Environmental Sociology
ISSN: 2325-1042 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rens20
A defense of waste: the case of municipal food
recycling in Sweden
Sebastian Abrahamsson
To cite this article: Sebastian Abrahamsson (2023) A defense of waste: the case of
municipal food recycling in Sweden, Environmental Sociology, 9:1, 107-116, DOI:
10.1080/23251042.2022.2124622
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/23251042.2022.2124622
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 21 Sep 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2935
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 8 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rens20
A defense of waste: the case of municipal food recycling in Sweden
Sebastian Abrahamsson
Department of Sociology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
ABSTRACT
This article is an empirical analysis of food waste management and food recycling in Sweden. 
Currently, across Sweden, attempts are being made to achieve a circular economy whereby 
food wastes are transformed into resources. Food waste is used to produce biogas and bio 
fertilizer, and the enactment of food waste as a resource turns the waste into a raw material 
over which waste management organizations compete. Against this backdrop, the article 
interferes with research in ‘waste studies’ that highlight transformation of waste into some -
thing valuable, and proposes instead to ‘defend’ waste against the CE. The paper contributes to 
‘waste studies’ and research on the circular economy by cautioning about the risks involved 
both in the establishment of a circular economy, and the treatment of waste as valuable. The 
empirical material used draws on a research project in which interviews were carried out with 
‘waste workers’ in Swedish waste management organizations.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 20 January 2022  
Accepted 11 September 2022 
KEYWORDS 
Circular economy; waste; 
food waste; valuation
In the race to invent sustainable solutions and strate -
gies to mitigate the environmental impact of current 
modes of production, consumption and wasting, the 
circular economy (CE) is currently advocated by envir -
onmental organizations and nation states across the 
globe. There is no coherent or unified definition of the 
CE, but one central aspect of it is the notion that waste 
is taken care of, recovered, transformed, and treated as 
a resource (Prieto-Sandoval, Jaca, and Ormazabal 2018 ; 
Rosenlund 2017 ). Proponents of said strategy suggest 
that through the CE ‘everything previously considered 
waste is revived for other uses, effectively eliminating 
not only waste but the concept of waste altogether’ 
(Lacy and Rutqvist 2015 , 52). Hence, in contrast to 
a linear economy, the CE aims to create material 
loops through which energy, goods and materials do 
not go to waste but are instead re-injected into the 
economy through re-use, recycling and material trans -
formations. The CE may have potential benefits over 
the linear economy, but the framing of CE as the 
panacea for environmental challenges is problematic. 
There is a growing body of research that engages 
critically with the CE (for an overview see (Corvellec, 
Stowell, and Johansson 2021 )). This paper adds to this 
body of research, focusing specifically on risks with 
embracing a food waste CE without considering side- 
effects and unintended consequences that follow 
when waste gets associated with value in municipal 
waste management. There are three risks that I want to 
highlight here. First, a focus on getting rid of waste by 
treating it like a resource risks downplaying the 
resources used in production, transportation and con-
sumption. Put differently: ‘the resourcification of waste strips it of its power as a doomsayer urging us to curb 
our consumption.’ (Doeland 2019 , 1) Second, achiev -
ing circular material loops requires investments in 
infrastructure and these infrastructures rely on and 
potentially normalize the overproduction of waste. 
(Reno 2015 ) Finally, treating waste as a resource risks 
reducing the incentives to prevent waste and excess 
from getting produced to begin with. (Greer, von 
Wirth, and Loorbach 2021 ) This paper analyses how 
actors in the food waste CE negotiate and attempt to 
resolve these potential tensions, conflicts and risks. As 
such, it contributes to the growing body of critical 
literature on CE by highlighting the work done by 
‘waste workers’. The objective is to articulate these 
workers’ practices by attending to the risks and con-
cerns that follow when food waste is organized as 
valuable through Swedish municipal waste manage -
ment. Doing so, I also contend that the dominant role 
that the CE food waste management, recycling and 
biogas production plays in Swedish municipalities 
infringes on the prioritized goal of preventing waste.
In Sweden, private and public actors are eager to 
treat discarded food and other wastes not as failures 
but as opportunities to acquire valuable matter 
(Ekman Burgman 2022 ; Rosenlund 2017 ). The article 
outlines a critique of the circular economy of municipal 
food waste transformation through recycling, analys -
ing the challenges that such transformations may lead 
to. I have phrased this critique as a ‘defence’ of waste. 
The point of this ‘defence’ is neither to insist on essen -
tialism – that waste is waste – nor to ignore the ‘human 
systems of design’ (Bauman 2017 , 22), and the ‘nonhu -
mans’ (Gumbert 2020 ; Holmberg 2021 ) that both help 
CONTACT Sebastian Abrahamsson 
 sebastian.abrahamsson@soc.uu.seENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY                          
2023, VOL. 9, NO. 1, 107–116 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23251042.2022.2124622
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
co-create and thrive on discards. Instead, the point is to 
defend waste against the logic, within CE waste man -
agement, through which it is considered valuable. This 
value-creating logic ignores the (material, economic, 
environmental) costs of producing foods. It is also 
costly in itself, in the sense that it requires work and 
a supporting infrastructure. Rather than encouraging 
the caring for foods, it risks weakening incentives to 
reduce food wastage.
In what follows, I first introduce the methods and 
materials used for the study and the research project 
these were generated in. I then discuss the theoretical 
framing and contribution of this text, by highlighting 
work done on value transformation in waste studies. In 
the subsequent part of the text, I analyse the case of 
food recycling in Sweden and attend to three pro-
cesses of value creation. A fourth and final analytical 
section attends to how the dominance of recycling 
undermines other modes of ordering and organizing 
waste.
Methods and materials
The empirical material for the study comes from field -
work in Sweden. The main project was a study of 
organic wastes (food and wastewater) and valuation 
in the CE.1 A total of 40 waste workers and profes -
sionals working for waste management organizations 
and associated organizations were interviewed in 
three different cities.2 We picked three cities that 
were big enough to have one or several waste man -
agement organization in it. But we were also curious to 
see whether there were geographical and regional 
differences that may have an effect on the organiza -
tion of waste and hence in our selection of cities we 
ended up creating contrasts mainly in size and geo -
graphy. In each city, we interviewed engineers, CEOs, 
information officers, and technicians. Sometimes we 
were all present during the interview, and we then 
took turns asking questions. At other times only one 
of us was doing the interview. Each interview lasted for 
around an hour, and through them we inquired about 
waste management practices, business models, and 
policies and their practical implications. Elsewhere, 
we have framed the methods used as ‘trash tracing’ 
(Wallsten et al. 2021 ). Here, instead, I focus on the 
stories that our informants shared with us. 
I shamelessly invoke the term ‘trash talk’, to describe 
these stories. Trash talk, or talk about trash, convey the 
social, material and economic transformations of 
wasted materials. These stories articulate struggles 
and negotiations about value and valuation – how 
objects get valued as ‘good’ and/or ‘bad’ (cf. Heuts 
and Mol 2013 ). Our main focus in the interviews was 
on how large-scale transformation of waste into some -
thing valuable and ‘good’ generates both possibilities 
for a ‘green’ economy, and at the same time solidifies unsustainable modes of production, consumption and 
wasting. Our starting point was that in Sweden food 
waste is increasingly getting organized as valuable. 
That is, food waste does not ‘have’ value in and of 
itself. Instead, and adhering to insights from valuation 
studies, we approached value as a sociomaterial prac -
tice, meaning that we approached value as something 
that is done (Greeson, Laser, and Pyyhtinen 2020 ). At 
the same time waste retains associations with 
unwanted, useless and excessive matter. We framed 
this tension, following Gille, as a shift in waste regimes 
and a shift in valorizing waste (Gille 2007 ). Our infor -
mants shared stories and narratives about their work 
practices, about tensions in current waste manage -
ment policies, and about how organizing waste as 
a resource has affected their work. The interview mate -
rial was coded thematically using in vivo codes and 
analyzed using coding software. In this article I draw on 
a sample of eight interviews that focus specifically on 
the transformation of food waste into biogas and bio 
fertilizer. Through our informants’ work, food waste 
gets valued and articulated in different ways: in terms 
of an economic value and an associated market; as 
biogas that offers clean energy for public transports; 
as a potent bio fertilizer that returns vital nutrients to 
deprived soils. These enactments make use of an infra -
structure involving paper bags and containers, trucks, 
digestion chambers, bacteria, and a host of other 
actors. Households, restaurants and supermarkets are 
expected to separate their food waste for recycling, 
which is then collected by waste management organi -
zations and shipped off to treatment facilities where 
biogas and bio fertilizer is produced. This is all cele -
brated as the good thing to do. And yet, as the 
Swedish Natural Protection Agency cautions in 
a study of food waste in supermarkets: there is a
Tendency to view food waste as less of an issue in 
cases where it is used as a resource (e.g., biogas [. . .]). 
This can reduce incentives to prevent the emergence 
of food waste in earlier stages. (Sörme 2019 , 11)
Hence when recycling gets valued as ‘good’ this 
further strengthens the incentives to recycle. As my 
informants expressed, this risks stabilizing and normal -
izing both the continuous generation of food waste as 
well as the resources that are made from it.
Waste, value and transformation
Waste studies attends to the socioeconomic, techno -
political, and environmental dimensions of discarded 
matters and wasting practices. At the center of this 
research is a concern with the materiality of different 
kinds of wastes and the ways in which this materiality 
gets transformed through landfilling (Reno 2016 ), recy -
cling (Hawkins 2006 ), repair (Graham and Thrift 2007 ) 
and management (Corvellec and Hultman 2014 ). For 108
 S. ABRAHAMSSON
the purposes of this paper, this section will focus on 
the lines of waste research that highlight value trans -
formations; research that ‘focus on the productive 
afterlives of waste – its impact on and significance for 
humans and nonhumans.’ (Reno 2015 , 558). More spe-
cifically, I will highlight research on the CE, and posi -
tion this paper in relation to this.
The CE is championed by the European Commission 
as promising increased economic growth, innovation 
and jobs while at the same time protecting the envir -
onment and supporting sustainable ways of living. It is 
a contested (Valenzuela and Böhm 2017 ) and ambig -
uous term (Kirchherr, Reike, and Hekkert 2017 ). 
A growing body of critical engagements with the CE 
has highlighted the troublesome association between 
waste and the economy that is generated through the 
business models that emerge through present day CE 
implementations by corporate and state actors. This 
association not only depoliticizes waste, it also creates 
a demand for it. At the core of the CE is the idea – as 
simple as it is alluring – that wastes generated by both 
production and consumption practices get collected, 
refurbished, revamped, and recycled such that the loss 
of resources and energy is kept to a minimum. This 
ideal of purified material flows rests on an essentialist 
‘modernist logic’ (Isenhour et al. 2022 ) by which eco-
nomic and human activities are separate from ‘natural’ 
ones. In waste management practices however, pollu -
tants and toxic materials, such as PFAS, that are 
involved in food production as well as waste manage -
ment, risk contaminating the soil when compost and 
fertilizer from food waste CE are used. Drawing on 
interviews with affected food waste processors, 
Isenhour et al. (2022 ) suggest that for food waste CE 
to become safe policies need to attend to actors 
upstream. A similar point is made by Thakali and 
MacRae (2021 ) who analyse the risks with continuous 
use of treated food waste and compost for food pro-
duction. Heavy metals, antibiotic resistance genes, 
pathogens and other contaminants risk entering the 
circularity, thus jeopardizing the food system’s safety. 
This points to the fact that, as Holmberg and Ideland 
(2021 ) contend, the closed material loops that the food 
waste CE is meant to achieve are both permeable and 
fragile. All suggest that more efforts need to be made 
upstream, and that maintenance and management 
work is crucial for circularity to be achieved. Hence, 
waste management needs to work more effectively 
and policies and regulations need to focus efforts 
upstream.
This article takes inspiration from the cited studies 
but has a slightly different focus. While these studies 
are critical of the implementation of CE and suggest 
how to improve it, I analyze the hesitance towards 
practices of recycling and economization expressed 
by informants during fieldwork (cf. Gregson, Watkins, 
and Calestani 2013 ). This hesitance grows out of a concern about the increasing volumes of waste gen -
erated and processed, but it also relates to the recog -
nition that waste management and transformation 
relies on the construction of infrastructure and that 
this infrastructure creates dependency on waste. 
Such infrastructure stabilizes the continuous produc -
tion of waste so that alternatives get sidelined. Similar 
to the notion of path dependency, this stabilization 
resembles the situation that Corvellec, Zapata 
Campos, and Zapata (2013 ) call a ‘lock-in’. A lock-in 
describes how technological systems lock-in ‘produ -
cers, users, and regulators in dynamic webs of technol -
ogies, legislation, standards, physical infrastructures, 
politics and cultural norms’ (2013 , 33). In their study 
they show how waste incineration is locked-in with 
district heating in Gothenburg and how, as a result, 
achieving more sustainable solutions to municipal 
waste gets hampered through material, economic, 
political and cultural rationales. In a similar manner, 
Swedish municipal food waste management risks mov -
ing toward a food waste lock-in, which may hamper 
work to waste less. A growing number of organizations 
and social movements in Sweden and elsewhere are 
increasingly putting into question the recycling of food 
waste into biogas. Feedback, a global food waste cam -
paign group launched in 2013, suggests that food 
waste to biogas recycling at best ‘provides sticking 
a plaster to problems like food waste and the intensive 
livestock industry, and at worst it is actively expands 
polluting industries’. (Feedback 2022 ) These groups 
call for a revised food system based on minimal 
resource use and thriftiness. Similar to the ‘careful 
circularities’ of community composting that Morrow 
and Davies analyze, or the informal CE of soap makers 
in Spain that Ibáñez and de Laet, M detail, a hesitance 
to recycling and economization has the potential to 
slow down the will to transform waste to value, to 
cultivate a space of thinking and doing things differ -
ently (Morrow and Davies 2021 ; Ibáñez Martín and de 
Laet 2018 , see also Abrahamsson and Bertoni 2014 ). 
Similar also to the waste minimization practices dis-
cussed by Bissmont in this journal, this hesitance to 
recycling invites us to engage in creatively acting to 
avoid, reduce and minimize (Bissmont 2020 ).
Food recycling in Sweden
In 2018, 133 kilos of food per person was wasted in 
Sweden equalling 1,3 million tons in total. Estimates 
suggest that 95 kilos come from households, and the 
remaining 38 kilos come from restaurants, supermar -
kets and production. (Andersson and Stålhandske  
2020 ). In 2019 the Environmental Protection Agency 
concluded that 38% of all food waste was recycled for 
biological treatment and extraction of nutrients. 
A smaller portion, 33% of all food waste, was recycled 
for both nutrient extraction and energy. (Sörme 2019 ) ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY
 109
One of the stipulated goals for food waste recycling is 
that by 2023, at least 75% of all food waste generated 
by households, restaurants, caterers, and supermarkets 
had to be sorted, treated and recycled to make biogas 
and bio fertilizer. To stimulate municipalities, regions, 
companies and industries to reach environmental 
goals, the Environmental Protection Agency has 
launched an investment program – Klimatklivet [The 
Climate leap ] – that funds investments in infrastructure, 
such as food waste treatment facilities. Between 2015 
and 2020, a total of 1,2 billion SEK was invested to 
support the 41 biogas production initiatives. 
(Andersson and Stålhandske 2020 ) In first section 
below I focus on the economic value of food waste 
and how investments in food waste recycling, both 
through increasingly ambitious policies and plans of 
actions and in terms of a growing number of actors, 
transform food waste into a market good. In the two 
sections that follow I turn instead to analyze what 
becomes of the food waste once it has entered the 
transformation process.
A market for waste
The biogas plant in City X is part of the municipal 
waste and water management organization. To pro-
duce biogas and fertilizer the plant needs raw mate -
rial, i.e. food waste. And in order to keep up with 
the market demand for the output, the right 
amount of raw material is needed. Preferably, 
there should be more raw material than what is 
actually needed, to allow for redundancies and 
potential breakdowns. During an interview with 
one of the engineers at the plant, Anders, I was 
told about some of the difficulties with the current 
way of organizing incoming and outgoing transac -
tions. At the moment, Anders told me, the plant 
charges a fee for collecting food waste, but this is 
likely to change. Here, Anders spoke at lengths 
about the troublesome situation with a newly 
opened competing plant. While he welcomes that 
more actors get involved, competition for raw mate -
rials inevitably means adjustment in value. In a not- 
so-distant future, he continued, the demand may 
even increase so much that in order to guarantee 
continued production of biogas and fertilizer, the 
plant will have to pay for food waste. At the plant 
in City X, the fluctuating prices have already had an 
impact both on contracts with other municipalities 
and on the economy of the plant. In the longer run, 
however, with the increased national efforts to col-
lect food wastes in neighboring municipalities the 
market will hopefully stabilize as more waste gets 
collected. When it was first built, the biogas plant in 
City X collected local food waste from the city in 
exchange for a ‘receiver fee’ which was financed through waste tariffs. As the plant expanded, adja -
cent municipalities that lacked the infrastructure to 
treat the waste sent it to the plant, in exchange for 
receiver fees. With the recent opening of the com -
peting plant, this fee has been pushed down, and 
some municipalities that used to send their waste 
off to the plant in City X have now decided to send 
it to the competitor, because their the fee is lower.
What is food waste transformed into here? First, the 
biogas plant made profit on collecting and treating the 
waste, and transformed it into, and made profit on, 
biogas and fertilizer. This profit, in turn, was used to 
expand the plant and increase its capacity. Now, as the 
region is seeing new actors competing for the same 
raw material, the biogas plant faces a different situa -
tion altogether. Anna, who works for an organization 
that advises interested actors on renewable fuels in 
City X, commented in an interview on the current 
developments in the region as follows
It is easier for large-scale plants to make ends meet 
and if there are too many actors on the market and 
food waste is the only raw material that can be used to 
generate revenue then that is far from an optimal 
situation. Food waste can be transported, and the 
competition increases because of its transportability 
[. . .] The problem right now, in this region, is that there 
are too many biogas plants that need and want food 
waste. (interview with Anna, biogas advisor)
If the current situation endures, the fee will be replaced 
by a cost for the plant in City X. This shift – from 
unwanted waste collected and treated in exchange 
for a receiver fee to a precious good that has a price 
tag – plays straight into the waste as resource dis-
course, embraced and endorsed by waste manage -
ment organizations and proponents of the CE. In this 
configuration, food waste is made to be something 
over which competing waste management actors 
struggle because of the value associated with it. In 
market terms, it is made to be a good – like any 
other – that actors on the market wish to procure. It 
is indeed no longer waste but instead an input and 
a raw material with a price tag. Configuring food waste 
as such, creates a local and regional economy, 
a market, where the logic of supply and demand 
turns discarded food into a valuable and desired good.
Competition over discarded materials between dif-
ferent actors is not problematic in itself. The practice of 
dumpster diving, for example, which entails looking for 
foods in dumpsters outside supermarkets may be 
viewed in terms of competition (Lehtonen and 
Pyyhtinen 2020 ) (Abrahamsson 2019 ). But whereas 
the dumpster diver is often motivated by the promise 
of a potential free meal, competition between biogas 
plants involves not only the creation of costly and 
largescale waste management infrastructures – it also 
creates a demand for more food waste. In the ‘waste 110
 S. ABRAHAMSSON
economy’ that is hence created there is no such thing 
as ‘too much’ waste (Kinnunen et al. 2020 ).
Making green fuel
At the biogas plant in City X, and across Sweden, food 
waste gets enacted as a raw material, a potent and 
necessary input without which the production of bio-
gas would come to an abrupt halt. Without the biogas, 
city buses that currently run on said gas would also 
come to a standstill. Hopes are that the current com -
petition, and the subsequent fall in fees, will subside 
when the new – more ambitious – waste collection 
policies are realized. To get there, infrastructure needs 
to be put in place, and efforts to increase the amount 
of collected food waste need to be made.
In order to make households aware of and comply 
with food waste policies waste management organiza -
tions make use of campaigns. Next to expectations about 
increased compliance and awareness, the long-term aim 
of such campaigns is also to tap in to all the currently 
unused food waste that gets sorted in the wrong bins (cf. 
Wallsten and Krook 2016 ). Campaigns get advertised 
online, in leaflets, on city buses, or on advertisement 
spaces in cities. There are different versions of such cam -
paigns but the ones we have encountered during this 
project all configure wasted foods as a resource 
(Holmberg and Ideland 2021 ). They do so by explicitly 
downplaying ‘waste’ and highlighting fuel. Here is an 
example of such a campaign.
The campaign is advertised on a board in City X, 
Sweden, in the spring of 2020. Big black letters read 
‘thank you for the bus fuel!’ Below the print is of 
a brown paper bag filled with banana peel, the head of 
a pineapple, sweet pepper and some lettuce. Two logos 
are printed on the bag: one is for the municipal waste 
management organization and the other for the regional 
public transport organization. In the setting where the 
advertisement is produced, food waste is sorted and 
binned by households, and waste management organi -
zations collect this and transform it into biogas. This 
biogas is used to fuel city buses. In this very specific 
setting, food waste may be configured as a gift – some -
thing that is offered and valued, albeit differently, by all 
parties. It is also in this very specific setting that the 
makers of the advertisement can get away with saying 
thank you for one thing (bus fuel) and presenting 
a photograph of something else (food waste). For some -
one not yet convinced, the small print in the poster 
explains the details: ‘your food waste becomes fossil 
free biogas that runs the buses in city X.’ Here, food 
waste is not a good to be sold but is instead presented 
as a gift; a gift with the potential of giving back fossil free 
fuel to keep public transports running.
This strong association between biogas and bus fuel is 
not coincidental. Ever since food waste collection was made compulsory in City X, the biogas producer and 
the public transport organization have had tight and 
continuous collaborations to ensure that investments in 
transport infrastructure and biogas vehicles is matched by 
efforts to produce, and availability in gas. In an analysis of 
the biogas market in the south of Sweden, Corvellec 
regards the alliance thus created between food trans -
formed into biogas and the promise of mobility as exemp -
lary of our times when he suggests that:
the transformation of food waste into biogas binds 
two objects of gluttony – food and mobility – back 
to back. Food, which can be considered a proxy for life, 
feeds mobility, which one could call another proxy for 
life. (Corvellec 2014 , 155)
With the recent introduction and subsequent expansion 
of electrified vehicles in City X there is, however, potential 
future decline in the demand for biogas to run public 
transport. When asked about the future for biogas in City 
X, Anna, who was quoted above, expressed concerns 
about the potential ensuing tensions:
There is clear interest in increased electrification in 
public transport, especially in inner cities where most 
buses today run on biogas. There is also clear competi -
tion between biogas and electricity [. . .] We think that 
there are many valid points in electrification: health, 
emission, noise. And there are also limits to how much 
biofuels we can produce, so yes, electrifying public 
transport is wise. (interview with Anna, biogas advisor)
Commenting on the plans for City X’s public transport, 
Anna added that the city intends to switch biogas 
buses to regional traffic and that
buses that run on biogas work better, in terms of the 
technology, in regional traffic where there are less bus 
stops, and less interruptions, making them more 
resource efficient. (interview with Anna, biogas 
advisor)
A couple of hours’ drive from City X, in City Y, the problem 
is not that biogas vehicles get replaced by electric vehi -
cles. Instead, the problem that the biogas plant in City Y is 
facing is that there is a lack in demand for and, hence, an 
excess production of biogas. City Y has had these pro-
blems ever since they started producing biogas a couple 
of years ago. Big investments in both infrastructure and 
a sorting system for the city were not matched by invest -
ments in buses. During an interview with an engineer at 
the biogas plant the challenge was articulated in the 
following way: 
now that we have begun with the production process, 
we must find an outlet for a substantial volume of 
biogas. To make this work, economically, we have 
a lot to do in a short amount of time. It takes a lot of 
time for businesses to convert to gas. We are currently 
building a gas station, but the process has taken 4-5 
years due to administrative and legal issues (interview 
with Arvid, engineer)ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY
 111
Here, the situation is opposite to the one in City 
X. There is not only excess of food waste, but also 
excess of biogas. Rather than producing a highly 
valued green fuel, the biogas plant generates excessive 
and – in this particular setting where there is no pos-
sibility to use it – useless gas that has to be burnt. 
These two examples – the threat from competing 
fuels and the lack of infrastructure and outlets – point 
to the fragile and uncertain conditions under which 
current biogas production operates. But the examples 
also illustrate that despite efforts to treat food waste as 
a resource, the outcome of all endeavors to create 
value, may end up being unsuccessful. Rather than 
creating a CE, wherein wastes are taken care of and 
reinjected into the economy and society, wasting has 
merely been postponed, finding its outlet in the burn -
ing of biogas.
Repairing soils
Swedish waste management organizations are eager 
to advertise biogas in their campaigns about food 
waste recycling. By contrast, the remainder of the bio-
gas production process, bio fertilizers, are rarely made 
public. A reason that was mentioned to us is that 
bringing in fertilizers makes the message to complex. 
Another reason is the target audience for most cam -
paigns, i.e. people living in cities. While bio fertilizers 
get acknowledged as important to continued food 
production internally, biogas production gets all the 
attention in the public domain. The communication 
officer responsible for the campaign in city X phrased 
it in the following manner during an interview, when 
commenting on the absence of bio fertilizers in the 
campaign:
We talk about bio fertilizer as a byproduct for biogas 
production. So the primary product is biogas and the 
byproduct is bio fertilizer. We try to be clear that the 
bio fertilizer is used on local farmlands, that it becomes 
fertilizer for new food. So there is an ambition to 
promote this circularity, too. But contrary to the bio-
gas, the fertilizer is not prioritized. (interview with Erik, 
communication officer)
A big difference between biogas and bio fertilizer is 
that whereas there is profit to be made from biogas, 
there is hardly any money to be made from bio fertili -
zer. The biogas plant in City X sells fertilizer to nearby 
farms but also pays for the transport, making the 
transaction a zero-sum game. The value of the bio 
fertilizer, then, lies elsewhere. In an interview, Jonas 
who is also an engineer working at the biogas plant in 
City X, articulated the value in terms of nutrients and 
elements vital to the soil: 
Yes, there is a lot of focus on biogas, but what gets lost 
in this is the reintroduction of nutrients to farmlands. If 
we do not take care of the nitrogen, the phosphorus, and the potassium – that which we call nutrients in the 
food waste – and return it to the farmlands, we might 
just as well close down the plant. (interview with 
Jonas, engineer)
Adding a host of selected anaerobic bacteria to the 
slurry, digestion chambers at biogas plants produce 
methane and CO2. What remains is a fertilizer that is 
rich in nutrients and vital elements. Internally, how -
ever, this remainder is not a remainder, but instead 
gets articulated as the very raison d’être for food waste 
treatment. The dominant value here is environmental, 
rather than economic. Swedish bio fertilizer is 
a certified product, which means its quality gets 
assured by Avfall Sverige , the national waste manage -
ment association in Sweden. The quality assessment is 
meant to assure the potential users of the fertilizer that 
the fertilizer is not contaminated, that it does not con-
tain too much methane, and that the production chain, 
from raw material to finished product, has been scru -
tinized and is transparent.
With the words of Puig de la Bellacasa, we could call 
this a mode of soil care (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). 
Soils, she suggests, a vital component of food, and by 
extension of life, are increasingly at risk. To avert agri -
cultural and food crises, different forms of soil care 
need to be cultivated. And indeed, food production is 
notoriously costly not only in economic terms, but also 
in terms of resources. A recurring topic in anti-wasting 
campaigns emphasizes the double wastage of food 
waste, highlighting the resources that get folded into 
food and get wasted. In this context, the production 
and use of bio fertilizers is meant to recover unused 
resources and reintroduce them in the soils. In the 
region of City X, however, there are specific problems, 
as Anders explained:
Nitrogen and phosphorous is problematic in this 
region, where we have a lot of grain farms. What 
usually happens is they just add more and more 
mineral fertilizer which means there is a depletion of 
the soils. But if you introduce the bio fertilizer you get 
back some of these organic substances, nitrogen and 
phosphorous. The phosphorous we use in the mineral 
fertilizer today is extracted in mines, so that is actually 
a fossil product. (interview with Anders, engineer)
In the story told about bio fertilizers, food waste gets 
enacted in terms of its capacity to feed the farmlands 
and, by extension, to work as a fuel for continued food 
production. Just as biogas gets enacted as a good, 
sustainable alternative through juxtaposition with tra-
ditional fossil fuels, the valuation of bio fertilizers is 
done in relation to a less good alternative: mineral 
fertilizer. What gets lost in this transformation, how -
ever, is that which motivates the creation of bio ferti -
lizer; namely the use of mineral fertilizer on the one 
hand, and the excessive production of foods on the 
other hand.112
 S. ABRAHAMSSON
Things could be otherwise
Municipal food waste management in Sweden is suc-
cessful both in associating food waste with values and 
transforming it into new valuable products. Many of 
our informants welcome the transition to a CE, but 
many of them also caution about the risks with creat -
ing a demand for food waste. They hesitate: on the one 
hand they take pride in their work and do the best with 
what they have got. On the other hand, they express 
concern over the increasing amounts of waste they 
process. Through all efforts to create efficient, reliable 
and stable practices of municipal food waste manage -
ment, recycling gets stabilized while alternative solu -
tions – food sharing, composting, food donations, 
reduced production and consumption etc. – get side -
lined. From the point of view of the biogas plant, such 
solutions would interfere with and upset the creation 
of biogas. In this section I shift and analyze stories from 
fieldwork that resist and complicate this ambition to 
treat waste as a resource. These stories, I suggest, do 
not necessarily undermine the current state of affairs 
but point instead to the possibility of acting and think -
ing differently. As such they point to the potentiality 
that the current organization of food waste in Sweden 
could be otherwise (cf. Woolgar and Lezaun 2013 ).
Parallel to the incentives to re-appropriate waste as 
a resource there is also, at the policy level, the ambition 
to reduce and minimize waste. The European Waste 
Hierarchy is an attempt to rank the desirability of 
practices of production, consumption and disposal 
from least desirable to most desirable in terms of 
‘ecological, economic and social benefits’ (Hultman 
and Corvellec 2012 , 2414: 2414). At the top of this 
hierarchy is prevention, which is followed by re-use, 
recycling, recovery and disposal. Hence, as one of our 
informants in City Y, Ingrid, phrased it, ‘the best waste 
is the waste that never is’ (Interview with Ingrid, com -
munication officer). Prevention, however, is not the 
focus of the waste management organization where 
Ingrid works. As she recalls during our interview:
When I began working here we talked a lot about 
reuse and reduction. We had a leaflet with tips and 
tricks for households. And it is very important to talk 
about those parts of the waste hierarchy. But these last 
years I think we have taken a couple of steps back on 
this hierarchy. Now we focus almost exclusively on 
sorting waste for recycling. Because that is where 
most people are. So in my work, when communicating 
to our clients, I have stepped down in the waste 
hierarchy. (interview with Ingrid, communications 
officer)
What sets prevention apart from recycling is the recog -
nition that waste, while it may be ‘upcycled’ as 
a resource in a production process, is wasteful in itself. 
As the stories from City X and City Y above suggest, 
municipal recycling is not an antidote to waste. To 
successfully transform food waste into a resource infrastructure needs to be put in place. Next to this, 
the input and raw materials used for producing biogas 
need to match the demand. To achieve circularity, 
recycling infrastructure creates a demand both for 
that which gets recycled and the output that recycling 
generates (Gille 2012 ). Solving the problem with waste 
by recycling rather than preventing it, is in this sense 
an example of an infrastructural ‘lock-in’ whereby the 
creation of waste treatment plants normalizes waste 
(Corvellec, Zapata Campos, and Zapata 2013 ). In var-
ious ways all informants offered stories similar to 
Ingrid’s above: that the dominance and stabilization 
of recycling practices easily sidelines other practices. 
Thus, the establishment of recycling practices and 
infrastructures make it increasingly difficult to act dif-
ferently. Even stronger: while waste management 
organizations get backed up by governmental funding 
to recycle food waste into biogas, the difficult yet 
important task of preventing waste is left to individual 
actors to sort out.
Josef, a communications officer at the regional 
waste management company that we interviewed in 
City Y, phrased recycling in terms of ‘less bad’ than 
landfilling.
It is great that food waste can be turned into biogas, to 
be used for vehicles instead of using fossil fuels. 
However, research suggests that it is ten times better 
that food does not go to waste. But somehow we have 
a society, today, where we are willing to give a brown 
paper bag and a brown plastic holder to all house -
holds, build a special garbage truck and 
a pretreatment facility that makes a slurry, and 
a biogas production facility that makes biogas and 
fertilizer out of the slurry. All of this in order to reach 
this thing that is ten times worse than not generating 
food waste to begin with. (interview with Josef, com -
munications officer)
Rather than addressing the problem with excess, Josef 
suggests, recycling takes a shortcut to achieve 
a cosmetic solution. Bio fertilizers get distributed to 
farms to return organic substances to depleted soils. 
Soils that are depleted because of intensive farming. In 
City X more discarded foods are needed so that prices 
do not drop. In City Y by contrast, more buses need to 
be built and bought to match the gas production.
What sets these stories apart from those in the pre-
vious sections is that they offer resistance to the trans -
formative logic of recycling materials. They question the 
internal logic of waste management as resource crea -
tion. The space for thinking differently that these stories 
variously shape articulate the wastefulness of discarded 
food, irrespective of their potential value. They slow 
down the transformative logic of the CE of municipal 
waste management that stipulates that discards and 
organic materiality is destined to become revalued and 
reenacted as resources. And as such, I contend, they 
conjure a valuable lesson to waste studies: a focus on ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY
 113
transformation, mutability and fluidity risks obscuring 
the loss of value and the wastefulness that precedes the 
creation of something new. More specifically: these stor-
ies caution that successful transformations of materiality 
do not necessitate a successful outcome.
Discussion
Academic engagement with the CE has demon -
strated that it is an ambiguous term in theory, and 
that in practice the CE is often less than what it 
promises. While some (e.g. Thakali and MacRae 
(2021 )) advocate ‘fixing’ the problems with the CE 
through regulations, information and campaign work 
or technological intervention, this article has 
explored a hesitation toward the premises of the 
CE and a municipal food waste CE tout court. This 
hesitation contends that waste is wasteful, and not 
valuable. Hence, it ‘defends’ waste against the parti -
cular ‘solution’ that has been invented for it through 
the CE. Municipal food waste recycling is 
a provisional, historically, and geographically situated 
‘solution’ to two related concerns. One is the grow -
ing awareness of the energy, resources and money 
that go to waste when food that is produced for 
human consumption ends up being discarded. This 
happens while soils are getting depleted due both to 
exploitation of resources, and excessive production 
of foods. It also happens while a growing number of 
people face hunger and malnutrition. The second 
concern is the realization that organic wastes may 
be enacted as potent and valuable raw materials, 
used in the production of ‘sustainable’ energy and 
valuable resources. To create this alliance between 
wastes and ‘sustainability’, household, restaurants, 
waste management industries, bacteria, bus manu -
facturers, engineers, and a host of other actors need 
to work together. An effect of said alliance is that 
wastes get enacted not in terms of a loss of value, 
but as a resource that is generative of economic and 
environmental values. The concern that our infor -
mants voiced and that I want to echo here is that 
food waste recycling also effectively short-circuits 
interventions that aim at reducing waste. By organiz -
ing food waste as recyclable matter and stabilizing 
this through largescale infrastructures, alternatives 
are left out. There are at least three problems with 
this.
First, food recycling is put in place to achieve some -
thing valuable, sustainable and good. The alternatives 
against which this is configured as good (e.g. incineration 
or landfill) implies either the loss of potential value 
through incineration or emission of methane in landfills. 
But both these alternatives take waste as a given. The 
alternative to recycling is not necessarily landfill or incin -
eration but, as our informants as well as the European 
Waste Hierarchy suggest, reduction. The time, money and effort spent in creating infrastructures and practices that 
transform organic waste as recyclable make other solu -
tions absent. Secondly, current municipal waste manage -
ment in Sweden requires large investments over long 
periods of time. The infrastructure is not only costly, but 
also immutable. This means that it is both fragile and 
inflexible with regard to potential policy and legislative 
changes and unforeseen events, such as food shortage. 
Thirdly, to the extent that waste research highlights the 
mutability, transformation, fluidity of value, there is a risk 
that it overlooks other alternatives. Through detailed 
empirical work on specific materials, waste studies has 
made very clear that waste is not an end point. Things 
that have no value here and today get second lives and 
new value elsewhere or later. This is a valuable and 
important lesson. But as I have shown through this spe-
cific case, an emphasis on value as relational and situated 
risks making the wastefulness of waste absent, while 
making it increasingly difficult to think, let alone act, 
differently.
Notes
1. The research team included four other researchers – 
Tora Holmberg, Malin Ideland, Björn Wallsten and CF 
Helgesson.
2. No ethics review was deemed necessary by the ethics 
board. All informants have given their informed con-
sent to participate in the study. They have also been 
anonymized using pseudonyms, and the three cities 
have been given the names X, Y and Z.
Acknowledgement
I am grateful to Tora Holmberg, Malin Ideland and Björn 
Wallsten for generously thinking along through the concerns 
addressed here. Thanks also to Katja de Vries for commenting 
on the numerous iterations of the text. Finally, I am deeply 
grateful to the informants who shared their stories about 
their work, and to the three anonymous reviewers and their 
generous feedback on previous versions.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the Vetenskapsrådet [DNR 2017- 
02142].
Notes on contributor
Sebastian Abrahamsson is Docent in Sociology at Uppsala 
University, Sweden. His current work analyses tensions and 
clashes in enactments of circular economies.114
 S. ABRAHAMSSON
References
Abrahamsson, S. 2019 . “Food Repair: An Analysis of the 
Tensions between Preventing Waste and Assuring Safety.” 
Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization 19 (2): 283–301.
Abrahamsson, S., and F. Bertoni. 2014 . “Compost Politics: 
Experimenting with Togetherness in Vermicomposting.” 
Environmental Humanities 4 (1): 125–148. doi: 10.1215/ 
22011919-3614962 .
Andersson, T., and S. Stålhandske. 2020 . Matavfall i Sverige: 
Uppkomst och behandling 2018 . Stockholm: 
Naturvårdsverket.
Bauman, Z. 2017 . Wasted Lives: Modernity and Its Outcasts . 
Cambridge: Polity.
Bissmont, M. 2020 . “The Practice of Household Waste 
Minimisation.” Environmental Sociology 6 (4): 355–363. 
doi:10.1080/23251042.2020.1792264 .
Corvellec, H. 2014 . “Recycling Food Waste into Biogas, or 
How Management Trasforms Overflows into Flows.” In 
Coping with Excess: How Organizations, Communities and 
Individuals Manage Overflows , edited by B. Czarniawska 
and O. Löfgren, 154–172. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Corvellec, H., and J. Hultman. 2014 . “Managing the Politics of 
Value Propositions.” Marketing Theory 14 (4): 355–375. 
doi:10.1177/1470593114523445 .
Corvellec, H., A. F. Stowell, and N. Johansson. 2021 . “Critiques 
of the Circular Economy.” Journal of Industrial Ecology 
26 (2): 421–432. doi:10.1111/jiec.13187 .
Corvellec, H., M. J. Zapata Campos, and P. Zapata. 2013 . 
“Infrastructures, lock-in, and Sustainable Urban 
Development: The Case of Waste Incineration in the 
Göteborg Metropolitan Area.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 50: 32–39. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.12.009 .
Doeland, L. 2019 . “Letting Remainders Get Stuck in Our 
Throats.” Detrius 7: 1–3.
Ekman Burgman, L. 2022 . “What Sewage Sludge Is and 
Conflicts in Swedish Circular Economy Policymaking.” 
Environmental Sociology 8 (3): 292–301.
Feedback. 2022 . “Bad Energy.” Accessed May 8, 2022. https:// 
feedbackglobal.org/campaigns/indigestible/ 
Gille, Z. 2007 . From the Cult of Waste to the Trash Heap of 
History: The Politics of Waste in Socialist and Postsocialist 
Hungary . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Gille, Z. 2012 . “From Risk to Waste: Global Food Waste 
Regimes.” The Sociological Review 60 (2_suppl): 27–46. 
doi:10.1111/1467-954X.12036 .
Graham, S., and N. Thrift. 2007 . “Out of Order:Understanding 
Repair and Maintenance.” Theory, Culture & Society 24 (3): 
1–25. doi:10.1177/0263276407075954 .
Greer, R., T. von Wirth, and D. Loorbach. 2021 . “The 
Waste-Resource Paradox: Practical Dilemmas and Societal 
Implications in the Transition to a Circular Economy.” 
Journal of Cleaner Production 303: 126831. doi:10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2021.126831 .
Greeson, E., S. Laser, and O. Pyyhtinen. 2020 . “Dis/Assembling 
Value: Lessons from Waste Valuation Practices.” Valuation 
Studies 7 (2): 151–166. doi:10.3384/VS.2001-5992.2020.7.2. 
151-166 .
Gregson, N., H. Watkins, and M. Calestani. 2013 . “Political 
Markets: Recycling, Economization and Marketization.” 
Economy and Society 42 (1): 1–25. doi:10.1080/03085147. 
2012.661625 .Gumbert, T. 2020 . “Materiality and Nonhuman Agency.” In 
Routledge Handbook of Global Sustainability Governance , 
edited by A. Kalfagianni, 47–58. London; New York: 
Routledge.
Hawkins, G. 2006 . The Ethics of Waste: How We Relate to 
Rubbish . Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Heuts, F., and A. Mol. 2013 . “What Is A Good Tomato? A Case 
of Valuing in Practice.” Valuation Studies 1 (2): 125–146. 
doi:10.3384/vs.2001-5992.1312125 .
Holmberg, T. 2021 . “Animal Waste Work. The Case of Urban 
Sewage Management in Sweden.” Contemporary Social 
Science 16 (1): 14–28.
Holmberg, T., and M. Ideland. 2021 . “The Circular Economy of 
Food Waste: Transforming Waste to Energy through 
‘make-up’ Work.” Journal of Material Culture 26 (3): 
344–361. doi:10.1177/13591835211002555 .
Hultman, J., and H. Corvellec. 2012 . “The European Waste 
Hierarchy: From the Sociomateriality of Waste to a Politics 
of Consumption.” Environment and Planning A: Economy 
and Space 44 (10): 2413–2427. doi:10.1068/a44668 .
Ibáñez Martín, R., and M. de Laet. 2018 . “Geographies of Fat 
Waste. Or, How Kitchen Fats Make Citizens.” The 
Sociological Review 66 (3): 700–717. doi: 10.1177/ 
0038026117726731 .
Isenhour, C., M. Haedicke, B. Berry, J. MacRae, T. Blackmer, 
and S. Horton. 2022 . “Toxicants, Entanglement, and 
Mitigation in New England’s Emerging Circular Economy 
for Food Waste.” Journal of Environmental Studies and 
Science 12: 341–353. doi:10.1007/s13412-021-00742-w .
Kinnunen, V., H. Huijala, J. Saariniemi, and J. Valkonen. 2020 . 
“Environmental Concern in Waste Economy: A Case Study 
of Waste Policy in Finnish Lapland.” In Perspectives on 
Waste from the Social Sciences and Humanities: Opening 
the Bin, edited by R. Ek and N. Johansson, 114–135. 
Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Kirchherr, J., D. Reike, and M. Hekkert. 2017 . “Conceptualizing 
the Circular Economy: An Analysis of 114 Definitions.” 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 127: 221–232. 
doi:10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005 .
Lacy, P., and J. Rutqvist. 2015 . Waste to Wealth: The Circular 
Economy Advantage . New York: Palgrave.
Lehtonen, T.-K., and O. Pyyhtinen. 2020 . “From Trash to 
Treasure: Valuing Waste in Dumpster Diving.” Valuation 
Studies 7 (2): 197–220. doi:10.3384/VS.2001-5992.2020.7. 
2.197-220 .
Morrow, O., and A. Davies. 2021 . “Creating Careful 
Circularities: Community Composting in New York City.” 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 47: 
529–546. doi:10.1111/tran.12523 .
Prieto-Sandoval, V., C. Jaca, and M. Ormazabal. 2018 . “Towards 
a Consensus on the Circular Economy.” Journal of Cleaner 
Production 179: 605–615. doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.224 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015 . “Making Time for Soil: 
Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care.” Social 
Studies of Science 45 (5): 691–716. doi: 10.1177/ 
0306312715599851 .
Reno, J. 2015 . “Waste and Waste Management.” Annual 
Review of Anthropology 44 (1): 557–572. doi: 10.1146/ 
annurev-anthro-102214-014146 .
Reno, J. 2016 . Waste Away: Working and Living with a North 
American Landfill . Oakland, California: University of 
California Press.ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIOLOGY
 115
Rosenlund, J. 2017 . “Improving Regional Waste Management 
Using the Circular Economy as an Epistemic Object.” 
Environmental Sociology 3 (3): 297–307. doi: 10.1080/ 
23251042.2017.1323154 .
Sörme, L. 2019 . “Matavfall i butik .” Analys av 
samhällsförändringar . Retrieved from https://www.natur 
vardsverket.se/globalassets/media/publikationer-pdf 
/6900/978-91-620-6901-8.pdf 
Thakali, A., and J. MacRae. 2021 . “A Review of Chemical and 
Microbial Contamination in Food: What are the Threats to 
A Circular Food System?” Environmental Research 194: 
1–12. doi:10.1016/j.envres.2020.110635 .Valenzuela, F., and S. Böhm. 2017 . “Against Wasted Politics: 
A Critique of the Circular Economy.” Ephemera Theory & 
Politics in Organization 17 (1): 23–60.
Wallsten, B., S. Abrahamsson, M. Ideland, and T. Holmberg. 
2021 . “Gnissel i maskineriet – Avfallshantering i den 
cirkulära ekonomin.” (Report Uppsala university).
Wallsten, B., and J. Krook. 2016 . “Urks and the Urban Subsurface 
as Geosocial Formation.” Science, Technology & Human Values 
41 (5): 827–848. doi:10.1177/0162243916634866 .
Woolgar, S., and J. Lezaun. 2013 . “The Wrong Bin Bag: A Turn to 
Ontology in Science and Technology Studies?” Social Studies 
of Science 43 (3): 321–340. doi:10.1177/0306312713488820 .116
 S. ABRAHAMSSON
