A Political Ecology of Desire
Between Extinction, Anxiety, and Flourishing
JARED MARGULIES
Department of Geography, University of Alabama, USA
Abstract How does attention to exertion and absence of care illuminate possibilities for avoid-
ing extinction amid global biodiversity declines? This article brings together feminist tech-
noscience and more-than-human theory on care with Lacanian psychoanalytic theories ofanxiety and desire. It does so to diagnose the threat of extinction anxieties and consider
their material and political consequences for impedances to caring for nonhuman life and
their ﬂourishing. The article is developed through the empirical case of Arrojadoa marylanae ,a n
endangered species of cactus in Bahia, Brazil, as a political ecology of desire. In bringing psycho-
analytic thought into conversation with care, it considers how desire sits at the heart of more-
than-human care and yet may be thwarted by anxiety. Contending with his own extinction anx-ieties as they became focused through an endangered cactus on a mountain destined for min-
ing, the author excavates routes toward ﬂourishing geographies: geographies of care-full inter-
species alliances composed against Anthropocenic thinking. In concluding, the author urges forgreater attention to the work of desire in studies of environmental change and the wider envi-
ronmental humanities.
Keywords care, cacti, psychoanalysis, more-than-human geography, Jacques Lacan
Who Cares Whether a Cactus Goes Extinct?
Acts of care for endangered species are uneven, regardless of how near to extinction a
species might be or become.1Formal recognition of species endangerment, or prac-
tices marking species as matters of concern, do not necessarily lead to efforts of speciescare. There is therefore an important distance between the politics and ethics of dem-
onstrating concern and “hands-on ”practices of care for nonhuman life.
2Whereas con-
cern holds more passive connotations of “worry and thoughtfulness, ”care, as María
Puig de la Bellacasa writes, invokes active practices with a “strong sense of attachment
and commitment to something. ”3What structures this distance between handwringing
1. Van Dooren, “Care ”; van Dooren, Flight Ways ,7.
2. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care .
3. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care , 42.
Environmental Humanities 14:2 (July 2022)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-9712357 © 2022 Jared Margulies
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

and the active work necessary for fostering life? How might approaching desire to care
for another life be better understood by ﬁrst asking what it means to desire or what
stands in desire ’s way?
With these questions in mind I engage with the cactus Arrojadoa marylanae to write
a political ecology of desire. I consider a political ecology of desire as a kind of analysis
of environmental change, recognizing that desire holds profound capacities for making
(and remaking) the world in ways that can produce or accelerate forms of unevennessand imbalances of power across societies, spaces, and species alike. If political ecology
excels in revealing the production of these kinds of human inequalities wrought through
and coproducing environmenta l change, explicit attentio n to desire turns to an appre-
ciation that the political and economic are also profoundly shaped by the work of
the unconscious and “the desire to desire, ”the force that propels the subject forward
as a desiring subject. The story of A. marylanae is one of desiring to care best under-
stood through a psychoanalytic reading of the unconscious as “thoroughly social and
material, ”in line with two decades of psychoanalytic geographic thought.
4But in
aiming for desire, this article explores what occurs when desire becomes impossible,
thwarted by anxiety.
Arrojadoa marylanae is a cactus endemic to one mountain in Bahia, Brazil, and was
only recently described in the scienti ﬁc literature .Its survival as a species, however,
does not elicit suf ﬁcient concern to move powerful actors to care for it more than the
proﬁt potential of the mountain ’s mineral resources, though this does not stop others
from attempting to care within a deeply “troubled ecology. ”5The cactus exempli ﬁes cru-
cial gaps between concern and care in species conservation work, and how matters of
care are always inherently also political matters intersecting the governing of non-human life and transformations wrought by global capitalism.
6A. marylanae provides
a useful case study in contending with how extinction elicits powerful expressions of
anxieties in response to it as a profound disruption of time —when the obliteration of
time gets “too close. ”7
Taking up concerns for care and extinction in a Lacanian psychoanalytic register, I
explore how anxiety thwarts desire by displacing the ultimate absence that makes de-
sire possible with the absence-presence of the cactus verging on extinction.8In a related
vein, Paul Robbins and Sarah A. Moore understand Anthropocenic anxieties through
what they call “ecological anxiety disorder. ”9Through an analysis of how scientists re-
spond to species invasions, they interrogate how Anthropocenic anxieties swirl around
the question of human importance in great planetary transformations underway. Here
4. Robbins and Moore, “Return of the Repressed, ”1750. Kingsbury and Pile, “Introduction. ”
5. Besky and Blanchette, “Fragility of Work, ”6.
6. Marder, Plant-Thinking .
7. Bastian, “Fatally Confused ”; Shepherdson in Harari, Lacan ’s Seminar on “Anxiety, ”xxxii.
8. Lacan, Anxiety ,1 7 4 –75.
9. Robbins and Moore, “Ecological Anxiety Disorder. ”242 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

I am concerned with extinction as a particularly disturbing form of portending temporal
absence . Because anxiety represents a form of denial or repression of what one actually
knows, but the unconscious works to conceal to protect the subject from unwanted feel-
ings or revisitations of past traumas, anxiety also holds potential: “It [anxiety] can reach
beyond the phantasy . . . prompting a potentially radical shift in the constitution of sub-
jects, practices, and institutions. ”10Anxiety, therefore, is a “signal, ”but “of all signals,
[it] is the one that does not deceive. ”11In examining this case of impending extinction
anxiety, I show how the seemingly futile and even contradictory efforts taken by con-
cerned actors to “save ”this species represent intelligible expressions of extinction anx-
iety and what this anxiety seeks to conceal: the political and economic conditions be-
hind the diminishing presence of the cactus, powers thwarting efforts of collective
exertions to enact species care.
In what follows I turn to psychoanalytic self-analysis in making sense of bearing
witness to cactus extinction. This approach to ethnographic research, as Jesse Proudfoot
writes, includes “the discovery that key elements of my research were inextricably con-
nected to my own anxieties as a researcher. ”12There is a steady and growing body of
scholarship interested in how studies of human-environment relations can bene ﬁt from
the insights of psychoanalytic thought.13Recognizing that psychoanalytic theories of
the unconscious are inextricable from the European imagination through which theyemerged, I approach my arguments against a backdrop of understanding the colonial
psyche as one that represses the “violent acts and desires of colonization. ”
14My pre-
sentation of psychoanalytic self-analysis in contending with extinction anxieties is
thus inevitably also a reading and critique of Euro-Western conservation desires ex-
pressed in-landscape in Bahia, Brazil.
Between Flourishing Geographies and Extinction
There is little cross-fertilization between more-than-human geographies and psycho-
analysis.15If“human nature is an interspecies relationship, ”as Anna Tsing writes, why
has more-than-human scholarship tended to neglect our unconscious selves?16How hu-
mans and nonhumans co-constitute one another, and how this co-constitution is medi-
ated by affects, encounters, and efforts to care, has been a key feature of more-than-human geographies and a range of af ﬁliated ﬁelds since their inception and remains so
10. Moore, Are ﬁn, and Rosenfeld, “Generating Anxiety, Short-Circuiting Desire, ”1084.
11. Lacan, Anxiety , 160.
12. Proudfoot, “Anxiety and Phantasy in the Field, ”1135.
13. Nast, “Mapping the ‘Unconscious ’”; Robbins and Moore, “Return of the Repressed ”; Moore, Are ﬁn,
and Rosenfeld, “Generating Anxiety, Short-Circuiting Desire. ”
14. Nast, “Mapping the ‘Unconscious, ’”215.
15. But see two notable exceptions: Pile, “Beastly Minds ”; Pohl, “Object-Disoriented Geographies ”;a n d
see a new edited volume by Burnham and Kingsbury, Lacan and the Environment .
16. Tsing, “Unruly Edges, ”141.Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 243Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

today.17Donna Haraway writes, “We are in a knot of species coshaping one another
in layers of reciprocating c omplexity all the way down. ”18The psychoanalyst Jacques
Lacan, whose work I draw on here, also liked thinking with knots and shows how the
unconscious can be understood topologically through knots ’conjoining the real, the
symbolic, and the imaginary in chains of signi ﬁers.19We may be knots of species coshap-
ing one another, but our knotted unconscious selves aren ’t just along for the ride, they
mediate the very meaning of the journey “all the way down. ”As Steve Pile aptly writes,
“The affective and emotional intensities of human and nonhuman relationships must
be seen as fundamental to how and why psychical structures take the form they do. ”20
InImagining Extinction ,U r s u l aK .H e i s ea s k sav i t a lq u e s t i o n : “Is it possible to
acknowledge the realities of large-scale species extinction and yet to move beyond
mourning, melancholia, and nostalgia to a more af ﬁrmative vision of our biological fu-
ture? ”21What I see left unnamed in this “afﬁrmative vision ”areﬂourishing geographies
as a horizon of pursuit —an impossible destination that nevertheless orients movement
away from extinction as a great unmaking.22My thinking on ﬂourishing is inspired by
Chris Cuomo ’s theorizing of ﬂourishing as an ecological feminist ethic for interspecies
well-being that also advances human well-being. As Robin Wall Kimmerer writes, “All
ﬂourishing is mutual. ”23Flourishing is an ecological engagement of interdependence.
Flourishing acknowledges that human and nonhuman life are entwined and reciprocal,without suggesting evenness or necessary mutuality.
24Butﬂourishing, as Franklin Ginn,
Uli Beisel, and Maan Barua write, “is not some ‘soft ’alternative to biopolitics. Flourish-
ing also involves a constitutive violence; ﬂourishing . . . requires that some collectives
prosper at the expense of others. ”25Composed against dismal “misanthropocenic ”26
narratives, I consider ﬂourishing geographies as places where life is afforded the possi-
bility for becoming in an ever-changing world.27Extending this thinking to matters of
care, care demands contending with impediments to the capacity to enact ﬂourishing,
just as it requires contending with any number of material, political, economic, or bio-
physical (in)capacities. To insist on ﬂourishing as a horizon is to resist both psychic and
physical efforts constraining life ’s potential for adaptation and change as a processual
enactment of becoming.
17. Whatmore, Hybrid Geographies ; Krzywoszynska, “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene. ”
18. Haraway, When Species Meet ,4 2 .
19. Lacan, On Feminine Sexuality , 122 –36.
20. Pile, “Beastly Minds, ”233.
21. Heise, Imagining Extinction , 13.
22. Dean, Communist Horizon ,1–2; Rose, “Multispecies Knots of Ethical Time. ”
23. Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass , 20.
24. Cuomo, Feminism and Ecological Communities ,7 4 .
25. Ginn, Beisel, and Barua, “Flourishing with Awkward Creatures, ”115.
26. Patel, “Misanthropocene? ”
27. Larsen and Johnson, Being Together in Place ,2 0 –22.244 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

On Extinction and Care: A P sychoanalytic Thought
E x t i n c t i o ns t u d i e si sc o n c e r n e dw i t h “understanding and responding to processes of
collective death, ”death that Deborah Bird Rose describes elsewhere as a “double death, ”
the permanent extinguishing of intergenerational time.28Across much work in extinc-
tion studies is an awareness of a mounting “ethical paralysis, ”an emotional state dis-
abling response to extinctions as they unfold and hasten.29But we can also understand
inaction to extinction ’s presence through the work of Jacques Lacan on anxiety and
unconscious attempts to sho r eu pt h ep s y c h et h r o u g hp r o t e c t i n go u r s e l v e sf r o mt h e
pain or trauma contained in what we know but refuse or are unable to confront.30Asking
what instead could contribute to a ﬂourishing of thought fostering a praxis of multi-
species care is aided by developing a conversation between psychoanalysis and extinc-
tion studies.
Against ideas of anxiety as being without an object, for Lacan, anxiety very much
does have an “object, ”but it is a different sort of object, what he names objet a . Lacan
repeatedly states that “anxiety is not without an object. ”31As Roberto Harari explains,
this wording of “not without ”is exacting: “These two particles . . . structure the apho-
rism in a way that accounts for the obscure, imprecise condition of the object at hand. ”32This
Lacanian theorizing of anxiety is important because it helps make sense of how it is the
absence-presence of the thing being made extinct —the unnerving proximity of true ab-
sence close at hand —that causes extinction anxieties to arise, not absence itself. In the
context of global species declines, this excavating work of the unconscious produces
important opportunities for grappling with extinction anxieties to see what lies beyond.
In raising the specter of extinction as a looming threat encircling Anthropocenic
thinking, Lacan ’s key insights of jouissance and objet a illuminate what inhibits possi-
bilities for movements to care .Jouissance poorly translates into English as “enjoyment ”;
rather, it is surplus-enjoyment “beyond the pleasure principal, ”33a yearning for “total
satisfaction ”that can only produce the “ache of desire. ”34Jouissance sits at the core of
Lacanian theory on desire: it “involves an ineluctable yet ﬂeeting, alluring yet threaten-
ing painful pleasure. ”35Jouissance also helps clarify the emergence of a cactus at the
edge of extinction as a signi ﬁer for objet a. This is because objet a is a “lure, ”a horizon
or target to be pursued through the desire for jouissance.36“In the desire of every
28. Rose, van Dooren, and Chrulew, “Introduction, ”5; Rose, “What If the Angel of History Were a Dog?, ”
75. Many key texts within extinction studies are published in this journal. See Bastian, “Whale Falls, Sus-
pended Ground ”; Garlick and Symons, “Geographies of Extinction. ”
29. Rose, “Slowly, ”2; van Dooren, Flight Ways .
30. Robbins and Moore, “Return of the Repressed. ”A helpful short review of Lacanian anxiety is offered
by Moore, Are ﬁn, and Rosenfeld, “Generating Anxiety, Short-Circuiting Desire. ”
31. Lacan, Anxiety , 159.
32. Harari, Lacan ’s Seminar on “Anxiety, ”34.
33. Lacan, Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis , 184.
34. Kirshner, “Rethinking Desire, ”84.
35. Kingsbury, “Did Somebody Say Jouissance?, ”50.
36. Loveless, How to Make Art , 80.Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 245Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

demand, ”Lacan says, “there is but the request for object a, for the object that could sat-
isfy jouissance. ”37Objet a is the leftover excess emergent in the formation of the subject
in relation to the big Other. The capital O Other here is not a referent to another speci ﬁc
individual but the more abstracted “big Other ”through which we symbolically emerge
as desiring subjects upon entering the world of language as young children.38In the de-
sire for the fantasy of the impossible (re)uni ﬁcation of the self with this pre-separated
state, it is the subject ’s recognition of an ontic split from the Other that makes the
desiring subject possible. Lacan instructs we should understand this desire as a media-
tion of what we suppose our own unconscious desires to be in relation to the Other ’s
desire. This does not mean we cannot grasp at these desires, instead it is to recognize
“our”desires are not “ours ”alone. The unconscious, as Maurice Merleau-Ponty says, “is
to be sought not at the bottom of ourselves, behind the back of our ‘consciousness, ’but
in front us, as articulations of our ﬁeld. It is ‘unconscious ’by the fact that it is not an ob-
ject, but it is that through which objects are possible, it is the constellation wherein our
future is read. ”39This is what Lacan means when he says, “The discourse of the Other
that is to be realized, that of the unconscious, is not beyond the closure, it is outside .”40
Objet a, in other words, is what sets desire in motion.41But desire is not only medi-
ated as an experience between our unconscious selves and the external world; as Paul
Kingsbury explains, the mental and the social are topologically enjoined: “The interior
is present in the exterior and vice versa. ”42This raises our eyes to a more-than-human
psychoanalytic possibility focused on the interactivity of unconscious desires operating
in the world with profound reverberations for the living world and how we understand
the world to be. Such an appreciation is vital to establishing how we might approach a
cactus on the road to extinction as both a “lure ”in the desire for jouissance yet also an
“object ”[objet a] of anxiety. Attention to desire in examining the work of care is impor-
tant then because it is the search for jouissance in objet a that is the motor behind a de-
sireto desire . And yet when the position of objet a shifts away from its proper place —the
side of the Other —in relation to the desiring subject, anxiety may arise, thwarting the
capacity to desire. Anxiety is not —as Lacan importantly instructs —an emotion; anxiety
is an affect. Anxiety emerges when objet a becomes too close, when the fantasy of the
split subject begins to disintegrate. Anxiety ’s affective closeness signals desire falling
away.
Before turning to how desire mediates movements toward care and concern, it
is important to clarify meanings of care. The difference between concern and care is
37. Lacan, On Feminine Sexuality ,1 2 6 .
38. Lacan, Écrits , 366.
39. Merleau-Ponty, Visible and the Invisible , 180. I ﬁrst encountered this description of the unconscious in
Loveless, How to Make Art .
40. Lacan, Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis , 131; Kingsbury, “Extimacy of Space, ”246.
41. Kingsbury, “Locating the Melody of the Drives. ”
42. Kingsbury, “Extimacy of Space, ”246.246 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

important because their separation is the difference between expressing concern and
doing something in response. Concern and care also engage with different politics: as
Puig de la Bellacasa writes, “A politics of care engages much more than a moral stance;
it involves affective, ethical, and hands-on agencies of practical and material conse-
quence. ”43The politics of care is an active expression of desire to make better, but care
does not only carry meanings of positive outcome; there is work to be done to unsettle
care within wider political ecologies shot through with unevenness, inequality, and vio-lence.
44Although power and agency ought be understood in more-than-human terms,
questions of power beget other questions about responsibility, and who or what bears
responsibility when species extinction registers as a matter of concern.45
I am drawn to understanding care as a mode of analysis that “starts out from the
ﬂeshiness and fragility of life ”to stay close to how the thing or subject being cared for is
an active participant in exertions of care and also how subjects are compelled to care.46But
as Eva Haifa Giraud argues ,“Simply acknowledging that human and more-than-human
worlds are entangled is not enough in itself to respond to problems born of anthropogenic
activity. ”47This leads me to consider questions about movements toward care in conser-
vation geographies, and which lives suf ﬁciently move people or organizations into prac-
tices of care against the threat of extinction, and which lives do not. My use of the active
verb move in relation to care here is speci ﬁc; considering what moves people to care must
account for what unconsciously takes place that elicits the desire to care as an active and
relational process between the unconscious self and our external worlds, or what occurs
in structuring the movements of desire.48
Contending with Cactus Extinction on the Dark MountainOn a hot day in November 2018 I observed a botanist plucking seeds off a tall, thin cactus
swaying in the wind on the edge of a mountain. The small mountain of about 300 meters
in height is in the process of being excavated as a quartz mine. Our group, a mix of bota-
nists, conservationists, and European cactus collectors, arrived to visit and informally
assess the status of the now-imminently threatened cactus species Arrojadoa marylanae .
Like many species, this plant ’s entrance into scienti ﬁc knowledge was almost immedi-
ately marked with the threat of extinction. The botanist assured me this species wouldbe extinct in a matter of years, if not sooner, save dramatic intervention.
49
43. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care , 4; see also Krzywoszynska, “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropo-
cene. ”
44. Murphy, “Unsettling Care ”; Martin, Myers, and Viseu, “Politics of Care in Technoscience. ”
45. Puig de la Bellacasa, “‘Nothing Comes without Its World ’”; Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for
Soil ”; Latimer and Puig de la Bellacasa, “Re-thinking the Ethical. ”
46. Mol, Logic of Care , 11; Ureta, “Caring for Waste. ”
47. Giraud, What Comes after Entanglement? ,7 .
48. Kingsbury and Pile, “Introduction. ”On the movement of desire see McGowan, Capitalism and Desire ,3 3 .
49. Goettsch et al., “High Proportion of Cactus Species. ”Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 247Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

A. marylanae is known to exist only in one location in the entire world, the Serra
Escura (Dark Mountain) in the municipality of Tanhaçú in southwestern Bahia. The cac-
tus was ﬁrst identi ﬁed as a new species in 2003 by botanist Marlon Machado and named
A. marylanae after a student who alerted Machado to the possibly novel species .I won-
dered by what unlikely event of dispersal A. marylanae arrived on Serra Escura from
some distant locale or, alternatively, if th is population instead represented the last
stronghold of a species that once dotted hill tops across the region. Phylogenetic and
ecological research could help answer the se questions and explain its small habitat
range, but that research has yet to be conducted, and likely never will. Yet this kind of
basic knowledge can be an essential starting point for the enactment of species ﬂour-
ishing.50Truly little is known about the kinds of ecological company A. marylanae keeps.
When Machado ﬁrst published his formal description of A. marylanae in 2005, the
plant faced few if any threats to its survival. Passionate cactus collectors did not want
it because they did not know it existed. Even if they had, it is not the sort of cactus to
cause a collecting frenzy51—it can grow over 2 meters tall (making it dif ﬁcult to keep in
a greenhouse), and while it is certainly a beautiful cactus, especially when mature and
studded with rings of ﬂowers, it does not have any uniquely striking morphological fea-
tures, especially when young, when its charms are less apparent ( ﬁg. 1).52Its location on
top of a mountain also meant it was secure from the common problems of urbanizationand agricultural development that can threaten other cacti species in the region.
This changed when a mining company purchased the land of Serra Escura, with
the plan to transform the mountain into a quartz mine for sixty years. Referring to their
plan as The Dark Mountain Project (Projeto Serra Escura), the company Minas Stones is
extracting quartz from the mountain, which is used in the processing of materials for avariety of industrial manufacturing purposes including the production of steel. That the
mountain is home to a species that exists nowhere else in the world is an inconvenience
on the road toward the mountain ’s excavation. This is not an exceptional case; rather
it is representative of the constant and mundane con ﬂict embedded in choices about
how life is prioritized or not in the face of capitalist exploitation.
At the top of the mountain, our group visited one side studded with mature adults
scattered along the craggy top and hugging the escarpment ’s edge ( ﬁg. 2). On the other
side, just a few dozen meters away, we encountered much younger transplants, individ-
ually staked cacti in a grid pattern. These cacti were recently relocated away from the
side of the mountain that will be destroyed. This other side of the mountain, we were
told, would be spared from mining. I asked a botanist in our company for his opinion
on the prospects for A. marylanae . The botanist gestured to the side of the mountain
with the transplanted cacti ( ﬁg. 3). “It’s too small, it ’s just that small hill over there, it
50. Cuomo, Feminism and Ecological Communities ,7 3 .
51. Margulies, “Korean ‘Housewives ’and ‘Hipsters. ’”
52. Machado, “Discovery of Arrojadoa Marylanae, ”62.248 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Figure 1. Young relocated Arrojadoa marylanae in Minas Stones ’s nursery. The spelling of the species ’Latin
name is incorrect on the placard.Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 249Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Figure 2. Mature Arrojadoa marylanae dotting the peak of Serra Escura.250 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

isn’t enough to sustain the population. There are already plants lying around, dead. The
plant will go extinct. ”I asked him about the greenhouse at the bottom of the mountain,
where the company was propagating the plants that will be affected by their operations
as part of their formal sustainability plan. “Ex-situ conservation? ”he replied, shrugging
his shoulders in ambivalence. So little is known about A. marylanae ’s ecology, it was pre-
posterous to him to consider the moving of plants off the mountain as conservation
work while the company destroyed the cacti ’so n l yh a b i t a t .
I pressed the botanist for more information —if the plant was formally described
and recognized as endangered, shouldn ’t it be protected under Brazilian law? “The
plant was described, ”he explained:
We put it in the Red List as critically endangered. We proposed to list it in the Brazilian
list of endangered species; it should be included in the national [Red] List as criticallyendangered, but because the process is so slow, the mining company already got their li-cense. Now the plant is listed as critically endangered on the state of Bahia ’sl i s to f
endangered species, so it will likely be included in the national list, but it ’s too late, the
company already has their license, and they are mining.
53
Figure 3. Staked and relocated Arrojadoa marylanae on the mountain ’s“salvage ”area.
53. “Critically endangered ”is the most threatened category in the International Union for the Conserva-
tion of Nature (IUCN) ’s threat classi ﬁcation system, except for “extinct in the wild ”or simply “extinct. ”Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 251Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

That the species registers as a matter of concern —it appears on the list of threat-
ened Bahia ﬂora—matters only because it gestures toward a concern for its well-being
yet does not otherwise permit scientists to intervene in curbing pro ﬁtable mining. De-
spite the comparatively “charming ”nature of cacti within the botanical world, the plant
does not compel people in power to greater action.54This is the banality of biopolitical
power at work par excellence; a power that fosters and cherishes some lives while also
excluding others.55
I next walked with the botanist to the eight-hectare “reserve area ”on one side of
the mountain, where around sixty A. marylanae were moved and replanted a year prior
(ﬁg. 3). This area was covered in shrubby vegetation, now cleared for the cacti, and the
ground had a distinct topsoil layer, unlik e the rocky quartz where the cacti grew. The
botanist noted that, unless the company keep s clearing the scrub, it will be taken over
again by denser, faster-growing vegetation outcompeting the cacti. And what about
sixty years from now, when they expect mining operations to cease —will A. marylanae
recolonize the ruins of a mined mountain? It is certainly something that Minas Stones,
at least in theory, is hoping to achieve as part of their project ’s sustainability plan. Later
we saw this project ’s greenhouse, where the removed plants from the mountain ( A. mar-
ylanae among them) are maintained and propagated for future planting. But I wondered,
as the botanist did, where these relocated plants will grow, many of which did not ap-pear to be thriving in their new home. Accord ing to the botanist, there is no similar
mountaintop nearby, to say nothing of the unknown ecological relations A. marylanae
keeps on Serra Escura. The “sustainability plan ”forA. marylanae felt tenuous, its capacity
to conceal the lurking threat of extinction incomplete.
Before our group left the mountain, I stood with the botanist as he scanned the
horizon. “It’s a nice spot, it ’s so sad. . . . It can be preserved in cultivation, but I don ’t see
it being safe anywhere else. There must be a reason this plant only grows here. Maybe
it just never dispersed to other hills that are like this, but none are near here. ”Is u d -
denly heard myself saying out loud “If only we could ask what it needs ”before trailing off.
He smirked at this glib response, not missing a beat: “The plant needs to be here. Now
you see the real problem —it’s not people taking a few seeds or cuttings of plants, it ’s
development. ”
Shortly after this conversation, I became aware of energetic activity around me. As
I wrote in my ﬁeld notes on the mountain:
[People] start digging out small plants and putting them in a bag with a pen knife. I feel
like I ’ve been thrown into a strange version of the monkey wrench gang. I want them to
have these plants . . . it feels sad but also victorious? Someone passes a pen knife off infront of the company biologist. It ’s hard to imagine she isn ’ta w a r eo rd i d n ’t see what it
54. Lorimer, “Nonhuman Charisma. ”
55. Srinivasan, “Biopolitics of Animal Being and Welfare. ”252 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

was used for, it still has dirt on it. Maybe she is glad, or just doesn ’tc a r e...o rm a y b es h e
does care, maybe she understands what is going to ultimately happen to this species onthis mountain.
These acts illustrate the at-times complicated meanings of more-than-human
care work. What are we to make of the quick and covert ripping of plants from the only
place they are known to ﬂourish as a purported act of care? Alongside questions of care,
these acts point to anxiety as a vital in ﬂection point, an impediment to desire.56If, fol-
lowing Lacan, anxiety is the falling away of desire, when lack as the motor of desire is
interrupted by the presence of objet a, how are we to understand objet a as the “object ”
of extinction anxieties in relation to the absence-presence of A. marylanae ?57To attempt
to address these questions, I turn to a self-analysis of my own contention with extinc-
tion. I use this analysis to clarify my argument for ﬂourishing geographies as a politi-
cal horizon composed against Anthropo-Capitalocenic thinking.
Extinction Anxiety
I give attention now to when I heard myself say, “If only we could ask it what it needs. ”
Psychoanalysis tells us such a blurting out of speech is often very meaningful, even if
(or especially if) the conscious self recognizes it, as I immediately did, as an embarrass-
ing remark, a signal perhaps of anxiety ’s presence. Embarrassment, Lacan writes, is
“when you don ’t know what to do with yourself any more, [and] you look for something
behind which to shield yourself. ”It is, he writes, a “slight form of anxiety. ”58Anxiety
emerges when “something that should not have been exposed, as something meant
to remain hidden, becomes present. ”59Through the lens of psychoanalysis, I interpret
this remark to mean that “I”(the egoic conscious self) heard “myself ”(the unconscious
self) speak. Imagine inserting the word butinto this expression —“butif only we could
ask what it needs. ”This butis an insertion of a kind of uncertainty into speech in “if
only . . . ”; we could say another discourse is present. As Bruce Fink explains, this butis
“announcing the unconscious subject of enunciation, and thereby showing that the
subject is split —of two minds, so to speak, conscious and unconscious. ”60For Lacan, it
is only in this brief temporal moment, a ﬂicker of what would seem to be someone
else ’s speech within our own, that we see the unconscious make itself known to “us.”
The unconscious slipping into the conscious is important because it reveals how anxi-
ety manifested through A. marylanae as“a signal, ”an interruption alerting me to what
was being exposed beyond the plant itself, yet signi ﬁed through it that led me to pro-
nounce, “[But] if only we could ask what it needs. ”These chains of signi ﬁcation are com-
posed of bending and twisting lines becoming knots in the search for an impossible
56. Lacan, Anxiety , 175.
57. Lacan, Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis ,i x .
58. Lacan, Anxiety , 11.
59. Harari, Lacan ’s Seminar on “Anxiety, ”56.
60. Fink, The Lacanian Subject, 40.Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 253Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

unity; in this way, thoughts and desires wind their way toward “a desire that is based
on no being —a desire without any other substance than that assured by knots them-
selves. ”61I see a desire for ﬂourishing becoming knotted through contending with the
anxiety that extinction elicits when confronted by its nearness at hand, the absence-
presence of the cactus as objet a. The “signal ”of the fading away of the cactus marks
the fading away of desire. Anxiety, which as a “cut,”in Lacan ’s words, works to safeguard
the conscious self, also alerts us to what might emerge through the work of analysisrather than negation. “It’s upon the cutting edge of anxiety that we have to hold fast. ”
62
The cactus alerted me to the painful recognition of accelerating intergenerational
unmaking of life, yet producing a sense of psychic immobility to enact a world other-
wise.63The knotting of desire, to turn back to Haraway, speaks to how “actual encoun-
ters are what make beings ”and how the unconscious becomes articulated through
encounters in the world.64I nt h i sw a y ,w ec a ns e ed e s i r e sa se n t a n g l e di nt h ec r e a t i o n
of beings as knotted encounters, inside and out.
“If only we could ask it what it needs ”brought to the level of speech an uncon-
scious desire to desire, but one thwarted by anxiety. This alters the tenor of my introduc-
tory question, “Who cares whether a cactus goes extinct?, ”to focus instead on what car-
ing for a cactus signals as a lure in the search for jouissance. On the mountain there was
a buzz and excitement to rescue A. marylanae from the grips of impending doom. My
ﬁeldnotes, photographs, and videos from this day resonate with a high-intensity energy
to care, in which people removed plants from the only habitat they are known to survive
in, justi ﬁed as work to maintain and continue the species “as well as possible. ”65Two
years later this sentiment is more ambiguous. Perhaps a seedling of A. marylanae now
grows on in a greenhouse in Belgium or on a windowsill in Bahia. So what? Althoughcare on the mountain might appear as an enactment of response-ability, what Haraway
describes as “a praxis of care and response . . . in ongoing multispecies worlding on a
wounded terra, ”
66such a reading is also a missed opportunity to understand this effort
to care as anxiety in motion .67Approaching this desire to care instead as an affective
engagement with anxiety, as an effort to stabilize the psychic fantasy maintaining objet
a in its proper place, some clarity emerges: how we might understand the anxiety in
extinction ’s nearness being “cut away, ”materialized through the literal cutting away of
the plants themselves, to conceal over what their diminishing presence asserts.68
61. Lacan, On Feminine Sexuality , 126.
62. Lacan, Anxiety , 15.
63. Rose, “Multispecies Knots of Ethical Time. ”
64. Haraway, When Species Meet ,6 7 .
65. Fisher and Tronto, “Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring, ”40.
66. Haraway, “Awash in Urine, ”302.
67. Harari, Lacan ’s Seminar on “Anxiety, ”1–27.
68. There is a linguistic relation between care, concern, and the work of psychoanalysis as cure. See Har-
ari,Lacan ’s Seminar on “Anxiety, ”5–8.254 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

In a more af ﬁrmative sense, I consider what occurred on the mountain with A.
marylanae as a movement toward care, but care set in motion by anxiety ’s presence.
Each fallen seed encased in bright pink fruit felt so important, at-risk, precious. Why
did the cactus not only move us, but lure us, to care? Anxiety, jouissance, and objet a
help disentangle how A. marylanae became something else, something distorted until
viewed “from the side, ”the perspective from which the unconscious meaning signi ﬁed
through the encounter with the cactus might be grasped.69
Toward a Care-Full Psychoanalysis?To understand the cactus in relation to desire, we should consider the cactus within a
chain of signi ﬁers.
70The twists linking the subject with the external world are described
by Lacan as taking place through topological forms. The Möbius strip is an excellentexample of this. It is a non-Euclidean topology in which a twist is produced before con-
necting two ends of a piece of paper through which interiorities and exteriorities be-
come enjoined —a spatial orientation Lacan describes through the use of the term exti-
macy to instantiate how, as Virginia Blum and Anna Secor describe, “material spaces
and psychic processes shape one another. ”
71The Möbius strip represents how the
psyche and our social and material worlds a re developed in relation to one another,
linking seemingly discrete registers of being through topological continuity.72Think-
ing the unconscious with the cactus in this topological formation helps give meaning
to seeing the unconscious as in front of us. A. marylanae was by no means the only cac-
tus I encountered during several weeks of participatory “cacto-exploration ”with my pri-
mary research subjects. I saw other tall columnar cacti on other mountains in Brazil,
some so exceptional in color and form they felt ethereal and otherworldly —the stun-
ning blues and great wisps of golden hair of cacti in the Pilosocereus genus, the enticingly
smooth blue-gray skin of Cipocereus bradei —but they did not affect me in the same way
A. marylanae did. It was not the cactus itself as a corporeal being that lured me to care,
but neither does this negate the charms or living wonder of these plants. We can see
then that A. marylanae became something else; it became inscribed with other signi ﬁ-
cations through these topological twists af ﬁxing the unconscious in the world.73
Other psychoanalytic readings of this cactus are also possible. As lack is the motor
of desire, we might alternatively read extinction aslack, the temporal obliteration of
presence itself. In this vein we might instead approach the cactus —contra anxiety —
through the Lacanian notion of sublimation as a “sublime object, ”or an object that
stands in for what Lacan refers to as Das Ding (to be replaced in later seminars by objet
69. Lacan, Écrits , 724.
70. Lacan, Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis ,7 9 –90.
71. Blum and Secor, “Psychotopologies, ”1031; Kingsbury, “Extimacy of Space ”; Healy, “Traversing Fan-
tasies, Activating Desires. ”
72. Pile, “Emotions and Affect ”; Philo and Parr, “Introducing Psychoanalytic Geographies. ”
73. Blum and Secor, “Psychotopologies. ”Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 255Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

a). Sublimation is the process in which an ordinary object is elevated “to the dignity of
the Thing [objet a], ”the ultimate lack.74There is certainly merit to such a reading, espe-
cially as extinction marks absence. But against this reading I would argue that this ex-
tends extinction too far into metaphorical registers. Extinction isreal even if it is through
absence that it is composed.75In arguing for understanding extinction anxiety in the
presence of a diminishing cactus, this is where a speci ﬁcally Lacanian reading of anxiety
is crucial, because anxiety is when lack recedes . The presence of anxiety, when objet a is
close at hand, interrupts the desiring subject through this twist that anxiety puts in
the way.76As Derek Hook writes, “Anxiety thus is not tantamount to desperation, but
r a t h e r...at y p eo f expectant dread .”77Extinction anxiety, as a cut, shores up uncon-
scious stability by insisting on a turn away from the great unmaking that could be oth-
erwise, interrupting the capacity to desire by instead telling us to rejoice in the stealingof a cactus off a mountain, or accepting the fantasy of a “sustainability plan ”that re-
moves the cacti from the only place in the world they are known to grow. It is the cac-
ti’s presence that alerts us to the cracks in this fantasy and what we already know to be
true and must contend with rather than negate in an act of psychic retreat.
Reading the story of A. marylanae yet another way, we might consider how I or oth-
ers wished to witness extinction itself as a fetishized experience of jouissance, as Stasja
Koot recently argued through their case of tourism amid South Africa ’s rhino poaching
crisis.
78Jouissance and desire are found at opposite yet connected poles in Lacanian
thought. If desire is about lack, jouissance “is a plus, a sensation beyond pleasure. ”79
“Enjoying ”extinction is a noteworthy application of Lacanian thought for political ecol-
ogy, and it is very likely that some of the members of my group experienced an excess
of aching pleasure as some of the few visitors permitted to watch a cactus in the processof being unmade by extractive capitalism. But here my interest is in what I and others
were in the grip of on the mountain in the nearness of extinction unfolding —the proxim-
ity of a void. The collectors ’and conservationists ’diverse concerns for A. marylanae ’sp e r -
sistence on the mountain should be understood as greater than an endeavor of more-
than-human care or the short-lived thrill in obtaining, illicitly or not, another species for
collection .Something greater-than lurked beyond my question of wishing I could ask
what it needs: the anxiety signaled in the anticipation of intergenerational obliteration, apainful awareness of its cause, and an inability to enact a different story. As a lure A. mar-
ylanae manifested the threat of contending with the Anthropo-Capitalocene as a move-
ment of species unmaking —that movement toward paralysis so commonly described in
74. See Pohl, “Sublime Object of Detroit ”; Kingsbury, “Sociospatial Sublimation ”;L a c a n , Ethics of Psy-
choanalysis , 112.
75. Schmidt, “Glacial Deaths, Geologic Extinction. ”
76. Lacan, Anxiety , 54.
77. Hook, “Mapping Anxiety, ”117.
78. Koot, “Enjoying Extinction. ”
79. Braunstein, “Desire and Jouissance, ”104.256 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

extinction studies, in which desire is replaced by an encircling of the object that stands in
its way. “Coming to grips ”with A. marylanae ’s extinction speaks to the profound dif ﬁcul-
ties of engaging with extinction as a disorientating obliteration of time, in which the anx-
ieties of the Anthropo-Capitalocene become manifested through the absence-presence of
species in the process of being unmade.80Anxiety in a Lacanian register shows how the
process of a cactus being made extinct can resonate with meanings far beyond the con ﬁ-
nes of species ’existence by paying closer attention to the interactivity of the unconscious
self with the world through speaking the aims of desire.
For Flourishing Geographies
What I see emergent in the story of A. marylanae is contending with the anxiety of the
Anthropo-Capitalocene as a time in whic h the causes of this great unmaking are
named yet there is a compulsion to turn away in shame rather than contend with
the weight of desire, the enactment of ﬂourishing geographies. As Svitlana Matviyenko
and Judith Roof describe in their introduction to Lacan and the Posthuman :
T o oo f t e n ,t h eo b s t a c l et oc o n f r o n t i n gk n o w l e d g ec o m e sf r o mw i t h i n ....A p p a r e n t l y ,i ti s
less painful for the subject to turn away from a deadly disaster, even at the cost of death,than to survive the disgrace of admitting that we knew what we were doing, that weknew about the potential consequences of our actions, and that we were both passivelyand actively complicit in the wrongdoings of others.
81
In suggesting that work remains to be done to excavate unconscious thought
about extinction in the Anthropo-Capital ocene through analyzing what was brought
to the surface in my blurting out of speech, my invocation of a collective “we”is
deeply quali ﬁed. There are, of course, other scholars and bodies of scholarship that
describe decidedly different kinds of human-plant relations immersed in reciprocal
forms of care and mutality that speak to understanding extinction as a matter of
concern that needs little psychoanalytic accounting.82Recent collective and collab-
orative interventions of Indigenous and decolonial thought, such as the CreaturesCollective and the Bawaka Collective, offer important critiques of hegemonic and
silencing Euro-Western conceptualizations of species, extinction, and the Anthropo-
cene.
83Against this Anthropocenic thinking, N oah Theriault and colleagues call for
“living protocols ”that “foster accountability, healing, reciprocity and capacities for
80. Bersaglio and Margulies, “Extinctionscapes ”; Maddrell, “Living with the Deceased ”; Pohl, “Object-
Disoriented Geographies. ”
81. Matviyenko and Roof, “Introduction, ”6.
82. See, for example, de la Cadena, Earth Beings ; Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass ; Chao, “In the Shadow
of the Palm. ”
83. Hernández et al., “Creatures Collective ”; Country et al., “Working with and Learning from Country ”;
Suchet-Pearson et al., “Caring asCountry. ”Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 257Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

resistance. ”84The pursuit of ﬂourishing geographies is therefore to enact collaborative
efforts of opposition to Anthropo-Capitalocenic thinking as an insistence for a vital (and
here, vegetal) politics of interdependent futures, one in which the ongoing harms of colo-
nial violence, both past and present, are named and recognized rather than repressed.85
This “we,”therefore, is one that seeks to recognize the longstanding harms of human-
nature dichotomies and repressive thought that patriarchal Euro-Western societies are
only beginning to truly grapple with, even if history and sociality are only part of thestory of the unconscious self.
86Exclusions also mark absences; I do not know more, for in-
stance, about people who currently or may have once held different relations with A. mar-
ylanae or Serra Escura prior to its enclosure. This work took place amid the broader con-
text of my larger research project of writing a multispecies ethnography of illegal
cactus trade and collection. The time I was therefore afforded to learn with A. maryla-
naein Bahia was altogether too restricted to interrogate how its history intersects with
the profoundly violent past of Bahia ’s colonization, or Serra Escura ’s more immediate
history within a regional context of mining over the past several centuries.
The story of A. marylanae demonstrates that work remains in grasping for routes
out of Anthropo-Capitalocenic thought while acknowledging that decolonial pathways
toward “abundant futures ”already exist.87But extinction thinking not only shapes how
we contend with extinction ’s profound absences but also increasingly holds power-
ful sway over the remaking of place and landscape through narratives of extinction. In
excavating extinction anxieties, and to think extinction otherwise, we must move be-
yond fantasizing about unmaking —we are compelled, Natasha Myers writes, to “resist
thelureof apocalypse like your life depends on it ...t h e only way to thwart the momen-
tum of the Anthropocene is to break the spell of capitalism and activate processes ofdecolonization. ”
88Confronting the anxiety of extinction demands confronting what im-
pedes desire, which is to say, recognizing the unconscious as a terrain of struggle for
another politics.89ButA. marylanae was not acting alone as a lure. It acted in concert
within an assemblage of enthusiastic supporters in the form of conservationists, sci-
entists, and collector/hobbyists also invested in its survival, all moved to care in vari-
ous ways through how A. marylanae was inscribed with signi ﬁcations of loss. In this
way I cannot think A. marylanae outside thinking it with these others and their own
d e s i r e sa sac o l l e c t i v ed e s i r et oc a r e ,b u tw h e r et h em e a n so fc a r i n ga n dt h ef o u n d a -
t i o n a lr e a s o n sf o rd e s i r i n gt oc a r er e m a i nu n e v e n .T h i si st os a y ,i nc o n s i d e r i n gt h e
84. Theriault et al., “Living Protocols, ”898 –99.
85. Buck, “On the Possibilities of a Charming Anthropocene ”; Head, Hope and Grief in the Anthropocene ;
Head, Atchison, and Phillips, “Distinctive Capacities of Plants ”; Myers, “How to Grow Livable Worlds. ”
86. Callard, “Taming of Psychoanalysis in Geography. ”
87. Collard, Dempsey, and Sundberg, “Manifesto for Abundant Futures ”; Sundberg, “Decolonizing Post-
humanist Geographies. ”
88. Myers, “How to Grow Livable Worlds, ”54 (emphasis mine).
89. Pohl and Swyngedouw, “‘What Does Not Work in the World. ’”258 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

care of the species as an enactment of response-ability, I am also speaking of a desire
to care collectively for and with others as multispecies enactments of ﬂourishing
geographies —a fantasy, but one that is nevertheless actualized in the world as a very
real horizon .
Conclusion
The frantic, ecstatic feeling of tearing plants from the only place they live is an intelligi-ble response to extinction anxiety weighed against confronting the relentless forces of
the Anthropo-Capitalocene making quick work of a mountain and a species of life. At-
tention to the unconscious through A. marylanae highlights matters of desire in articu-
lating what prompts movements (or not) toward care in unconscious registers. There is
so much that remains unknown about A. marylanae , and what binds the species to Serra
Escura within entangled ecologies. When the botanist said to me that the plant “needs
to be here, ”he was gesturing toward an unknown set of relations that permit A. maryla-
naetoﬂourish as a being that lives and dies in different times than humans do. Plants
inhabit worlds of life and death simultaneously, and they exceed the synchronous and
sequential temporalities of individuals amid generations as animals do; in other words,
they inhabit phyto -temporalities all their own.
90As beings that connect above and
below-ground worlds, plants suture time and space together in useful ways for thinkingwith species as intergenerational formations of time bound up with place.
91Learning to
care for plants must therefore also attend to caring for the distinct temporal worlds of
plants, connecting life and death within ecologies that are themselves care-full alliances.
Jodi Dean writes that the horizon marks “a fundamental division that we experience as
impossible to reach, and that we can neither escape nor cross. ”92Perhaps plants are espe-
cially helpful guides then for navigating toward a ﬂourishing horizon as transgressive
beings that entwine earth and sky (the spatial horizon) while further blurring the tem-
poral horizon demarcating the past and its attendant failures from what lies ahead.
I take learning from nonhuman life seriously, and so to me it follows that theory
should ﬂow out from the world and from questions of pressing concern about sustain-
ing it. This article is therefore the result of learning with a plant and how this led me to
unexpectedly engage with the world of psychoanalytic thought, as paradoxical as thismay seem. Despite the intellectual distance between the two, I suggest that an open-
ness for conversation between this divers e body of theory and more-than-human
thinking provides a valuable set of analytical concepts to contend with extinction, care,
andﬂourishing. Analyzing A. marylanae ’s possible extinction as a political ecology of de-
sire engages the limits of law to grant protection to nonhuman others; at the same timeit reveals how possibilities for multispecies alliances are shot through with matters of
90. Marder, Plant-Thinking ; Chao, “In the Shadow of the Palm. ”
91. Houle, “Animal, Vegetable, Mineral. ”
92. Dean, Communist Horizon ,1 .Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 259Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

the unconscious. When I said, “if only we could ask it what it needs, ”I truly do not think
I was expressing an actual desire to ask this species what it required to ﬂourish. “I”
understood, before the botanist needed to remind me, that this species as a formation
in time is part of a greater “living mountain, ”and its demise as a ﬂourishing being was
always knotted within the ecologies of others that will also be unmade through this
work of mineral resource extraction.93This is not to deny the possibilities for renewal,
or that many plant species quite easily move across great distances, ecosystems, andgeographies whether we want them to or not. Nor is this some circuitous route toward
reasserting preservationist desires for “Edenic ”natures absent human presence or mod-
iﬁcation. Perhaps, as the mining company suggests, in sixty years ’time these relocated
plants will again ﬁnd the means to persist or even ﬂourish on a hollowed-out mountain.
Or perhaps not. But when my unconscious slipped into conscious speech, I do not thinkI had only this cactus in mind. Approaching desire in this light is more than the work of
excavating the unconscious, but a collective effort of confronting anxiety that stands in
desire ’s way. What worlds do we miss in failing to speak of desire?
JARED MARGULIES is assistant professor of political ecology in the Department of Geography at
the University of Alabama. His book, The Succulent Subject: A Political Ecology of Plants, Desire,
and Illicit Trade is forthcoming with the University of Minnesota Press.
Acknowledgments
This work bene ﬁtted immensely from generous feedback on numerous drafts by members of the Gen-
der and Race Studies Writing Group at the University of Alabama and an audience of the University
College Dublin ’s Environmental Humanities Spring 2021 seminar. I owe my thanks to two anonymous
reviewers for their very helpful feedback and suggestions on this article, as well as critical feedback
on several previous iterations by Rob St. John, Sara-Maria Sorentino, Gina Stamm, Misha Hadar, Han-
nah Boast, Dan Brockington, Sophie Sapp Moore, Larissa Fleischmann, Lucas Pohl, and Brock Bersaglio.This research was supported in part with funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program grant agreement No 694995
(BIOSEC: Biodiversity and Security, Understanding Environmental Crime, Illegal Wildlife Trade andThreat Finance). Any errors remain my own.
References
Bastian, Michelle. “Fatally Confused: Telling the Time in the Midst of Ecological Crises. ”Environmen-
tal Philosophy 9, no. 1 (2012): 23 –48.
Bastian, Michelle. “Whale Falls, Suspended Ground, and Extinctions Never Known. ”Environmental
Humanities 12, no. 2 (2020): 454 –74.
Bersaglio, Brock, and Jared Margulies. “Extinctionscapes: Spatializing the Commodi ﬁcation of Animal
Lives and Afterlives in Conservation Landscapes. ”Social & Cultural Geography 21, no. 1 (2021):
10–28.
93. Shepherd, Living Mountain . As Alf Hornborg wrote over twenty- ﬁve years ago, “Turning a mountain
into gravel [or quartz] is facilitated by ﬁrst breaking it down conceptually. ”Hornborg, “Environmentalism, Ethnic-
ity, and Sacred Places, ”251.260 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Besky, Sarah, and Alex Blanchette. “The Fragility of Work. ”InHow Nature Works: Rethinking Labor on a
Troubled Planet , edited by Sarah Besky and Alex Blanchette, 1 –22. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico Press, 2019.
Blum, Virginia, and Anna Secor. “Psychotopologies: Closing the Circuit between Psychic and Material
Space. ”Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29, no. 6 (2011): 1030 –47.
Braunstein, Néstor. “Desire and Jouissance in the Teachings of Lacan. ”InThe Cambridge Companion to
Lacan , edited by Jean-Michel Rabaté, 102 –15. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Buck, Holly Jean. “On the Possibilities of a Charming Anthropocene. ”Annals of the Association of Amer-
ican Geographers 105, no. 2 (2015): 369 –77.
Callard, Felicity. “The Taming of Psychoanalysis in Geography. ”Social & Cultural Geography 4, no. 3
(2003): 295 –312.
Chao, Sophie. “In the Shadow of the Palm: Dispersed Ontologies among Marind, West Papua. ”Cul-
tural Anthropology 33, no. 4 (2018): 621 –49.https://doi.org/10.14506/ca33.4.08 .
Collard, Rosemary-Claire, Jessica Dempsey, and Juanita Sundberg. “A Manifesto for Abundant Fu-
tures. ”Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105, no. 2 (2015): 322 –30.
Country, Bawaka, Sarah Wright, Sandie Suchet-Pearson, Kate Lloyd, Laklak Burarrwanga, Ritjilili Ga-
nambarr, Merrkiyawuy Ganambarr-Stubbs, Banbapuy Ganambarr, and Djawundil Maymuru.“Working with and Learning from Country: Decentring Human Author-ity. ”Cultural Geographies
22, no. 2 (2015): 269 –83.
Cuomo, Christine. Feminism and Ecological Communities . London: Routledge, 1997.
de la Cadena, Marisol. Earth Beings . Duke University Press, 2015.
Dean, Jodi. The Communist Horizon . New York: Verso Books, 2012.
Fink, Bruce. The Lacanian Subject. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
Fisher, Berenice, and Joan Tronto. “Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring. ”InCircles of Care: Work and
Identity in Women ’sL i v e s , edited by Emily K. Abel and Margaret K. Nelson, 35 –62. Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1990.
Garlick, Ben, and Kate Symons. “Geographies of Extinction: Exploring the Spatiotemporal Relations
of Species Death. ”Environmental Humanities 12, no. 1 (2020): 296 –320.
Ginn, Franklin, Uli Beisel, and Maan Barua. “Flourishing with Awkward Creatures: Togetherness,
Vulnerability, Killing. ”Environmental Humanities 4, no. 1 (2014): 113 –23.
Giraud, Eva Haifa. What Comes after Entanglement? Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2019.
Goettsch, Bárbara, Craig Hilton-Taylor, Gabriela Cruz-Piñón, James P. Duffy, Anne Frances, Héctor M.
Hernández, Richard Inger, Caroline Pollock, Jan Schipper, and Mariella Superina. “High Propor-
tion of Cactus Species Threatened with Extinction. ”Nature Plants 1, no. 10 (2015): 1 –7.
Harari, Roberto. Lacan ’sS e m i n a ro n “Anxiety ”: An Introduction . The Lacanian Clinical Field. New York:
Other, 2001.
Haraway, Donna. “Awash in Urine: DES and Premarin®in Multispecies Response-Ability. ”Women ’s
Studies Quarterly 40, nos. 1 –2 (2012): 301 –16.
Haraway, Donna. When Species Meet . Posthumanities 3. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2008.
Head, Lesley. Hope and Grief in the Anthropocene: Re-conceptualising Human-Nature Relations .N e wY o r k :
Routledge, 2016.
Head, Lesley, Jennifer Atchison, and Catherine Phillips. “The Distinctive Capacities of Plants: Re-
thinking Difference via Invasive Species. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 40,
no. 3 (2015): 399 –413.
Healy, Stephen. “Traversing Fantasies, Activating Desires: Economic Geography, Activist Research,
and Psychoanalytic Methodology. ”Professional Geographer 62, no. 4 (2010): 496 –506.
Heise, Ursula K. Imagining Extinction . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.
H e r n á n d e z ,K .J . ,J u n eM .R u b i s ,N o a hT h e r i a u l t ,Z o eT o d d ,A u d r aM i t c h e l l ,B a w a k aC o u n t r y ,L a k l a k
Burarrwanga, Ritjilili Ganambarr, Merrkiyawuy Ganambarr-Stubbs, and Banbapuy Ganambarr.“The Creatures Collective: Manifestings. ”Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space , July 14,
2020. https://doi.org/10.1177/2514848620938316 .Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 261Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Hook, Derek. “Mapping Anxiety. ”Psychology in Society 48 (2015): 114 –20.
Hornborg, Alf. “Environmentalism, Ethnicity, and Sacred Places: Re ﬂections on Modernity, Discourse,
and Power. ”Canadian Review of Sociology/Revue Canadienne de sociologie 31, no. 3 (1994): 245 –67.
Houle, Karen. “Animal, Vegetable, Mineral: Ethics as Extension or Becoming? ”Symposium 19, no. 2
(2015): 37 –56.
Kimmerer, Robin Wall. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scienti ﬁc Knowledge, and the Teachings of
Plants . Minneapolis: Milkweed Editions, 2013.
Kingsbury, Paul. “Did Somebody Say Jouissance? On Slavoj Žižek, Consumption, and Nationalism. ”
Emotion, Space and Society 1, no. 1 (2008): 48 –55.
Kingsbury, Paul. “The Extimacy of Space. ”Social & Cultural Geography 8, no. 2 (2007): 235 –58.
Kingsbury, Paul. “Locating the Melody of the Drives. ”Professional Geographer 62, no. 4 (2010): 519 –33.
Kingsbury, Paul. “Sociospatial Sublimation: The Human Resources of Love in Sandals Resorts Inter-
national, Jamaica. ”Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101, no. 3 (2011): 650 –69.
Kingsbury, Paul, and Steve Pile. “Introduction: The Unconscious, Transference, Drives, Repetition,
and Other Things Tied to Geography. ”InPsychoanalytic Geographies , edited by Paul Kingsbury
and Steve Pile, 1 –38. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2014.
Kirshner, Lewis A. “Rethinking Desire: The Objet Petit A in Lacanian Theory. ”Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association 53, no. 1 (2005): 83 –102.
Koot, Stasja. “Enjoying Extinction: Philanthrocapitalism, Jouissance, and Excessive ‘Environmen-
tourism ’in the South African Rhino Poaching Crisis. ”Journal of Political Ecology 28, no. 1 (2021):
804–22.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role of Attentiveness in More-
than-Human Ethics. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 44, no. 4 (2019): 661 –75.
Lacan, Jacques. Anxiety .V o l .1 0o f The Seminar of Jacques Lacan , edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, trans-
lated by A. R. Price. Cambridge: Polity, 2016.
Lacan, Jacques. Ecrits: The First Complete Edition in English , translated by Bruce Fink. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2006.
Lacan, Jacques. T h eE t h i c so fP s y c h o a n a l y s i s .V o l .7o f The Seminar of Jacques Lacan ,e d i t e db yJ a c q u e s -
Alain Miller, translated by Dennis Porter. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997.
Lacan, Jacques. The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis . Vol. 11 of The Seminar of Jacques Lacan ,
edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: W. W. Norton, 1998.
Lacan, Jacques. On Feminine Sexuality: The Limits of Love and Knowledge .V o l .2 0o f The Seminar of Jacques
Lacan , edited by Jacques-Alain Miller, translated by Bruce Fink. New York: W.W. Norton, 1998.
Larsen, Soren C., and Jay T. Johnson. Being Together in Place: Indigenous Coexistence in a More than Human
World . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Latimer, Joanna, and María Puig de la Bellacasa. “Re-thinking the Ethical: Everyday Shifts of Care in
Biogerontology. ”InEthics, Law, and Society , edited by Nicky Priaulx and Anthony Wrigley, 153 –
74. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Lorimer, Jamie. “Nonhuman Charisma. ”Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 25, no. 5 (2007):
911–32.
Loveless, Natalie. H o wt oM a k eA r ta tt h eE n do ft h eW o r l d . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2019.
Machado, Marlon. “The Discovery of Arrojadoa Marylanae. ”Cactus and Succulent Journal 77, no. 2
(2005): 62 –67.
Maddrell, Avril. “Living with the Deceased: Absence, Presence, and Absence-Presence. ”Cultural Geog-
raphies 20, no. 4 (2013): 501 –22.
Marder, Michael. Plant-Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal Life . New York: Columbia University Press,
2013.
Margulies, Jared D. “Korean ‘Housewives ’and ‘Hipsters ’Are Not Driving a New Illicit Plant Trade:
Complicating Consumer Motivations behind an Emergent Wildlife Trade in Dudleya Farinosa. ”
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 8 (2020): 367.
Martin, Aryn, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu. “T h eP o l i t i c so fC a r ei nT e c h n o s c i e n c e . ”Social Studies of
Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 625 –41.262 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Matviyenko, Svitlana, and Judith Roof. “Introduction. ”InLacan and the Posthuman , edited by Svitlana
Matviyenko and Judith Roof, 1 –13. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
McGowan, Todd. Capitalism and Desire: The Psychic Costs of Free Markets . New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 2016.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The Visible and the Invisible: Followed by Working Notes . Evanston, IL: North-
western University Press, 1968.
Mol, Annemarie. The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . New York: Routledge, 2008.
Moore, Sarah A., Mohammed Ra ﬁAreﬁn, and Heather Rosenfeld. “Generating Anxiety, Short-
Circuiting Desire: Battery Waste and the Capitalist Phantasy. ”Environment and Planning D: Soci-
ety and Space 36, no. 6 (2018): 1081 –100.
Murphy, Michelle. “Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health
Practices. ”Social Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 717 –37.
Myers, Natasha. “How to Grow Livable Worlds: Ten Not-So-Easy Steps. ”InThe World to Come , edited
by Kerry Oliver Smith, 53 –63. Gainesville, FL: Harn Museum of Art, 2018.
Nast, Heidi J. “Mapping the ‘Unconscious ’: Racism and the Oedipal Family. ”Annals of the Association of
American Geographers 90, no. 2 (2000): 215 –55.
Patel, Raj. “The Misanthropocene? ”Earth Island Journal 28, no. 1 (2013): 21.
Philo, Chris, and Hester Parr. “Introducing Psychoanalytic Geographies. ”Social & Cultural Geography 4,
no. 3 (2003): 283 –93.
Pile, Steve. “Beastly Minds: A Topological Twist in the Rethinking of the Human in Nonhuman Geog-
raphies Using Two of Freud ’s Case Studies, Emmy von N. and the Wolfman. ”Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 39, no. 2 (2014): 224 –36.
Pile, Steve. “Emotions and Affect in Recent Human Geography. ”Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers 35, no. 1 (2010): 5 –20.
Pohl, Lucas. “Object-Disoriented Geographies: The Ghost Tower of Bangkok and the Topology of
Anxiety. ”Cultural Geographies 27, no. 1 (2020): 71 –84.
Pohl, Lucas. “The Sublime Object of Detroit. ”Social & Cultural Geography 22, no. 8 (2021): 1063 –79.
Pohl, Lucas, and Erik Swyngedouw. “‘What Does Not Work in the World ’: The Specter of Lacan in Crit-
ical Political Thought. ”Distinktion: Journal of Social Theory (2021). https://doi.org/10.1080
/1600910X.2021.1872667 .
Proudfoot, Jesse. “Anxiety and Phantasy in the Field: The Position of the Unconscious in Ethno-
graphic Research. ”Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 33, no. 6 (2015): 1135 –52.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”So-
cial Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds .P o s t h u m a n -
ities 41. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “‘Nothing Comes without Its World ’:T h i n k i n gw i t hC a r e . ”Sociological Re-
view 60, no. 2 (2012): 197 –216.
Robbins, Paul, and Sarah A. Moore. “Ecological Anxiety Disorder: Diagnosing the Politics of the
Anthropocene. ”Cultural Geographies 20, no. 1 (2013): 3 –19.
Robbins, Paul, and Sarah A. Moore. “Return of the Repressed: Native Presence and American Memory
in John Muir ’s Boyhood and Youth. ”Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109, no. 6
(2019): 1748 –57.
Rose, Deborah Bird. “Multispecies Knots of Ethical Time. ”Environmental Philosophy 9, no. 1 (2012):
127–40.
Rose, Deborah Bird. “Slowly: Writing into the Anthropocene. ”TEXT 17, no. 2 (2013): 1 –14.
Rose, Deborah Bird. “What If the Angel of History Were a Dog? ”Cultural Studies Review 12, no. 1 (2006):
67–78.
Rose, Deborah Bird, Thom van Dooren, and Matthew Chrulew. “Introduction: Telling Extinction Sto-
ries. ”InExtinction Studies , edited by Deborah Bird Rose, Thom van Dooren, and Matthew Chru-
lew, 1 –18. New York: Columbia University Press, 2017.Margulies / Political Ecology of Desire 263Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

Schmidt, Jeremy J. “Glacial Deaths, Geologic Extinction. ”Environmental Humanities 13, no. 2 (2021):
281–300.
Shepherd, Nan. The Living Mountain: A Celebration of the Cairngorm Mountains of Scotland . Edinburgh:
Canongate Books, 2008.
Srinivasan, Krithika. “The Biopolitics of Animal Being and Welfare: Dog Control and Care in the UK
and India. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 38, no. 1 (2013): 106 –19.
Suchet-Pearson, Sandie, Sarah Wright, Kate Lloyd, Laklak Burarrwanga, and Bawaka Country. “Car-
ingasCountry: Towards an Ontology of Co-becoming in Natural Resource Management. ”Asia
Paciﬁc Viewpoint 54, no. 2 (2013): 185 –97.
Sundberg, Juanita. “Decolonizing Posthumanist Geographies. ”Cultural Geographies 21, no. 1 (2014):
33–47.
Theriault, Noah, Timothy Leduc, Audra Mitchell, June Mary Rubis, and Norma Jacobs Gaehowako.
“Living Protocols: Remaking Worlds in the Face of Extinction. ”Social and Cultural Geography 21,
no. 7 (2020): 893 –908.
Tsing, Anna. “Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species: For Donna Haraway. ”Environmental
Humanities 1, no. 1 (2012): 141 –54.
Ureta, Sebastian. “Caring for Waste: Handling Tailings in a Chilean Copper Mine. ”Environment and
Planning A 48, no. 8 (2016): 1532 –48.
van Dooren, Thom. “Care. ”Environmental Humanities 5, no.1 (2014): 291 –94.
van Dooren, Thom. Flight Ways . New York: Columbia University Press, 2014.
Whatmore, Sarah. Hybrid Geographies: Natures Cultures Spaces . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002.264 Environmental Humanities 14:2 / July 2022Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/14/2/241/1613858/241margulies.pdf by guest on 05 October 2025

