CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY, Vol. 33, Issue 3, pp. 415–443, ISSN 0886-7356, online ISSN 1548-1360. /H17015American
Anthropological Association 2018. Cultural Anthropology journal content published since 2014 is freely available to
download, save, reproduce, and transmit for noncommercial, scholarly, and educational purposes. Reproduction andtransmission
of journal content for the above purposes should credit the author and original source. Use, reproduction, or distribution ofjournal content for commercial purposes requires additional permissions from the American Anthropological Association; pleasecontact permissions@americananthro.org. DOI: 10.14506/ca33.3.06A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY: Plants, Healing, and
Sovereignty in a Toxic World
STACEY ANN LANGWICK
Cornell University
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1688-8561
What ﬁrst struck me was the lushness. I had stepped through the gate and
into the compound of the NGO Training, Research, Monitoring and Evaluation
on Gender and AIDS (TRMEGA), just a few hundred meters off the main roadrunning east out of Arusha, Tanzania. The label of an herbal formula, imarisha
afya yako (“strengthening your health” in Kiswahili) had led me to this address.
Figure 1. Imarisha afya yako : an herbal formula whose components are grown, processed, and
packaged by TRMEGA, Maji ya Chai, Tanzania. Photo by Stacey Ann Langwick.

CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
416At TRMEGA, unlike at the herbal or biomedical clinics where I also worked,
passion-fruit vines covered the fence. Neatly labeled medicinal plants packednarrow beds along the edges of the compound and squeezed into corners ofbuildings. Chard and a range of other dark green, leafy vegetables grew in akitchen keyhole garden and burst from sacks placed around the courtyard. Abrightly painted sign reading “Maji ya Chai Slow Food Community Garden” satat the head of a winding path that invited walkers through plots of taro, sweetpotato, watercress, and tomatoes.
Figure 2. TRMEGA garden, as viewed upon entering the compound at Maji ya Chai.
Photo by Stacey Ann Langwick.
While it has taken time to understand the relations constituting this lushness
and to follow the alliances suggested in the sign, the garden immediately com-pelled a reframing of the story of imarisha and the other herbals that sat in piles
on a table against the back wall of the ofﬁce.
Imarisha is one example of the rapidly expanding developments in therapeutic
foods or nutritious medicines that are capturing imaginations in Tanzania andbeyond. Helen Nguya, the founder of TRMEGA, glosses this new conﬁgurationof plant-based healing as dawa lishe : a playful phrase that draws together the more
ofﬁcial categories of medicine ( dawa ) and fortiﬁed or nutrient-dense foods ( chakula
lishe). These therapies heal by feeding, nourishing, strengthening, bringing vitality,
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
417stimulating growth, enabling endurance. Tanzania is not alone in witnessing a
rapid rise in herbals. The World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated thatherbals make for a $60 billion industry worldwide, and some market forecasterssuggest that it stands to grow to a $140 billion industry by 2024 (Sharma et al.2008). Statistics on the market and on industry growth, however, do not capturethe work of TRMEGA gardens or elucidate their alliances with food sovereigntymovements. Dawa lishe is emerging as an unruly object in the interstices of med-
icine and agriculture, refusing to accept them as separate ﬁelds of knowledge andpractice. Dawa lishe is not a return to, or even a nostalgia for, traditional African
healing. It is, however, a refusal to forget in the present that African healing haslong addressed humans and their environments together. Therapies attend notonly to bodies but also to the relations between people, plants, and soil that drivemodern economies and frame health. Individual commodiﬁed formulas fade in
and out of view.
Imarisha and TRMEGA’s other colorfully packaged dried-plant remedies
draw people, as they drew me, to TRMEGA. The ease with which such remediescan be sold and gifted facilitate introductions to TRMEGA’s work. Yet thesecommodiﬁed herbal formulas circulate in the service of complex interventionsinto the forces that foster vital human and nonhuman communities. Indeed,TRMEGA’s garden explicitly destabilizes the commodities produced from regularharvests through the sharing of seeds, cuttings, and saplings across networks ofsupport groups.
The labors of people and plants, as well as the myriad organisms both human
and nonhuman that make up healthy soil and fertile communities of pollinators,constitute a central focus of TRMEGA’s interventions. As they spread, one outof the other, TRMEGA gardens and the gardens that they catalyze are complexexperiments in what constitutes the therapeutic. In the name of healing, TRMEGAgardens explicitly intervene into relationships between plants and people—re-making them in ways that unsettle assemblages built through colonial plantations,national development, and extractive capital. In this, these gardens share a kinshipwith the rise of various projects in Africa and throughout the global South thatdraw local knowledge of how to support the ﬂourishing of plants and peopletogether with global ecological and health movements.
1These gardens are ex-
amples of what Michelle Murphy (2017, 105) has called the “experimental oth-
erwise,” and dawa lishe is the unruly object forged in the multiple knowledges,
myriad practices, and entangled politics that they draw together.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
418Through dawa lishe , Tanzanians are debating the conditions under which life
is attenuated, diminished, depleted, exhausted, or drained away in the twenty-
ﬁrst century, and they are experimenting with ways to intervene in these con-ditions. The efﬁcaciousness of herbal products and of gardens full of therapeuticfoods and nutritious herbs rests in their cultivation of the forms of strength thatmake places, times, and bodies livable again (and again). Gardens and gardenersare generating a lexicon through which to challenge the techniques of governanceunfolded in the name of health. Their efforts, I will argue, articulate an emergentpolitics of habitability.
2Dawa lishe ties the dynamics of human liveliness to those
of plants and soils. Through it, Tanzanians work to build relations supporting thepossibility of a lushness that situates healing in the cyclical transformations ofcomposition and decomposition. They experiment with ways to inhabit the tox-icities that simultaneously enable contemporary life and deplete the very condi-tions of its ongoingness.
TOXICITY
Imarisha , speciﬁcally formulated to beneﬁt people with HIV/AIDS, contains
plants that have been shown to have dense nutritional proﬁles and a range ofbiochemical effects with therapeutic implications in laboratory research (Anwaret al. 2007). Yet an account of its potency must also attend to the ways in whichit problematizes the toxicity of pharmaceuticals, especially those like antiretro-virals that are to be taken for life.
3TRMEGA has a close relationship with a
nearby HIV/AIDS clinic. Imarisha is meant to be taken with antiretroviral med-
ications: the herbal formula works alongside antiretrovirals to strengthen bodiesso that they can sustain the pharmacological treatments, so that individual bodiescan incorporate these medications in ways that exploit their beneﬁts. Membersof TRMEGA build their stamina for antiretrovirals through imarisha , as well as
their compliance with the clinic’s regimes. Imarisha addresses the widespread
sentiments in Tanzania that (1) the toxicity of antiretrovirals (which is critical totheir capacities to heal) is also harmful, and (2) this harm is not sufﬁcientlyarticulated through the concept of side effects or fully mediated through the practice
of dosage.
4Imarisha highlights the double bind out of which Tanzanians are forging
dawa lishe more broadly: the very substances used to support modern life also
deplete the vital forces from which it comes.5
Over the past six years, as I have investigated the rise of dawa lishe , I have
come to see its political and therapeutic potency as intimately tied to the waysin which it reconﬁgures the relationship between toxicity and remedy. Dorkia
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
419
Figure 3. Mchaichai (dried lemongrass) produced and packaged by Dorkia Enterprises, Moshi,
Tanzania. Photo by Stacey Ann Langwick.
Enterprises, a small-scale entrepreneurial initiative in northern Tanzania, ad-
dresses this directly on the label of its mchaichai (Kiswahili: lemongrass).
It removes toxins from the whole body—those [toxins] that come from the
food whose growth we have cut short, aluminum pots, steel wire, chemicalmedicines [synthetic pharmaceuticals, as well as synthetic fertilizers, herbi-cides, and pesticides], mental stress, and nicotine, which is from cigarettesand their smoke [and] is the cause of lung cancer. It cleans the kidneys; itremoves all the residue stopping urine/plugging up the bladder (especiallyin elders). It returns a quicker memory and it puts the body in a good andlively state after using.
The problem articulated here is that eating, drinking, cooking, healing, and
breathing all involve ingesting toxins. Mchaichai offers a way to mediate the forms
of complicity and contamination that are constitutive of twenty-ﬁrst-century livesand bodies. Like imarisha , it is not a targeted or singular curative remedy, but
rather a therapeutic tea to be included in the everyday rhythms of nourishing.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
420This sense that toxins saturate everyday life compels herbal producers not
only to address the effects of toxins in individual bodies but also to pay attention
to how the plants in their remedies are grown and processed. As toxicity becomesrespatialized in this way, it focuses attention on that which is left behind as thevery ground through which new or alternative life might then be nourished,coaxed, and cultivated—or cut off, deprived, and attenuated. Producers’ com-mitments to sustainable agriculture—in particular, to the use of organic crop-management practices, composting, and seed sharing—generate the concretepractices through which dawa lishe articulates toxicity as a condition of modern
life and the substance of ethical engagement.
6By attending to the liveliness of
soils and seeds, as well as to their economies, Tanzanians reﬂect on and laborover the relations that constitute toxin and those that constitute remedy.
This problematization of toxicity by herbal producers in Tanzania highlights
a friction within public health studies of environmental exposure. The latter haveproven important in illustrating the uneven distribution of harm in our world,both nationally and internationally, by mapping disease prevalence data alongsidethe location of industrial contaminants and toxic waste. This data has supportedthe development of environmental regulations, a conceptualization of the truecost of industrial production, the monitoring of industries, and (in the best ofcases) the ability to hold them accountable to the people they affect. In this work,the image of individuals free of toxins provides both a ground for normative legalintervention and benchmarks for measuring success. Yet: is there a wethat can
be held safe against all else? A growing scholarship on toxicity and chemical
exposure is challenging philosophical investments in the possibility of discrete,bounded objects and subjects that undergird the ideal of bodies that can be whole,independent, authentic, and pure, as well as their versions of politics (both pro-gressive and conservative).
7Expanding Bruno Latour’s (1993) argument about
the practices of puriﬁcation that have been central to the project of modernity,
Alexis Shotwell (2016) captures this argument in her assertion that wehave never
been pure. The processes of puriﬁcation built into scientiﬁc and juridical knowl-edge-making practices structure our forgetting of this fact. Living through toxicityas a condition means remembering. It means remembering that the work it takesto purify human bodies and synthetic chemicals is embedded in the work it takesto solidify a long chain of ontological distinctions between us and them, subjectsand objects, and science and culture. Living through toxicity as a condition meansremembering that this work has proven critical to the formations of contemporaryhierarchy and privilege and the notions of contamination, corruption, and con-
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
421tagion that justify their maintenance.8Such remembering challenges any easy
recognition of a wewho has a right to live uncontaminated, of a toxin separate
from and threatening this we, and of a neutral position from which to adjudicate
this separation (Fortun 2001; Petryna 2002).
Shotwell’s research is helpful because it clariﬁes why purity politics do not
offer a space to argue and act that many Africans ﬁnd compelling.9The forms of
forgetting developed through practices of puriﬁcation have justiﬁed violence and
dispossession through colonialism, nationalism, postcolonial development, andhumanitarianism in Africa. How we grapple with toxicity is thus a question ofhow we remember and whose remembering matters (Agard-Jones 2016). Post-colonial memories shape how African publics hear both ofﬁcial news stories andcirculating rumors of the continued spraying of DDT (Cone 2009), the largegraveyards of e-waste from the United States and Europe (Schmidt 2006; Redfern2010; Minter 2016), the international trade in radioactive waste (Clapp 1994),the use of cyanide and mercury in mining (Campbell et al. 2003; Belem 2009),and chemical fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides in large-scale agriculture (Til-man et al. 2001; Mwegoha and Kihampa 2010). Tanzanians are well aware thatthe lack of regulations on known toxins is exploited as an asset throughout the
continent. This is before leakage into informal markets, such as when the surpluspesticides used by the large-scale ﬂower farms in Arusha made their way intosmall agricultural shops and were picked up as a cheaper alternative to protectingtomatoes in local kitchen gardens.
10In this space, a politics of purity, an ideal of
an uncontaminated body, is unthinkable both practically and politically. More
evocative is the mchaichai that “returns a quicker memory and it puts the body in
a good and lively state after using.” More evocative is the invitation to take in aplant and attune to its transformative potential. This is not a nostalgia for traditionbut a call for memory, for a remembering that relations between plants, people,and place have not always been as they are, that they were reorganized throughcolonialism and continue to be stabilized through large-scale (plantation) agricul-ture. Liveliness might be found by inserting the body into alternative economiesof people and plants.
For Tanzanians, such remembering also means that the toxicities that com-
pose the everyday are not only the result of capitalism’s ofﬂoading of its harmfulwaste to Africa but also the social-material effect of efforts designed to address
insecurity, poverty, and disease. The pesticides and herbicides in food, the growthhormones fed to modern chickens, tissue cultures injected into banana plants, thealuminum pots used in everyday cooking, the hybrid (at times, genetically mod-
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
422iﬁed11) corn whose reproductive strength decreases over generations, and the
pharmaceuticals required to address chronic diseases (whether HIV, hypertension,
or diabetes) and provide birth control are all held responsible for forcing modernbodies to bear complicated toxic loads. Approaching toxicity as a condition ratherthan an anomaly, however, does not mean an acceptance of sickness, pollution,injustice, poverty, and death. It doesmean that interventions focused narrowly on
modes of recognition (and management) are not sufﬁcient.
Through dawa lishe , the interpenetrations of plants and people become a
concrete space from which to explore “the enmeshment of ﬂesh with place”(Alaimo 2016, 1) by elaborating a notion of healing that recognizes our ontologicalinseparability from the world. This starting point was brought home to me by awoman working at one of the herbal clinics where I have been conducting researchsince 2013. Through our many hours together in the face of the pain of those
seeking help at the clinic, in the camaraderie and joys of collective efforts tosupport them, in the rush of multiple demands, and in the boredom of long hotafternoons, we had grown very fond of one another. One afternoon, she sharedher concern about the toll my trips back and forth between Tanzania and theUnited States would inevitably take on me. The dis-ease of my body, as it hadto adjust and readjust to these different environments, would beneﬁt from someattention. To cultivate this dual orientation, she recommended a strategy that shehad learned from a German missionary in the area. When I traveled back to theUnited States, my friend told me, I should take a little dirt from Tanzania. Onarrival, I should mix it with a little water from the United States and drink it.On my return to Tanzania, I should do the opposite: bring U.S. dirt, mix it withTanzanian water, and consume it. This way, my body would be constituted inthe interstices of these two lands; it would be of both places and could make thecorporeal translations and shifts necessary to my constant returns.
The vulnerability of a body is not only implicated in toxic substances but
also in the very movements that give rise to the conditions and labors throughwhich strength is constituted. In his effort to account for the toxic in NorthAmerica, Nicholas Shapiro (2015, 372) has argued that “bodies are sites of bothactively absorbing the world and being put into motion by its constituent medleyof human and nonhumans.” Healing, then, is not necessarily limited to managingthat which bodies absorb. Healing might also mean intervening in human–non-human relations to affect how speciﬁc bodies are put into motion. Dawa lishe
emerges as therapeutic as it (re)shapes the formations of time, space, and mate-riality through which bodies live and labor. In Tanzania, healing is raising questions
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
423of habitability, as it works through and against the politics of exposure that have
shaped “late industrialism” (Fortun 2012).12
THE PLANTS AND THEIR INSTITUTIONS
Dawa lishe has a complicated relationship to the state-recognized category of
traditional medicine and its institutional trajectories.13Producers of therapeutic
foods and nutritious medicines draw on indigenous plants, as well as those thathave migrated to the continent. They are inspired by local healers, as well as bybooks on functional foods, web-based investigations, scientiﬁc research at African,European, and North American universities, local Chinese healers, visiting Indianspiritual leaders, permaculture workshops, and sustainable agricultural practices.
14
Rarely interested in acting as custodians of the past, producers seek a moredextrous and subtle position that enables response to the ways past relations haveshaped the bodies and landscapes of the present.
15Many mobilize the form of the
NGO to reframe older social and political institutions in an effort to initiategenerative spaces for action.
For instance, while Helen Nguya is not a traditional healer by her own or
anyone else’s account, the process through which she came to found TRMEGAand grow into the work she does there echoes the embodied transformationsinvolved in African healers becoming expert through their own illness and healing.A physical collapse set in motion the conditions of possibility for TRMEGA. Thestress of more than a decade of demanding work and long hours as a director ofsocial-service programs for the Roman Catholic Church in the northern part ofTanzania, combined with two intense years during which she organized and wor-ried over the care of her children back in Tanzania while she was in Europeearning a master’s degree, exhausted Nguya. She did not have the strength to
bear the shock of the deaths of her mother and sister. She collapsed. Suddenly,she could not stand or feed herself. Her kin nursed her in her marital home ofMaji ya Chai. Nguya’s healing slowly drew her back to the garden. First, as shesat in the garden and then, eventually, as she put her hands in the dirt, she feltthat she began to heal. Or, as she tells it, she started to remember those thingsthat had fed her, had given her vitality when she was younger.
From her initial efforts to reimagine a life in which she could do meaningful
work and sustain her strength emerged the vision of TRMEGA. Among herextensive portfolio of social-service programs was a church-supported HIV clinic.She was moved by the story of a man who had sought treatment through thisclinic and had come to feel that he was capable of continuing his life with AIDS,
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
424that his diagnosis was not a death sentence. Together, they began reaching out
to others who had been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. Through their initial effortsin 2009, Nguya began to see a particular set of needs and possibilities. Sheexplained:
I realized that some had problems, and I didn’t have the funds to help. They
had clothing needs and food needs. So I told my family and friends. Somecontributed clothes. Some gave me shoes. Some donated domestic utensils.Some donated food. They came and they saw [my work]. They were amazedand gave me maize ﬂour and whatever they had. I taught those who gatheredabout nutrition. We had already planted some plants. I taught them how tocook them. They came here [to my garden in Maji ya Chai]. We ate togetherand participated. This made them more active. After that we saw that itwould be better to teach them about herbs, and that they should not onlypractice it here, but also at their homes. And those who had land aroundtheir homes, we gave them things to plant.
Thus emerged the garden as object and intervention. Gardens are not exactly a
solution to the problems that Nguya perceived, but something more and some-thing less. For TRMEGA, gardens—organic, cultivated without chemical pesti-cides and synthetic fertilizers, full of therapeutic plants, spreading from one toanother and growing up around homes and schools—are remedy and relation,resource and momentum. They constitute the very material of individual, insti-tutional, and community extension. Gardens offer a response to the attenuationof life; their answer is a thickening, a density, a multiplicity that one mightexperience at times—like when walking through the gate of TRMEGA—aslushness.
Today, the garden at TRMEGA’s headquarters serves as a community garden
for the members of TRMEGA support groups and a Slow Food demonstrationgarden to introduce new members, school groups, and other visitors to the plantsand principles of sustainable agriculture. Experiments with recycling kitchen wa-ter, sack gardens, and composting were always underway. Bees have been intro-duced, both larger honeybees and smaller, stingless African bees. Medicinal plantsare neatly labeled in both Swahili and the local language of the area where Nguyalearned of their therapeutic potential. In the shade of the pavilion, medicinal herbsas well as therapeutic foods are dried and processed into TRMEGA remedies.This garden also generates the cuttings, seeds, and saplings used to stimulate othergardens.
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
425The contents of this garden embody a lifetime of living with and working
with plants. Both in its shape and in the plants that populate it, Nguya’s garden
innovates older ways of organizing landscape through the residential farms of herchildhood. Nguya grew up in Kagera. She helped her grandfather as he tendedbanana trees, which not only supplied the primary staple food crop but alsostructured the spatiality of village life and the masculine forms of land ownershipthat drove it.
16Nguya ﬁrst learned to identify and collect medicinal herbs with
her grandmother, a traditional midwife. She has transplanted some of these plantsto Maji ya Chai. Others she continues to get from Kagera, sometimes goingherself, at other times asking a nurse in the health center to collect a desirableherb for her and then send the harvest by bus. The novel collectives fosteredthrough the rapid expansion of NGOs in Tanzania since the 1990s have enabledNguya to combine the ways that the gendered landscapes of Buhaya villages struc-tured reproduction, nourishment, and expansion with the work of global projects.While her home in an adjacent lot is surrounded by banana trees, her TRMEGAgarden is not. The contents of TRMEGA’s garden might be better seen as anextension of the gardens Buhaya women would cultivate in the grasslands outsidethe village.
17The plants she learned from her grandmother grow together with
the charismatic plants now used for therapeutic purposes globally, inputs fromnutrition initiatives and development projects and vegetables that make the manystews accompanying starches throughout Tanzania—all in a space shaped by a setof practices often glossed as “sustainable agriculture.”
The gardens at TRMEGA are in a complicated conversation with older
social-political practices of dwelling and newer global ecological practices.Nguya’s knowledge of these ecological techniques ﬁrst grew out of her partici-pation in an NGO called Women Development for Science and Technology As-sociation (WODSTA). In the 1980s, Nguyga worked with a group of prominentwomen leaders to found WODSTA. In those early days, President Julius Ny-erere’s wife, Maria Nyerere, joined their efforts. The association has always fo-cused on “grassroots women,” meaning rural and often disenfranchised women.
Sustainable agricultural practices were central to the mission of the organizationfrom its inception. Because of this work, Nguya was ﬁrst invited to the biennialSlow Food gathering in Turin, Italy in 2004. She returned in 2008 and has goneto each subsequent gathering. These days she generally goes with Rose Machange,who runs the gardens and does outreach for WODSTA. In the 1980s, Machangewas one of the grassroots women whom WODSTA had contacted. Initially partof a support group, she rose to lead this group and then to mobilize others.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
426Each of these gardens forms part of the Ten Thousand Gardens for Africa
project, one of the ﬂagship initiatives of the Slow Food Foundation for Biodiver-sity. In 2011, while in Tanzania to celebrate the ﬁrst gardens (one in Dar esSalaam and one in southern Tanzania), Italian staff members visited Nyuga’s com-pound and saw the TRMEGA garden. They ate with her and talked about theirvision for Ten Thousand Gardens for Africa, asking if she would volunteer to betheconvivium coordinator for the northern region. Although coordinators are not
paid, this position would enable Nyuga to solicit limited funds for material en-hancements to expand the network of gardens, such as hoes, wheelbarrows,watering cans, and fencing. In addition, the foundation strives to train convivium
coordinators and other leaders and to support travel to meet other communities.These connections draw members into other Slow Food projects like the Arc ofTaste, an effort to catalog indigenous foods and recognize groups whose workensures their endurance. A women’s group that Machange leads, calledUMANGU, has recently succeeded at having their African stingless bee honeyaccepted into the Arc of Taste. It also oversees projects like the new traditionalfoods shop that sells various products from the women’s support groups Machangeruns. When Nguya and Machange travel, be it locally to the gardens or interna-tionally to Kenya, Uganda, Italy, Ethiopia, or India, seeds often return in theirpockets. Even after decades of friendship, it seems they rarely leave one another’sgardens without something in their hands. Knowing them both for the past fouryears has allowed me to witness not only their attentiveness to plants but alsohow they move through the world with them.
Throughout its existence, TRMEGA has grown, extending its work through
a variety of organizations. Originally, Nguya’s wide-ranging connections with theCatholic dioceses and their projects animated TRMEGA’s formation, and theycontinue to provide fertile ground for growth. Currently, Nguya is folding someof the projects and energy of the Slow Food Foundation for Biodiversity intoTRMEGA’s work. Such entanglements have been further extended and reinforcedby Nguya’s connection to WOSTRA and by her friendship with Machange. Theinterpenetrations of these institutional trajectories also carry with them certainorientations toward history—here, Catholic social-justice agendas, a globalmovement for culinary diversity and food sovereignty, and a postcolonial, non-aligned socialist drive for self-sufﬁciency. Connections are partial, situated, andembodied, built through personal histories of resilience, friendship, and striving,as well as of inequality, abuse, and sickness. It is into this density of relations
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
427(institutional, human, and botanical) and these storied spaces that TRMEGA wel-
comes people.
THE GARDENS AND THEIR REMEDIES
Early in TRMEGA’s formation, Nguya met Jane Satiel Mwalyego, who at
the time was very weak. Her husband had died in 2002. She was, in her ownwords, “living with much stigma” (Saas 2014). She had stopped taking her anti-retroviral drugs in the midst of these pressures and the demands of providing forher children as well as her nieces and nephews, whom she had taken in after herbrothers had died from AIDS. She tells a story of decline and searching, and ofvisiting a range of healers. Eventually, she lost the strength to farm. At times,she could not even rise from bed to cook. Both of her parents had passed away.She ran out of money and found herself without enough to be able to feed thechildren in her household or herself. The vitality that had sustained her life andthat of others grew more and more attenuated; the courtyard of her home grewsparse. When Mwalyego reﬂects on this time, she describes loneliness, and iso-lation, and anger—anger at healers who took her money, time, and waning
strength. But she marks 2010 as the turning point, in which she met Nguya andgradually began building up relations with people and plants.
At the time, TRMEGA focused on teaching people with HIV to “together
leave aside stigma” (Kiswahili: nawafundisha waondokane na unyanyapaa ). The or-
ganization sought to create spaces where people with AIDS could, in its ownterms, “get used to each other,” gain the conﬁdence to talk with one another,and “share what is in their hearts.” This language resonated with that of HIV/AIDS support groups. Indeed, Nguya did receive some external support for suchwork. Most prized at the time were bicycles that would ease outreach efforts andenable more connections. Yet an account of TRMEGA’s approach at this timemust acknowledge that stigma here was in translation, a sort of boundary object
that often emerges as NGOs appeal to global initiatives in efforts to design localprojects and take up medicalized concepts to support interventions into everydaylife. The way that TRMEGA actualizes stigma differs from the way that stigma isactualized through psychosocial research and public health programming. Thehistories of discrimination and social sanction that structure stigma ( unyanyapaa )
are most accurately accounted for through material instantiations. Stigma, forTRMEGA, glosses a thinning of social relations and all matter of life entangledwith them—human, plant, and otherwise. Rather than seeing stigma as a psy-chosocial phenomenon, a judgment of the mind that can be ﬁxed by addressing
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
428ignorance, TRMEGA takes up stigma as a relational phenomenon. It entails a
turning away or attenuation of involvement that must be ﬁxed by addressing thedensity of interconnection through which life is generated. While TRMEGA gladlyfolds education into its agenda, the efﬁcacy of its efforts lies as much or more inthe gatherings convened than in the correction of false beliefs or the transmissionof information. Addressing stigma requires a series of encounters that interpolateone into vital, mutualist relations with things, people, and plants. Nguya intro-duced Mwalyego to mlonge —the Kiswahili word used for many species of mor-
inga, but here for Moringa oleifera in particular. She remembers that Mwalyego’s
dramatic response to the plant was the ﬁrst time that she “saw the power ofmlonge. ”
18Mwalyego gained strength, resumed her antiretrovirals, and started
gardening again. She was able to support her children and her brother’s children.Her physical and social life thickened; the landscape around her house grewdenser. This experience strengthened the role of mlonge and the centrality of the
gardens as remedy in TRMEGA’s work.
Figure 4. Mlonge (Moringa oleifera ) in the garden at TRMEGA headquarters in Maji ya Chai.
Photo by Stacey Ann Langwick.
When I ﬁrst came to know Mwalyego, her life had grown lusher. She had
come to embody the transformations possible through TRMEGA and its gardens,and to serve as a catalyst for others. In 2016, when an anonymous donor gave
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
429TRMEGA a plot of land so that the organization might increase its production,
Nguya asked Mwalyego to live on the property and tend the gardens. In additionto a house, Mwalyego received space to grow some of her own food. Using seeds,saplings, cuttings, and tubers from other gardens, she built up a second demon-stration garden and developed plans for a much larger production garden. Mwa-lyego’s daughter and grandchild moved in with her. As a new Slow Food com-munity garden, this second TRMEGA garden attracted some additionalinvestments. Mwalyego started a chicken coop and developed a vision of acquiringgoats. One of the ﬁrst luxuries at the house was a long, thin wooden bench whereTRMEGA members and others could gather, where Mwalyego could teach, andwhere collective work could be organized.
During the past few years, much of my ﬁeldwork involved Nygua, Mwa-
lyego, and me ﬁlling my vehicle with plants and distributing them. Many of ourbest conversations arose as we drove through the region delivering cuttings, seeds,and saplings—as we extended TRMEGA’s garden outward. Our activities cata-lyzed other patches of lushness in orphanages, street children’s homes, elementaryschools, and the homes of people planning community gardens of their own.Plants were delivered, along with a great deal of advice and problem-solvingskills, as we tromped around the spaces to be planted. Nguya instructed oncomposting, organic pest and fungi management, irrigation and drainage, inter-cropping and more. She brought both nutrient-dense vegetables and medicinalherbs. After these long and detailed walks through the gardens, conversationsregularly turned to health, to the therapeutic beneﬁts of plants. Over tea, wewould speak of the ways they cured and strengthened. Such meetings never stoodalone; they always marked moments in long and involved relationships. Some hadstarted a decade or two earlier through Catholic Church projects, while othersemerged from newer, secular connections. Yet all gardens required tending andongoing relationships.
While individual gardens and their gestures were limited, gardens were sites
from which plants and relations could be extended. One TRMEGA member, wholives on the outer reaches of Arusha, started a community garden for memberson his land. The medicinal teas he makes for his parents facilitate his caring forthem. His neighbors drop by to explore ways that they might use plants to supportthe health of their families. Other gardens are larger. For instance, the garden atthe Watoto Foundation, a home for male street children run by the CatholicChurch, is quite established and substantial. The residents eat from the gardenand make products to sell. Many of these boys go home during breaks. They have
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
430been encouraged to bring mlonge saplings home and to plant them at their parents’,
relatives’, and neighbors’ houses.
IMMIGRANT NATURES, COMPOSTING FUTURES
Mlonge , the tree that was so powerful in Mwalyego’s story, animates
TRMEGA’s current work and their Slow Food gardens. The saplings sprouting
in small plastic bags that line the wall of the garden in Maji ya Chai lend themselvesto travel, to manifesting extensions and initiating new spaces. This mlonge tree is
also known as Moringa oleifera , a tree native to the foothills of the Himalayas in
northwestern India. The species likely traveled to Tanzania along numerousroutes, involving both land and sea. Gujarati traders arrived in Tanzania in largenumbers in the nineteenth century. Indians were also brought to East Africa asindentured laborers, many of whom worked on the Kenya-Uganda railway aroundthe turn of the twentieth century. Even before these migrations, however, Moringa
oleifera may have found its way to Tanzania along earlier trade routes, whether
from Egypt, South Africa, or through centuries of Indian Ocean exchange. Inmore recent times, Moringa oleifera has extended its reach through international
nutrition and water puriﬁcation projects. Today, many producers of therapeutic
plants dry and grind the leaves to be added to tea or porridge. At TRMEGA, itis mixed with three other plants (including the herb from Kagera discussed above)to make imarisha . TRMEGA shares seedlings with its members and sells them to
support the organization’s work.
As the immigrant histories of therapeutic plants in these gardens suggest,
herbal producers are no more invested in the purity of nature than they are inthe authenticity of the healer or the discreteness of institutions. Local Slow Foodfestivals do celebrate indigenous foods. Yet through a careful parsing of plants as“therapeutic,” Tanzanians are mobilizing commitments to indigeneity toward newethical-political negotiations.
19Some gardens share space with more recent hy-
brids such as banana stock from the USAID Tanzania Agricultural Productivity
Program, or the many sorts of orange sweet potatoes that have made their wayinto the country through nutrition projects that have introduced a variety ofnutrient-dense cultivars. Relations with plants are cultivated based on the waysthat collaborations with them enable particular modes of exchanging, growing,eating, tasting, healing, communing, and decomposing. The qualities of the plantsthemselves matter. Mlonge , for instance, does not lend itself easily to plantation
agriculture despite the ongoing efforts of many. The leaves are small and difﬁcultto harvest en masse; they wilt quickly. One failed effort at large-scale production
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
431lies to the east, outside Tanga, where row upon row of trees stand unattended
and unharvested. Mlonge ’s value emerges when it is enrolled in human projects
by different means.
Relations among plants, as well as between plants and people, prove critical
to decisions about which plants are brought in, cultivated, and catered to, andwhich plants are not. Not only are gardens as remedy ones that foster mutualistrelations—nitrogen ﬁxing, pesticide management, pollination, and so on—butthey are also capable of holding surprises and remembering, even when peopledo not. Nguya and Machange illustrated this one day when walking through thegarden of a member of one of the women’s groups. They saw a vine growingamong the more purposefully tended plants and asked the woman what she didwith it. She told them that it was “just a weed.” Nguya revealed that she couldeat the fruits of this wild cucumber plant, and Machange added that the leaves
made a good vegetable. The woman tasted the plant; later, she ate the fruits andcooked the leaves. Soon, she was making a small income selling the leaves andseeds back to Nguya and Machange for Slow Food gardens and to others in localmarkets. The gardens here are weedy. Often blackjack or other medicinal herbswill be growing in the middle of a bed of another vegetable, or on the side of atended row. Such weeds are left. These gardens are not plantations. The plantsbrought in must make affordances for, if not explicitly support, other life. Thepractices through which particular plants are folded into the space of these gardenscultivate plant relations, and therefore a plant politics .
These weedy natures defuse a politics of purity and, in so doing, the fantasies
of salvation (or apocalypse) such a politics supports. Projects such as TRMEGA’smake much more modest proposals about what it might mean to develop spaceswith the capacity for growth or for what Anna Tsing (2015, 179) calls “resur-gence.” The work is patchy and uneven. It requires making arguments for careand healing, for taking positions and initiating action from some ground otherthan crisis (Roitman 2013). This ground is compost. In the gardens discussedhere, compost is both practical consideration and a form of re-membering. Com-post is that which fosters a process of living-through. It trains our attention onthe ability of parts of the past that have been left behind, residues and scraps, totransform through speciﬁc entanglements into something other than themselves—and, if carefully tended, to transform into the components of rich healthy soil,the entanglement that grounds growth and other life. Compost re-members andin so doing, it decenters the work of crisis and its forms of forgetting.
20
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
432There are stakes in this turn. Compost constitutes a material, social, and
ethical relation. For not all things compost and not all compost well. The stakes,
however, rest in an ongoingness, not in an authenticity. They rest in the qualitiesof relations that support “making livable again” (Haraway 2016, 33). Plants canbe localized over time by becoming other than themselves, by being turned underand becoming soil. Compost draws us toward accounts of pragmatic spaces ofthoughtful entanglements with the potential for increased liveliness. Compost isnot only a practice worthy of description but also an incitement to theory.
21
Some of the most involved conversations between Ngyuga, Mwalyego, and
the others with whom they collaborate concern composting: what to compost,where to put it, how to tend to it, and how to use it. In my ﬁrst interview withNguya, she emphasized compost as central to the identity of her garden, statingemphatically that they never use dawa za dukani , literally “store-bought medicines,”
referring to chemical fertilizers available at the market. Composting, which inpractice includes the recycling of crop residues, food scraps, and animal waste,orients toward a “collective continuance” (Whyte 2018) of the vital forces thatsupport ongoingness. In the process, it problematizes that which attenuates anddiminishes these forces over time, or toxicity. On entering each of the gardensthat we visited together, Nguya attends to the signs of composting: the pits orpiles of organic matter in slightly shaded spaces, in different stages of decompo-sition, bearing evidence of regular turning. She asks questions and advises on how
to foster the sorts of relations that lead to soil that can go on—systems of re-plenishment, practices of nourishment. As she builds new relations or starts tobecome more deeply involved with a garden, establishing composting routinesand ensuring practices that regenerate the soil’s fertility often demands signiﬁcanttime. Successful composting requires reﬂection and attention, even in her owngarden and in those of longtime companions.
Composting involves cultivating thick relations. The greater the content of
organic matter, the greater the capacities of the soil to retain water and nutrients,to make proximate those entanglements that support plants and a community ofdecomposer microorganisms. When these relations are attenuated—when plantsare harvested and taken away, when plant matter is not turned back into the soil,when there has been a thinning of relations—then the structure and porosity ofthe soil becomes compromised. Composting proposes an ethic of return or, atleast, of a regular turning. The past is turned in and under to cultivate an envi-ronment dense with matter and with the potential for transformative relations.
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
433
Figure 5. A discussion in the garden at TRMEGA headquarters in Maji ya Chai. The brick
compost bin for both garden waste and kitchen scraps is visible on the right.
Photo by Stacey Ann Langwick.
The pleasures of composting rest in these interconnections, interpenetra-
tions, and transformations. The stuff of the world must alter from itself, change
from what it was: corn stalks, bean vines, fallen rotting tomatoes, spinach stems,and other debris from the garden and scraps from the kitchen left after humanconsumption. Exposure to living decomposers like bacteria, fungi, protozoa, al-gae, invertebrates, and insects triggers long and complex sequences of physicaltransformations: decomposition, mineralization, and humiﬁcation. Compostingcalls for an ethics that rests in ontological dynamism. Our stakes in each othercannot be articulated through a loyalty or faithfulness to what one is; rather, thestakes consist in a commitment to becoming other—to becoming that throughwhich other living might happen (Holbraad, Pedersen, and Viveiros de Castro2014).
22
CONCLUSION
For Tanzanians, modern bodies bear complicated toxic loads not only be-
cause of the dumping of capitalism’s harmful by-products but also because of thevery products that facilitate domestic life (plastics, kerosene), agriculture (pesti-cides, chemical fertilizers) and health (antiretrovirals, contraceptives). Dawa lishe
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
434is forged in this double bind. It problematizes toxicity as a way to think about
the conditions under which life becomes attenuated, diminished, depleted, ex-hausted, drained away. The toxic is social (as with stigma) and environmental (aswith chemical fertilizers). Producers of dawa lishe offer dried herbal formulas—
but “not only” (see de la Cadena 2015, 13–28). They also intervene into thesocial and environmental conditions that attenuate life and diminish vitality.
In raising gardens as remedy, producers of therapeutic foods and nutritious
medicines shift attention from the individual embodiments of plants and peopleto the ways that plants collaborate with people to make vital spaces that enablehealing. Plants are not only agents with active ingredients, although both herbalproducers and users are happy to fold in such articulations if available. Plants arenot only resources to be capitalized on, although they do at times constitute alatent commons that offers the possibility of commodiﬁcation. They are therefore
not (or not only) anticommodities (see Scott 2009), even as they resist the formsof politics possible through stable trajectories of commodiﬁcation (Glover andStone 2018). In these gardens, therapeutic plants are never only resources to beharnessed for human need (corporeal, aesthetic, or economic); they are alsocollaborators in the making of nourishing and nourished spaces.
23In fact, plants
become therapeutic as they move and work with people to create habitable spaces,
pockets where people and plants mutually reinforce the cultivation of vitalities.24
Agricultural policies in Tanzania over the past ﬁfty years have focused on
cash-crop productivity as a way of navigating the country’s position in the globaleconomy. The gardens at TRMEGA disrupt the forms of scalability so critical tothese dominant notions of development. They are designed for ongoingness,rather than scalability and maximum extraction. Gardeners eschew notions oftranscendence through continual growth; they work within the impermanence,dependencies, and decompositions of plant and human life. Organizing their gar-dens around compost, they question how we problematize toxicity by pointingto the ways that people and plants navigate value within the dynamics of com-position and decomposition. They do not ignore other framings—environmentaldestruction, chronic disease, or food insecurity—but they unsettle them by rec-ognizing and folding in the temporalities of other urgencies. Such gardening pro-jects think expansion with their plants; reproducibility here is about seed sharing,
cuttings, and transplants. Health is about lushness, density, diversity, and themutualisms it enables.
Many have cited the witticism, famously attributed to Fredric Jameson, that
“it is easier to imagine the end of the world than to imagine the end of capitalism.”
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
435In part, this failure of imagination is an effect of what (and who) we choose to
think with. These gardens of therapeutic plants are not outside modes of capitalistextraction and world-making, but they do seek healing through ways that alter itand are alter to it (Viveiros de Castro 2012).
TRMEGA’s engagement with food sovereignty movements, then, raises an
interesting question about the sorts of sovereignty the organization imagines.From one angle, these gardens appear to democratize the means of therapeuticproduction. Indeed, knowledge of the ingredients in one’s medicines, and theability to make them, stand in stark contrast to most people’s relationship topharmaceuticals. These gardens also expand access to particular therapies, re-claiming the right to alternative options for treatment. By sharing cuttings, seeds,and transplants with each other, TRMEGA members and afﬁliates might be saidto create and extend a form of the commons. In this reading, the commerciali-
zation of plant-based medicines hovers as the ultimate, if not inevitable goal.Sovereignty would seem to emerge through people’s ability to determine whatsorts of therapies are available, what they are composed of, how they are pro-duced, and how they are distributed.
From another angle, however, the extension of these gardens results in more
than a democratization of the means of production for herbal therapies, becausethe gardens themselves move the therapeutic value of the plants beyond theprocess of commoditization. Gardens cannot be explained away as apothecariesfor the poor. In this reading, TRMEGA’s work is not about control over themeans by which therapeutic plants are turned into resources for the alleviationof human need, but rather about the creation of spaces that facilitate dynamicrelations among plants, people, soil, and decomposers of various sorts, as well asthe interpenetrations that might transform them. A plant’s own capacity to re-produce is utilized in efforts to extend the gardens. None of the gardens standsas a model of some original or imagined garden. None is merely a concept. Rather,each constitutes an actual extension of other gardens, an extension of their socialrelations, physical matter, and storied histories.
25Not only does this move chal-
lenge a particular notion of ownership but also, as diverse temporal relations fold
in on one another, it also troubles the very notion of an owner. Opened up tothe indeterminacies of both subject and object, this version of sovereignty suggeststhe ability to shape the conditions of possibility for thriving and becoming—thatis, the conditions of habitability.
Indeed, thinking with the edges of capitalism means, in part, thinking
through toxicities as a condition of life to be navigated, shaped, and engaged,
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
436rather than as apocalypse or salvation. The ethics of these gardens grow in the
relations and logics of dirt. They do not lend themselves easily to dystopic orutopic visions. They push against these “cramped spaces” (Povinelli 2016, 6) forargument and action. They are experiments in creating spaces for a new politicsof habitability, one that continually asks: What kinds of lushness can be cultivatedin twenty-ﬁrst-century Tanzania? What relations enable bodies and landscapes togrow ampler, denser, more productive and more potent? Whose ongoingnessand what forms of continuance do our gardens support?
ABSTRACT
For Tanzanians, modern bodies bear complicated toxic loads not only because of the
dumping of capitalism’s harmful by-products but also because of the social-materialeffects of efforts designed to address insecurity, poverty, and disease. Dawa lishe
(nutritious medicine) is forged in this double bind. Producers of dawa lishe proble-
matize toxicity as the condition under which life is attenuated, diminished, depleted,exhausted, or drained away. Therapies attend not only to individual bodies but alsoto relations among people, plants, and the soil. The efﬁcacy of herbal remedies and
of gardens full of therapeutic foods and nutritious herbs rests in the cultivation of
the forms of strength that make places, times, and bodies livable again (and again).This essay examines how Tanzanians are laboring over, and reﬂecting on, the toxicand its relationship to remedy and memory through dawa lishe . In the process, it
argues, they are redeﬁning healing through a politics of habitability. [toxicity;
healing; body; plants; gardens; sustainable agriculture; ontologies; Africa]
NOTES
Acknowledgments The research on which this article is based was supported by the
National Science Foundation and the Wenner-Gren Foundation, as well as by Cornell Uni-
versity through the Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies and the Institute for theSocial Sciences. I was grateful for a generative and generous environment in which to writeduring my fellowship at the Society for the Humanities at Cornell University (2016–2017).The analysis developed through my extended participation in the Translating Vitalities workinggroup, which was supported by the University of Chicago, the University of British Columbia,and the Wellcome Trust. The article also beneﬁted from the feedback of many scholars at theannual meetings of the American Anthropological Association and the African Studies Asso-ciation, as well as from presentations at the Society for the Humanities and the Institute forComparative Modernities at Cornell University and the Department of History and Sociologyof Science at the University of Pennsylvania.
1. Here, see Lyons 2016; Murphy 2017, 105–109; and Whyte 2018.
2. Michel de Certeau (1984) taught us that habitability is about the making of storied
space, as well as the spatiality of stories. In The Practice of Everyday Life , he accounts for
the ways that walkers make urban space habitable over and against the concept city of
the planner, which is created from a view in the tower with the logics of efﬁciency and
design. The walker creates spaces as she moves through the city, drawing with her notonly maps but also memories and legends. The city unfolds through the movements ofthe walker as she is pulled down different paths by longings, nostalgia, and glimpses of
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
437beauty, or pushed by fear, dread, or boredom. The walker takes shortcuts (or long),
breaking with the planners’ trajectories and weaving more complicated, laden spaces.For de Certeau, the walker is seized on by the imagination, which creates spaces forreturn, spaces where the past can be acknowledged, its presence responded to. Withoutthis ability to return, the city is not habitable. This article is also about movements thatstrive to remember and reorient toward the past through material entanglements in thepresent. In contrast to de Certeau’s urban walker and that very human-centered story,however, I think through gardens and the labors of plants and people.
3. See Hamdy 2012 and Livingston 2012 on ways that the toxicity of pharmaceuticals is
problematized elsewhere in Africa.
4. See Walter Stumpf’s (2006) argument about the biomedical truism “the dose makes the
medicine.”
5. Consider, for instance, their impact on bodily life and household economies through
hunger (Kalofonos 2010; Langwick 2015) and on political-economic positioning globally(Peterson 2014).
6. I am inspired here by Michel Foucault’s (1985) ontological claim for ethical substance
as the matter of the self on which ethical and moral discourse reﬂects. Ethical substance
is that which demands reﬂection and work. Attending to this substance is what makesethical subjects. Foucault argues that for the Greeks, this was bodily pleasure. Thepotency of dawa lishe resides in the way that it captures an active material-social space
to work on an alternative ethical substance: toxicity.
7. Much of this literature is inspired by feminist, queer, critical race, and postcolonial
theory. Shiloh Krupar’s (2013) work reminds us that the impossibility of purity is notan issue of the so-called developing world. Yet Elizabeth Roberts (2017) does not letus forget that other ways of articulating boundaries (and managing the ﬂow of substancesin ways that constitute insides and outsides) remain important. The impossibility ofpurity does not mean that all entanglements are welcome.
8. One might argue that at the heart of interest in alternative modernities lay an attraction
to the creative maneuvers of people outside of the United States and Europe to rejectforms of puriﬁcation that would marginalize them from discourse while simultaneouslytranslating the institutions of modernity.
9. See Helen Tilley’s (2004) and Louise White’s (2004) contributions to the issue of Osiris
on “Landscapes of Exposure,” as well as Hecht 2012.
10. While pesticide and herbicide use is prevalent on small holdings, many report feeling
ill after application (Ngowi et al. 2007).
11. In supporting of the government’s 2006 National Biosafety Frameworks, which required
the monitoring of genetically modiﬁed organisms, Chagula Mwita, Ken Hosea, andMasoud Muruke (2013) conducted a study to assess GMO contamination in both im-ported maize stocks and processed soybeans in the country.
12. In the interpretive social sciences, the demands of grappling with toxicity have incited
the theorization of exposure. A central catalyst has been a special issue of Osiris edited
by Gregg Mitman, Michelle Murphy, and Christopher Sellers (2004). See Fortun 2001;Petryna 2002; Fortun and Fortun 2005; Murphy 2006, 2017; Choy 2011; Chen 2012;Shapiro 2015; Alaimo 2016; and Haraway 2016. See also the series of essays on “Tox-icity, Waste, and Detritus in the Global South: Africa and Beyond,” edited by PamilaGupta and Gabrielle Hecht (2017).
13. For more on the history of traditional healing in Tanzania, see Feierman 1974, 1990;
Turshen 1984; and Langwick 2011a, 2011b, 2012.
14. In 2011, Tanzania launched a new process for the registration of healers, their premises,
and their medicines. The national registrar of the council for traditional healers ﬁrstrecommended some of the herbal producers with whom I worked in northern Tanzania.She held them up to me as models for how healers might develop and in turn lead thedevelopment of traditional medicine. Yet others with whom I worked explicitly rebuffedthe label of healer and state attempts to manage their practice and products through this
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
438category. Identifying as entrepreneurs, they were more likely to seek certiﬁcation
through the Small Industrial Development Organization.
15. See Feierman 1985 on the ways that healers were separated from their social basis of
power.
16. I thank Steve Feierman for this point. As Brad Weiss (1996) has described, villages in
this region comprise a cluster of household-based farms dominated by banana (the staplefood crop) and coffee (the primary cash crop).
17. Helen’s grandmother would have been unlikely to have access to farmland deﬁned by
the cultivation of the bananas by men. Yet she, like other women in Kagera, wouldhave used the grasslands outside of the village to cultivate food and potentially medicinesfor family consumption and sale. Helen’s establishment of TRMEGA echoes longstand-ing strategies by women in Kagera to generate possibilities within the frictions of pa-triarchal systems of land ownership (Weiss 1996).
18. See Archambault 2016 for a discussion on how affective encounters between people
and plants in Mozambican gardens inspire reﬂections and reorientations that generatethe possibility of new futures.
19. For an important argument on the political and ecological signiﬁcance of native plants,
see Mastnak, Elyachar, and Boellstorff 2014.
20. For Roitman 2013, this forgetting is that which articulates crisis as the point that requires
radical epistemological revision, the rupture that justiﬁes intervention and something
new.
21. Here, I join K. Hall 2014, Puig de la Bellacasa 2015, Haraway 2016, and Lyons 2016.22. This is also the logic of ancestors, of a dying in which one might return but not as one’s
self, not as human, not embodied. Ancestors lay claim to the living. They demandfeeding, coaxing, appeasing, and relation. They compel actions that remember thatembodied life was born from them. Compost proposes a theory of nonhuman ancestorsto be fed, appeased, and coaxed into new relations that will protect and nourish.
23. As Natasha Myers (2017, 297) writes, “plants entice entire ecologies of other creatures
to participate in their care and their propagation: they have the know-how to entrainothers in the service of their rhythms, their wiles, and desires.” See also Hustak andMyers 2012.
24. This account joins work in the emerging ﬁeld of critical plant studies, which “challenges
the privileged place of the human in relation to plant life” (Stark 2015, 180; see alsoMarder 2013).
25. Such gardens grow and extend, but they are not scalable (as with matsutake in Tsing
2015). Rather, they invite us to connect the histories of the making of economies ofscale and the making of ecologies of scale. For gardens as storied space, see L. Hall2015.
REFERENCES
Agard-Jones, Vanessa
2016 “Chemical Kin/Esthesia.” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
American Anthropological Association, Minneapolis, Minn., November 18.
Alaimo, Stacy
2016 Exposed: Environmental Politics and Pleasures in Posthuman Times . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Archambault, Julie Soleil
2016 “Taking Love Seriously in Human-Plant Relations in Mozambique: Toward an
Anthropology of Affective Encounters.” Cultural Anthropology 31, no. 2: 244–
71. https://doi.org/10.14506/ca31.2.05.
Anwar, Farooq, Sajid Latif, Muhammad Ashraf, and Anwarul Hassan Gilani
2007 “ Moringa oleifera : A Food Plant with Multiple Medicinal Uses.” Phytotherapy
Research 21, no. 1: 17–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/ptr.2023.
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
439Belem, Gisele
2009 “Mining, Poverty Reduction, the Protection of the Environment, and the Role
of the World Bank Group in Mali.” In Mining in Africa: Regulation and Development ,
edited by Bonnie Campbell, 119–49. New York: Pluto Press.
Campbell, Linda, D. G. Dixon, and R. E. Hecky
2003 “A Review of Mercury in Lake Victoria, East Africa: Implications for Human
and Ecosystem Health.” Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part B 6,
no. 4: 325–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/10937400306474.
Chen, Mel Y.
2012 Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect . Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.
Choy, Timothy
2011 Ecologies of Comparison: An Ethnography of Endangerment in Hong Kong . Duke
University Press.
Clapp, Jennifer
1994 “The Toxic Waste Trade with Less-Industrialized Countries: Economic Linkages
and Political Alliances.” Third World Quarterly 15, no. 3: 505–518. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01436599408420393.
Cone, Marla
2009 “Should DDT Be Used to Combat Malaria?” Scientiﬁc American , May 4. https://
www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/ddt-use-to-combat-malaria.
de Certeau, Michel
1984 The Practice of Everyday Life . Translated by Steven Rendall. Berkeley: University
of California Press. Originally published in 1980.
de la Cadena, Marisol
2015 Earth Beings: Ecologies of Practice Across Andean Worlds . Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.
Feierman, Steven
1974 The Shambaa Kingdom: A History . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
1985 “Struggles for Control: The Social Roots of Health and Healing in Modern
Africa.” African Studies Review 28, nos. 2–3: 73–147. https://doi.org/10.2307/
524604.
1990 Peasant Intellectuals: Anthropology and History in Tanzania . Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Fortun, Kim
2001 Advocacy after Bhopal: Environmentalism, Disaster, New Global Orders . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
2012 “Ethnography in Late Industrialism.” Cultural Anthropology 27, no. 3: 446–64.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2012.01153.x.
Fortun, Kim, and Mike Fortun
2005 “Scientiﬁc Imaginaries and Ethical Plateaus in Contemporary U.S. Toxicology.”
American Anthropologist 107, no. 1: 43–54. https://doi.org/10.1525/aa.2005.
107.1.043.
Foucault, Michel
1985 The History of Sexuality , Volume Two: The Use of Pleasure . Translated by Robert
Hurley. New York: Pantheon. Originally published in 1984.
Glover, Dominic, and Glenn Davis Stone
2018 “Heirloom Rice in Ifugao: An ‘Anti-Commodity’ in the Process of
Commodiﬁcation.” Journal of Peasant Studies 45, no. 4: 776–804. https://doi.
org/10.1080/03066150.2017.1284062.
Gupta, Pamila, and Gabrielle Hecht, eds.
2017 “Toxicity, Waste, and Detritus in the Global South: Africa and Beyond.”
Somatosphere series. http://somatosphere.net/toxicity.
Hall, Kim Q.
2014 “Toward a Queer Crip Feminist Food Politics.” philoSOPHIA 4, no. 2: 177–96.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
440Hall, Laura
2015 “My Mother’s Garden: Aesthetics, Indigenous Renewal, and Creativity.” In Art
in the Anthropocene: Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments, and
Epistemologies , edited by Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, 283–92. London:
Open Humanities Press.
Hamdy, Sherine
2012 Our Bodies Belong to God: Organ Transplants, Islam, and the Struggle for Human Dignityin Egypt . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Haraway, Donna J.
2016 Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, N.C.: Duke
University Press.
Hecht, Gabrielle
2012 Being Nuclear: Africans and the Global Uranium Trade . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Holbraad, Martin, Morten Axel Pedersen, and Eduardo Viveiros de Castro
2014 “The Politics of Ontology: Anthropological Positions.” In “The Politics of
Ontology,” Theorizing the Contemporary series edited by Martin Holbraad and
Morten Axel Pedersen, Cultural Anthropology website, January 13. http://
www.culanth.org/ﬁeldsights/462-the-politics-of-ontology-anthropological-positions.
Hustak, Carla, and Natasha Myers
2012 “Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the Sciences of Plant/Insect
Encounters.” differences 23, no. 3: 74–118. https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-
1892907.
Kalofonos, Ippolytos Andreas
2010 “‘All I Eat is ARVs’: The Paradox of AIDS Treatment Interventions in Central
Mozambique.” Medical Anthropology Quarterly 24, no. 3: 363–80. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1387.2010.01109.x.
Krupar, Shiloh R.
2013 Hot Spotter’s Report: Military Fables of Toxic Waste . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Langwick, Stacey A.
2011a Bodies, Politics, and African Healing: The Matter of Maladies in Tanzania .
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
2011b “Healers and Scientists: The Epistemological Politics of Research about Medicinal
Plants in Tanzania, or ‘Moving Away from Traditional Medicine.’” In Evidence,
Ethos, and Experiment: The Anthropology and History of Medical Research in Africa ,
edited by P. Wenzel Geissler and Catherine Molyneux, 263–95. New York:Berghahn.
2012 “The Choreography of Global Subjection: The Traditional Birth Attendant in
Contemporary Conﬁgurations of World Health.” In Medicine, Mobility, and Power
in Global Africa: Transnational Health and Healing , edited by Hansjo ¨rg Dilger,
Abdoulaye Kane, and Stacey A. Langwick, 31–59. Bloomington: IndianaUniversity Press.
2015 “Partial Publics: The Political Promise of Traditional Medicine in Africa.” Current
Anthropology 56, no. 4: 493–514. https://doi.org/10.1086/682285.
Latour, Bruno
1993 We Have Never Been Modern . Translated by Catherine Porter. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. Originally published in 1991.
Livingston, Julie
2012 Improvising Medicine: An African Oncology Ward in an Emerging Cancer Epidemic .
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
441Lyons, Kristina Marie
2016 “Decomposition as Life Politics: Soils, Selva , and Small Farmers under the Gun
of the U.S.–Colombia War on Drugs.” Cultural Anthropology 31, no. 1: 56–81.
https://doi.org/10.14506/ca31.1.04.
Marder, Michael
2013 Plant-Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal Life . New York: Columbia University Press.
Mastnak, Tomaz, Julia Elyachar, and Tom Boellstorff
2014 “Botanical Decolonization: Rethinking Native Plants.” Environment and Planning
D32, no. 2: 363–80. https://doi.org/10.1068/d13006p.
Minter, Adam
2016 “The Burning Truth Behind an E-Waste Dump in Africa.” Smithsonian , January
13. https://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/burning-truth-behind-e-
waste-dump-africa-180957597.
Mitman, Gregg, Michelle Murphy, and Christopher Sellers, eds.
2004 “Landscapes of Exposure: Knowledge and Illness in Modern Environments.”
Special issue of Osiris , no. 19.
Murphy, Michelle
2006 Sick Building Syndrome and the Problem of Uncertainty: Environmental Science,
Technoscience, and Women Workers . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
2017 The Economization of Life . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Mwegoha, W. J. S., and C. Kihampa
2010 “Heavy Metal Contamination in Agricultural Soils and Water in Dar es Salaam
City, Tanzania.” African Journal of Environmental Science and Technology 4: 763–
69. https://www.ajol.info/index.php/ajest/article/view/71346.
Mwita, Chagula A., Ken M. Hosea, and Masoud H. Muruke
2013 “Assessment of Genetic Modiﬁcation in Imported Maize ( Zea mays ) Seeds and
Processed Soybean ( Glycine max ) Foods in Tanzania.” Journal of Chemical, Biological
and Physical Sciences, Section B 3, no. 4: 2809–2827.
Myers, Natasha
2017 “From the Anthropocene to the Planthroposcene: Designing Gardens for Plant/
People Involution.” History and Anthropology 28, no. 3: 297–301. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02757206.2017.1289934.
Ngowi, A. V. F., T. J. Mbise, A. S. M. Ijani, L. London, and O. C. Ajayi
2007 “Smallholder Vegetable Farmers in Northern Tanzania: Pesticides Use Practices,
Perceptions, Cost and Health Effects.” Crop Protection 26, no. 11: 1617–24.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cropro.2007.01.008.
Peterson, Kristin
2014 Speculative Markets: Drug Circuits and Derivative Life in Nigeria . Durham, N.C.:
Duke University Press.
Petryna, Adriana
2002 Life Exposed: Biological Citizens after Chernobyl . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A.
2016 Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria
2015 “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientiﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care.” Social
Studies of Science 45, no. 5: 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0306312715599851.
Redfern, Paul
2010 “EU, U.S. Dumping Toxic Waste in Africa.” East African , July 5. http://
www.theeastafrican.co.ke/news/EU-US-dumping-toxic-waste-in-Africa/2558-951790-385m1f/index.html.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 33:3
442Roberts, Elizabeth F. S.
2017 “What Gets Inside: Violent Entanglements and Toxic Boundaries in Mexico
City.” Cultural Anthropology 32, no. 4: 592–619. https://doi.org/10.14506/
ca32.4.07.
Roitman, Janet
2013 Anti-Crisis . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Saas, Christine
2014 “How a Garden Changed My Life.” Slow Food Foundation for Biodiversity
website, September 2. https://www.fondazioneslowfood.com/en/come-un-
orto-mi-ha-cambiato-la-vita.
Schmidt, Charles W.
2006 “Unfair Trade: e-Waste in Africa.” Environmental Health Perspectives 114, no. 4:
A232–35. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1440802.
Scott, James C.
2009 The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia . New
Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Shapiro, Nicholas
2015 “Attuning to the Chemosphere: Domestic Formaldehyde, Bodily Reasoning, and
the Chemical Sublime.” Cultural Anthropology 30, no. 3: 368–93. https://
doi.org/10.14506/ca30.3.02.
Sharma, Alok, C. Shanker, Lalit Kumar Tyagi, Mahendra Singh and Ch. V. Rao
2008 “Herbal Medicine for Market Potential in India: An Overview.” Academic Journal
of Plant Science 1, no. 2: 26–36.
Shotwell, Alexis
2016 Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Stark, Hannah
2015 “Deleuze and Critical Plant Studies.” In Deleuze and the Non/Human , edited by
Jonathan Roffe and Hannah Stark, 180–96. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stumpf, Walter E.
2006 “The Dose Makes the Medicine.” Drug Discovery Today 11, nos. 11–12: 550–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2006.04.012.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt
2015 The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins .
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Tilley, Helen
2004 “Ecologies of Complexity: Tropical Environments, African Trypanosomiasis, and
the Science of Disease Control Strategies in British Colonial Africa, 1900–1940.”
Osiris 19: 21–38. https://doi.org/10.1086/649392.
Tilman, David, Joseph Fargione, Brian Wolff, Carla D’Antonio, Andrew Dobson, RobertHowarth, David Schindler, William H. Schlesinger, Daniel Simberloff, and DeborahSwackhamer
2001 “Forecasting Agriculturally Driven Global Environmental Change.” Science 292:
281–84. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1057544.
Turshen, Meredeth
1984 The Political Ecology of Disease in Tanzania . New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers
University Press.
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo
2012 “‘Transformac ¸a˜o’ na antropologia, transformac ¸a˜o da ‘antropologia.’” Mana 18,
no. 1: 151–72. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0104-93132012000100006.
Weiss, Brad
1996 The Making and Unmaking of the Haya Lived World: Consumption, Commoditization,and Everyday Practice . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
A POLITICS OF HABITABILITY
443White, Louise
2004 “Poisoned Food, Poisoned Uniforms, and Anthrax: Or, How Guerillas Die in
War.” Osiris 19: 220–33. https://doi.org/10.1086/649403.
Whyte, Kyle Powys
2018 “Food Sovereignty, Justice, and Indigenous Peoples: An Essay on SettlerColonialism and Collective Continuance.” In The Oxford Handbook on Food Ethics ,
edited by Anne Barnhill, Mark Budolfson, and Tyler Doggett, 345–66. NewYork: Oxford University Press.
