Science and Public Policy , 2021, 48, 841–848
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scab048
Advance Access Publication Date: 18 August 2021
Article
Addressing digital diversity: Care matters in vulnerable
digital relations in a Swedish library context
Johanna Sefyrin1,*, Mariana Gustafsson2and Elin Wihlborg2
1Division for Information Systems and Digitalization, Department of Management and Engineering, Link ¨oping University, Link ¨oping 58183,
Sweden and2Division for Political Science, Department of Management and Engineering, Link ¨oping University, Link ¨oping, Sweden
*Corresponding author. E-mail: johanna.sefyrin@liu.se
Abstract
As societies become increasingly digitalized, the requirements for inclusion continuously increase. In a Swedish public, municipal, library context,
it is common that individuals who face difficulties related to digital technologies come and ask for help. In this paper, we explore care in relations
constituted by individuals and digital technologies and analyze how care matters for digital inclusion. It builds on field studies in a Swedish library
context and includes qualitative interviews, focus groups, and observations of employees working to support individuals with digital needs. In
order to analyze the material, we apply the concept of care. In the concluding discussion, we argue first for viewing individuals as sociomaterial
entanglements of relations constituted by humans and non-humans, second that these sociomaterial entangled relations are vulnerable, shifting,
and fluid, rather than stable, and third that these relations are in constant need of care.
Key words: digital divide; care; individuals; sociomaterial; vulnerability.
1. Introduction
In an advanced digitalized society, humans become intercon-
nected not only with the social organization, but increasingly
with digital infrastructures, technologies, and systems ( Pipek
and Wulf 2009 ;Pipek et al. 2017 ;Karasti and Blomberg
2018). Hence, in their daily lives, individuals are expected
to maintain a complex web of relations with various private
and public organizations and institutions—relations which
today are most commonly upheld through the use of the
digital services. However, contrary to the official image of
Sweden as a highly advanced, digitalized society, there are
also indications that about one million individuals in Sweden
are non-users or low-frequency users of digital services and
communications, thus situating them outside the digitalized
society ( Internetstiftelsen 2018 ,2019). Those who indicate
less access and lower use of internet or digital technologies
in Sweden are found in all age groups, but are dominated by
65+-year olds, with more of them living in rural areas than in
urban areas and having a lower educational background and
a lower income ( Internetstiftelsen 2019 ). Furthermore, while
digital technologies are increasingly integrated in public ser-
vices, openingupfornewpossibilitiesforpreviouslyexcluded
groups such as those who are visually impaired or have read-
ing difficulties, at the same time they seem to generate a new
diversity of needs for support in terms of information, ser-
vices, technology, or other literacies. Hence certain groups,
for instance asylum seekers with no Swedish language pro-
ficiency and certain migrant groups with no or low general
education or elderly people, face new difficulties under these
circumstances ( Bernhard et al. 2019 ).
The public libraries are commonly a support arena to help
thoseexcludedfromdigitalservices( Jaegeret al.2012 ;Bertot
2016;Mersand et al. 2019 ), often prior to the governmentrealizing it. In Sweden, all municipalities are obliged to
provide public libraries, which are considered an important
part of the rather extensive Swedish welfare system. More
recently, public libraries have become an important place
for immigrants and asylum seekers to access information
(Pilerot and Hultgren 2017 ;Pilerot and Lindberg 2018 ) and
attend Swedish language training activities and introduction
to society courses. These libraries are important also for other
groups in vulnerable life conditions who need support with
practicalquestionsinordertomanagetheirdailylives, includ-
ing digitalized contacts with public organizations and the
use of digitalized welfare services ( Richter et al. 2019 ). By
Swedish law, public libraries are obliged to work with infor-
mation support and communication to the wide public (mass
education), including access to digital technologies ( Swedish
Statute Book 2013:801 ). But the volume of the questions con-
cerning digital problems has increased and the nature of the
questions has diversified to the point that these issues have
become a rather large part of library employees’ professional
roles (Nowé Hedvall et al. 2019 ).
In this study, we will ground our analysis on ideas of
sociomateriality coming from science and technology stud-
ies (STS) ( Latour 2005 ;Barad 2007 ;Suchman 2007 ;de la
Bellacasa 2011 ,2017;Haraway 2016 ) and will focus on
entangled webs of relations between individuals, organiza-
tions, and digital technologies, in which power and agency
are contested and negotiated ( Martin et al. 2015 ;Murphy
2015). Here, individuals are understood as agents entangled
in sociomaterial webs of relations constituted by humans and
non-humans, technologies, and authorities, involving differ-
ent vulnerabilities based on lack of different knowledge of
services,technicalskills,oraccesstodigitaltechnologies.Indi-
viduals in a digitalized welfare state, we argue, are dependent
© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

842 Science and Public Policy
on upholding comparatively stable and frequent relations
with public and private organizations, and the services they
provide—relations which today often involve digital tech-
nologies. We have chosen to conceptualize the work required
to maintain these relations in terms of ‘care’ and ‘care prac-
tices’ and focus on the libraries as providers of care in broad
sense (Stens ¨ota 2010 ;de la Bellacasa 2011 ). Upholding such
digitalized relations require care in terms of for instance sup-
port, help, and maintenance, care which may come in many
guises - friends, colleagues and family members who know
more, IT support at work, or support from service providers,
private or public organizations, or distributive traders.
For individuals to be included in a digital society, it is
necessary for them to have digital literacy, competence, and
digital skills ( Robinson et al. 2015 ;Macevi ˇci¯ut˙e and Wilson
2018). To be digitally included involves managing several
issues, such as having access to digital devices (computer,
smart phone, printer, etc.), to (reasonably fast) internet con-
nection, and to programs and applications (internet browser,
e-mail, bank application, e-ID, etc.) and the knowledge and
competence to use these devices, programs, and applications
(Robinson et al. 2015 ;van Deursen et al. 2017 ;van Deursen
and van Dijk 2019 ).van Dijk (2012) suggested a hierarchi-
cal model ( Fig. 1) describing what is required for a diversified
and skilled usage of digital services. It included motivation;
physical and material access to digital technologies, systems,
and infrastructures; and finally digital skills, competence, and
know-how.
The model, however, does not show how issues of moti-
vation, physical and material access, digital skills, and usage
are entangled with the interrelated public organizations and
private companies which constitute an important part of the
sociomaterial fabric. Drawing models such as in Fig. 1is
always tricky, since they necessarily involve simplifications in
termsofincludingsomeissueswhileexcludingothers( Bowker
and Star 1999 ), and our purpose here is not to criticize the
Figure 1. The levels of digital divide (based on van Dijk 2012 , in
Macevi ˇci¯ut˙e and Wilson 2018 : 272).model, but merely to point out some of that which is not
included. The use of public services, apart from digital access
and competence, often requires detailed knowledge of how
these organizations and services are organized and interre-
lated, or the so-called ‘governmental literacy’ ( Bernhard et al.
2019). In order for individuals to be able to use digitalized
public and private services, there are needs for support that
addresseverylevelofthemodelindifferentways, individually
and structurally, socially and technologically; the individual
user’s motivation, her physical and material access to various
digital services, and her digital skills, in the hope that this will
result in frequent, skilled and diversified usage for the benefit
of the user ( van Dijk 2012 inMacevi ˇci¯ut˙e and Wilson 2018 ).
Technical artifacts, programs and applications, and the inter-
faces between these break down and grow old. In order to
stay on top with the ever-changingtechnological development
users must change themselves, and stay motivated, in order
to make sure that the physical and material artifacts that they
use to are not too old, that the artifacts - software and hard-
ware - are compatible with each other and with the services
that the users need to use (for instance that a smart phone is
not too old for a specific version of a mobile e-identification
application which is required in order to log in to a digitalized
public service), and they must learn and develop their digital
skills. This is not easily done for everybody but requires sup-
port structures which can provide help and care when digital
artifacts and services do not work as expected ( Hunsaker and
Hargittai 2018 ;Butler 2019 ). The individuals also need to
learn about the mentioned relations of public organizations
that they need to cooperate with and which organizations to
turn to for a specific situation, such as illness, unemployment,
age, need for childcare, residence permit, parental leave, or
sick leave ( Bernhard et al. 2019 ).
Furthermore, digitalservicesareinthemselvesassemblages
of interrelated digital artifacts, software, and infrastructures,
immersed in organizational logics, aims, regulations, hier-
archies, and practices ( Orlikowski and Barley 2001 ;Pipek
and Wulf 2009 ;Pipek et al. 2017 ;Lips 2019 ), and are
dependentonattention, supportstructures, development, and
maintenance—which we conceptualize as care in this paper.
Digital services are not set up once and for all and then just
keep working without support. They are part of an ongoing,
changing world, organizationally, technologically, socially,
and culturally, and require maintenance and development—
care—in order to keep working in a specific, historically
situated reality ( Pipek and Wulf 2009 ;Pipek et al. 2017 ).
They require skilled expertise, educational systems, regular
supplyofrequiredtechnologicalartifacts,logistics,designand
manufacturing structures, technological standards, and stan-
dardization structures, not to mention electricity. Viewed in
this way, the list can easily be expanded to include almost
anything, all of which are interrelated and interdependent
in complex assemblages, or webs of relations, made up by
both social and material constituents ( Orlikowski and Iacono
2001;Suchman 2007 ;Bijker 2009 ). In this sense, the model
above (Fig. 1) in itself becomes an assemblage made up of
entangled relations, demanding a more intricate analysis of
how motivation can be encouraged and supported through
care practices in order to lead to the actual use and thereby
inclusion in a digitalized society.
For many of the library visitors, the care provided by the
library employees becomes a precondition for living a dailyDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

Science and Public Policy 843
life (Taylor et al. 2014 ;Bertot 2016 ), and this is the point of
departureinouranalysis. Theconceptofcarebuildsonareal-
ity in which somebody in a specific situation is in a vulnerable
position and in need of care, something which challenges the
liberal notion of the autonomous individual ( Tronto 2001 ;
Stens ¨ota 2010 ;de la Bellacasa 2011 ;Henry 2016 ).
Based on the above, the aim of the paper was to explore
care in relations constituted by individuals and digital tech-
nologies and to analyze how care mattered for digital inclu-
sion. Theempiricalsettingandthenexusoftheserelationsisa
Swedish municipal public library where the library employees
who responded to visitors asking for help with digital issues
and the public program on society introduction for asylum
seekers.
2. Analytical framework: the concept of care
In this paper, we approach the concept of care from the per-
spective of STS, but we situate this in a broader context of
how the concept has been understood and applied. We are
primarilyinterestedinhowcarewaspracticedandhowitmat-
teredintheentangledrelationsthatthelibraryvisitorsseemed
to be placed in. In their overview of care in STS, Martin
et al. (2015) brings to attention Gilligan’s (1982) work on
ethics of care and point out that those who have taken up her
workoftenunderscore‘thewaysinwhichcarewasfeminized,
devalued, overlooked, or rendered invisible by materially and
morally privileging mind over body, public over private, rea-
son over emotion, and waged labor over unpaid care work’
(Martin et al. 2015 : 628). The concept of ‘ethics of care’ was
developed by Gilligan (1982) as a reply to Kohlberg’s (1981)
work on the more general concept of justice. Glenn (2000)
has reflected upon a ‘crisis of care’ that devalued practices of
care because it is being framed as a ‘privatised and feminised’
matter. Relating to feminist critical studies, she contributed
to a re-definition of the concept of care and its centrality to
society. She referred to findings such as the dominance of
efficiency rationale in administrative implementation of care
regulations such as getting physical care tasks done, meet-
ing time deadlines, and documentation. Glenn (2000) also
highlighted practices of cooperation between care workers
to provide care that was not recognized by the bureaucratic
structures. In her manifesto for creating a caring society, pri-
marily addressing the US context, she called for a rethinking
of social citizenship where care is central to the rights and
entitlements of the citizens ( Glenn 2000 ).
Care or care practices can be understood most basically
as ‘everything we do to maintain, continue, and repair our
world so that we can live in it as well as possible. That
world includes our bodies, ourselves, and our environment,
all that we seek to interweave in a complex, life sustaining
web’ (Tronto 1993 : 103). This definition focuses on the prac-
tices and doings of care aimed at taking care of human and
non-human bodies, and the preconditions for life, and indi-
cates its embeddedness in everyday life. In the field of STS,
care has been discussed for instance by Mol (2008) ,Mol et al.
(2015), then in a health-care setting, and more generally by
de la Bellacasa (2011 ,2012). de la Bellacasa’s interpretation
of care ( de la Bellacasa 2011 ) builds on a long tradition in
STS to focus on the intimate, fragile, and entangled relations
between humans and non-humans ( Haraway 1997 ,2016;
Barad 2003 ,2007;Latour 2005 ;Suchman 2007 ), feminist
studieswithitsconcernforgenderedhierarchiesandexcludedactors, positions, and identities ( Wajcman 2009 ;Åsberg and
Lykke 2010 ;Butler 2011 ) and for issues concerning account-
ability(Haraway1991 ,1997;Barad2007 ).InSTS,thenotion
of care has a wide reach and concerns the complex entangle-
ments of humans with non-humans, the infrastructural and
biological, natural-culturalwebsofrelationsthatmakeitpos-
sible for humans to co-habitate this world with non-humans
or other-than-humans, all of those which make up ‘the fab-
ric of biological and social existence’ ( Martin et al. 2015 ).
Hence, in an STS, context care does not necessarily concern
traditional care practices, such as in health care or in social
work, but might as well have to do with the care of other-
than-human species and bodies who contribute to making
human life possible, such as insects ( Schrader 2015 ), soil (de
la Bellacasa 2015 ), or, we argue, the technologies and infras-
tructures that enable everyday life in a digitalized world ( Star
and Ruhleder 1996 ;Karasti and Blomberg 2018 ). There are
inherent ethical dimensions in how these entangled relations
are often unequal and involve actors who are differently vis-
ible, gendered, acknowledged, and recognized—something
which adds an ethico-political dimension ( de la Bellacasa
2011). The underlying assumption is that while some things
are expected to just work, some bodies must be involved in
situated practices in order make sure that these things do
work.
3. Methodological approach
The study was conducted as a qualitative, interpretive case
study with included elements of ethnography ( Myers 2013 ).
The analytical framing of care practices developed during
our field work. The models on digital inclusion was already
guiding our research ( Bernhard et al. 2019 ) and motivated
these field studies and interviews, but our use of care as an
analytical concept developed during the study. Our empiri-
cal studies were conducted for about one and a half years,
following library employees’ daily encounters with the vis-
itors. There were two complementary cases; first the city
library in a medium-sized municipality in Sweden and second
a program—organized by the county library—for introduc-
ing asylum seekers to the Swedish society (the government,
services, IT, rights, and responsibilities). We worked with
observations, deep interviews with some of the professionals,
a series of focus groups with professional groups, participant
observations in combinations with additional interviews at
the library information desk, and the ‘IT guidance’ sessions
that library visitors could book. We also conducted partic-
ipant observations at regular meetings in the introduction
program for asylum seekers. Additionally, we participated in
meetings with library employees on regional and national lev-
els and collected relevant documents in order to substantiate
our findings. Library visitors who asked for help with digital
issues were not representative of the Swedish population in
any way, but rather individuals who visited the library since
they did not find help elsewhere. We present the empirical
material in the analytical section given below primarily in the
form of stories told by the library employees and the society
communicators working with the introduction program for
asylum seekers. The stories were told during deep interviews,
selected based on their relevance to our aim, and then ana-
lyzed with the help of the concept of care drawing on STS
research.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

844 Science and Public Policy
4. Analysis—library care practices
The empirical nexus of these explorations was a Swedish
municipal public library and the county library collaboration
forintroductiontosocietyofasylumseekers.Theanalysishas,
basedontheaboveanalyticalframework, beenorganizedinto
threeoverallthemes:sociomaterialentanglements,vulnerabil-
ities in such entanglements, and the need for care.
4.1 Stories about sociomaterial entanglements
The first analytical theme concerns the entanglements con-
stituted by both social and material, including digital, con-
stituents, which emerged in the observations made and
through the stories told by the respondents. The interviewed
library staff and society communicators showed us how digi-
tal questions and problems occurred regularly on an everyday
basis and that digital technologies and services were depen-
dent on many other relations. It might start with a simple
question about help to print a document and then unfold as
a complex entanglement of issues, concerns, and technical
devices:
‘It is usually people who should… print different docu-
ments and then they come with some form of… smart
device, oftenitisamobilephoneandsotheysay“Iwantto
printthis”andthenyoushallfigureouthowtomakeit[ed.
help the visitor] most smoothly. One has different ways to
handle this. You can ask: “Can you send that document
to your mail?” And, “Can you open your mail from one
of our public computers”, as it’s the easiest way to print
something on. If not, then you have to find out “Okay …
can you download apps?” Because then you can download
an app that makes it possible to print. If you cannot do
this for various reasons then there is a web interface that
you can use, but the document must be in a downloadable
format, it must be like a file that you can upload as well’
(Librarian 4).
The example shows how the individual was entangled
in relations which involved digital technologies and how
these relations were constituted by hardware, software, infor-
mation, and knowledge of technology. Language literacy
presents another important issue for those who were rather
new in Sweden and needed help with digital problems:
‘It is also the language that is difficult for them. Before they
can use any digital services - as many of them require a
lot of reporting and reading of information in Swedish, it
is extremely difficult for them. They can say to me “yes I
understand” when they are here [during the course], but
then they go home and still can’t do it and ask others for
help’ (Focus Group 1 A, Society Communicator).
These stories underscore how those who are new in Swe-
denandwhotrytoliveinandbeapartoftheSwedishsociety,
aredependentondigitaltechnologies, andhowproblemswith
these are sometimes related to language. The stories also indi-
cate that these individuals sometimes do not dare or want to
ask for help and rather pretend to understand, even though
they still need more help in order to be able to use digitalized
services. Here, the society communicators highlighted how
dependency in relations extended from the private sphere—
where family and relatives were helping—to the e-servicesprovided by various organizations. In the library context, vis-
itors often came for help with e-services and digital contacts
with other public authorities. Most often, as illustrated in the
following citation, they did not find the help from the other
involved authorities or did not know how to seek for it online
ordidnotunderstandhowtoproceedinthee-serviceandthus
could not solve their problem on their own. Faced with situ-
ations like this, they turned to the library, where they would
use a computer with an internet connection or get help from
a librarian at the help desk.
‘Yes, well it’s different… it’s, it’s various contacts with
authorities, like the National Insurance Office, The
Swedish Employment Service, this way you should fill in,
unemployment fund, you shall fill in time reports, like
“how should I do? what should I do?”, like … I had a man
who…he had justreceived apayment fromthe unemploy-
ment fund, several months after he had applied and he did
not understand how it worked at all and he had not seen
that he had a message in his inbox in the system’ (interview
Librarian 2).
This was an example of how a library visitor did not
understand the digital communication and the digital service
provided by an authority for reporting on job applications in
order to be eligible for unemployment benefits, upon which
he was dependent for his income. All of these stories illustrate
how digital issues were entrenched in larger entanglements
of sociomaterial relations, including digital equipment; pro-
grams and services; digital competence or lack thereof; public
and private organizations; expectations to manage digital-
izedrelationswithbothindividualsandorganizations; lackof
help from some organizations; and help from family, friends,
society communicators, and librarians.
4.2 Stories about vulnerabilities in sociomaterial
entanglements
The second theme concerns the vulnerability of the socio-
material entanglements that the asylum seekers attending the
introduction to society and the library visitors were situated
in. The complexities of these problems made visible how
these visitors while they were entangled with digital technolo-
gies,Swedishauthoritiesandotherinstitutions,theserelations
were shifting and unstable. One of the society communicators
in the introduction course pointed to how digital technolo-
gieswerecentralforlivinginadigitalizedsocietylikeSweden,
something which indicates the expectations to manage these,
and the problems that might occur when these do not work:
‘The problem I see with my participants is that [they] are
dependent on young relatives that they have. They usu-
ally do not learn to use [digital technologies], they have
someone who can help… Even if it is an easy website, they
cannot do it or they do not want to learn as there is help at
home. Their young relatives often take care of everything,
that is, digital or digital services’ (Focus Group Society
Communicator).
Here, the professional employees in the role of ‘society
communicator’explicitlyunderscoredhowdependentonoth-
ers someone becomes when he or she does not know howDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

Science and Public Policy 845
to deal with digital technologies—something which also indi-
cates the importance of care practices. Another vulnerability
which was often brought up concerned the visitors’ personal
integrity:
‘[thus] they often depend on the help I can give them… and
most often there is no kind of integrity thought [from the
visitor’s side]. I often try when people enter passwords to
turn my eyes away, not for their sake, as they most often
don’t care about me knowing their password, but rather
for my own sake. Because I do not want to end up in a
situation where I know these things, as I do not think that
is good. So that when it comes to such things or if they log
in, then I actively look away because I should not know it’
(Librarian 4).
This story illustrates the vulnerabilities in terms of how the
visitor was dependent on digital technologies, and help from
the librarian, but also the vulnerability which was involved
in the relation between the librarian and the visitor, when the
latteropened personalinformation suchas bank transactions,
passwords, pictures, etc. inordertogettheirissuesolved. Sev-
eralofthelibrarianstalkedabouthowthisrequiredsensitivity
and respect from their part, in relation to the visitors. Also,
they discussed how they had to balance the visitors’ needs
against the library rules for how to handle such situations.
‘Then there are, as in some cases, often with older people
with whom I have had IT guidance, then they can say so
“Yes, but write this password for me now” or something
like that and in some cases the person asked me “You can
choose a password for me”. And that is very difficult, after
all, of course, that is clear that we should not do that, but
if the person himself gives his approval to it and it is a sit-
uation where I feel that “Yes, this person … needs help so
much, to the point that I myself can go in and do it,” then
it may well be so. [Then] there will always be a boundary
drawing, what should you put first, the principles for the
service you perform or that you help this person in a good
way to reach his goal’ (Librarian 4).
The librarian’s reflection on this form of dilemma illus-
trates the ethics involved in the library employees’ work, and
he expressed awareness of the vulnerable situation in which
the visitor was placed, the confidence on behalf of the vis-
itor, and the responsibility which he had in this situation.
All of these stories illustrate the fragility of these socioma-
terial relations—how easily they fall apart when something,
such as a password needed in order to access an e-service, an
e-ID, a computer, or a digital bank account, does not work
and help is required. These individuals were dependent on
these entangled relations to work, and they were dependent
on the public organizations providing digitalized welfare ser-
vices such as parental insurance, unemployment fund, health
insurance, or income support. These stories are placed in two
specific contexts—a Swedish public library and an introduc-
tion to Swedish society for asylum seekers—and here we have
underscored how digitalization contributed to increased com-
plexity and new forms of fragility in already vulnerable and
unstable sociomaterial relations, but the stories can also be
understood as illustrations of life’s fragility in a more general
sense. The vulnerability of these relations indicates the need
for attention, support, and help, which we conceptualize here
as care.4.3 Stories about care in vulnerable entanglements
The third theme concerns the need to care for the vulnerable
sociomaterialentanglementsthattheasylumseekersattending
the introduction to society and the library visitors were situ-
atedin. Oneoftheinterviewees, alibrarian, toucheduponthe
responsibility concerning digital technologies that the public
library had:
‘This [the work with digital issues] is something else that
we have taken upon us, which we think is a part of our
democratic mission, that’s how we have seen it, it is a part
of mass education, [our] democratic mission, it’s impor-
tant. Information shall be available to everyone and one
shall know how to find it and how to handle the technolo-
gies behind it, so there’s where we’ve found our entrance’
(interview Librarian 1).
Another librarian described a visitor who came with an
errand and had to book a private session for IT guidance,
because it would take too long to solve the problem at the
desk. The story illustrated how an apparently simple prob-
lem might turn out to be rather complex and require quite
some time, concern, knowledge, and work to disentangle.
It also illustrated how the library visitors’ contacts with a
number of public organizations were required to work, and
when they did not, they required care, in order for the
visitors’ daily lives to work. When these relations were dig-
italized, the complexity of the relations increased, as did
the need for care. Our observations of library practices and
the library employees’ stories show how the library employ-
ees provided care for their visitors and the visitors’ digi-
tal issues on a daily basis. These care practices related to
concerns about contributing to the visitors’ abilities to live
their lives and to fulfill their duties to various authorities
in order to benefit from critical social services and support
themselves.
The presented stories express entangled sociomaterial rela-
tions in which digital technologies and services were central,
and it seems as though these entanglements were fragile, vul-
nerable, and unstable. The stories illustrate how care was
called for and provided, how asylum seekers and library visi-
tors asked for care and thus engaged others—friends, family,
andlibraryemployees—inordertorestoretheseunstablerela-
tions, make them somewhat more stable, and keep working
for yet some time. The relations that the library visitors and
the asylum seekers were situated in did not work all by them-
selves, but required care from someone, for instance library
employees, in order to keep working. In the library con-
text, care frequently involved and required that the library
employees balance the visitor’s dependency, the confidence
s/he was entrusted with, the ethical dilemma that s/he was
placed in, and the risk of stepping over boundaries, while
assuming responsibility for the integrity of the visitor. The
library visitors seemed to be motivated to use digital tech-
nologies; however, in relation to models similar to van Dijk’s
(2012), they did not always have the physical or material
access or the digital skills to use the technology in order to
fulfill their needs. This situation made them vulnerable, espe-
cially as dependency on one or more public organizations
was involved. Questions which might seem simple from the
perspective of those familiar with the service and skilled in
technology turned out to be difficult for the individual withDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

846 Science and Public Policy
lack of access to internet, Swedish language proficiency, or
ability to use an e-service. Such micro-situations of seemingly
simple questions showed how relations of dependency were
at play, not only between visitors and public organizations,
but also between those who needed care in order to stabilize
the fragile sociomaterial relations they were situated in, and
those who provided care.
5. Concluding discussion
The aim of this paper was to explore care in relations consti-
tuted by individuals and digital technologies and to analyze
how care matters for digital inclusion. The analysis drawing
on library practices and stories showed how library visitors
and newcomers in Swedish society were situated in depen-
dency relations and vulnerabilities which included digitalized
relations to public organizations, and that they tried to man-
age these relations by coming to the library for help. The
individuals were dependent on digital technologies and dif-
ferent literacies in terms of knowledge of services, the gov-
ernment, and language—among others—and their abilities to
access and manage technologies. In their care practices, the
library employees took the responsibility for sustaining and
nurturing the vulnerable relations that the visitors were sit-
uated in—relations which involved and depended on digital
technologies. Thelibrarystaffcanbeunderstoodasbecoming
enrolled in the unstable, entangled relations that the visitors
were situated in, and they contributed to improving digital
access and competence in these relations, so that the visitors
could live better in the current, digitalized, society.
InspiredbySTS,ourargumenthereisfirstthatthisanalysis
opens up for viewing individuals as sociomaterial entangle-
ments of relations constituted by humans and non-humans
(Barad 2007 ;Suchman 2007 ;Orlikowski and Scott 2008 ;
de la Bellacasa 2011 ), including various public (and pri-
vate) organizations and the legislation, rules, and practices
that regulate these, and increasingly, digital technologies,
systems, and services. This study shows how the increas-
ing reliance on technologies, and the growing complexity
of mundane technologies ( Woolgar and Neyland 2013 ), are
adding new demands to the professionals in public organiza-
tions such as the library. The response to develop and embed
a care approach into their daily practice is formed bottom-
up through the library employees’ daily practices, but not
enhanced by supportive institutional arrangements facilitat-
ingthecoordinationofdigitalservicesandempoweringdigital
literacy. We see a risk that the lack of arrangements for care
practices might involve deeper and increasing exclusions of
individuals in society, something which might erode trust
in institutions, technology, and humans. Thus, it is impor-
tant for policies to address the delimitations of responsibility
between private and public services and actors and between
individuals in different dependency relations. It is also impor-
tant to highlight the limits of the library employees’ care
practices, their accountability, and to support them in order
forthemtobeabletofeelsecureandtrustworthyintheirwork
to support digital services, which seem to go far beyond the
main scope of their ordinary library practices.
Second, the analysis opens up for understanding these
sociomaterial entangled relations as vulnerable, shifting, and
fluid, rather than stable. As indicated by the empirical mate-
rial, it does not take much for these relations to rupture; itis enough with a lost password, lack of language proficiency,
problems with borrowing a smart phone from a friend and
there is no Google account, the need for a specific app, and
so forth. This indicates that the relations are far from stable,
but rather unstable, vulnerable, and easily fall apart. Inspired
by van Dijk’s model ( van Dijk 2012 , inMacevi ˇci¯ut˙e and Wil-
son 2018 , presented above), a diverse set of preconditions are
required in order for frequent and diverse digital use to occur;
even though the library visitors seemed to be motivated to
use digital technologies, they had problems with physical and
material access to digital devices, programs, and applications,
and to digital services, systems, and infrastructures, and they
needed sufficient knowledge of these, and of the public orga-
nizationalstructurestheywerepart( Bernardet al.2019 ), and
thisresulted in the inability touse digital services with enough
frequency and diversity.
Third,weviewthevulnerabilityofthesesociomaterialrela-
tions as unavoidable, as an inevitable dimension of human
existence and its immersion in modern, complex, and dig-
italized societies. Consequently, these relations are in need
of continuous care in the form of attention, work, support,
and maintenance, in order for these to not fall apart ( de la
Bellacasa 2011 ,2012); in which case, the individuals would
not be able to go on with their lives. In the stories that are
brought forward in this study, the individuals tried to manage
these vulnerabilities through coming to the library for help,
but this was because they had nowhere else to turn to for this
help. For other individuals, the needed help might come from
other actors, such as colleagues, helpdesk at work, family,
friends, and experts or resellers of digital devices and appli-
cations. Not only do humans require food and shelter, warm
clothes, clean water, electricity, as safe place to stay, sleep and
eat, education, health care, a family and a social context but,
as many human relations with each other as well as with var-
ious organizations in a modern welfare state involve digital
technologies, these digitalized relations also require care.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared.
Acknowledgements and funding
We want to thank Norrk ¨opings forskningsfond who funded
thestudy, andthosewhosogenerouslyparticipatedwiththeir
time, interest and knowledge in the study.
References
Åsberg, C. and Lykke, N. (2010) ‘Feminist Technoscience Studies’,
European Journal of Women’s Studies , 17: 299–305.
Barad, K. (2003) ‘Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Under-
standingofHowMatterComestoMatter, Signs’, Journal of Women
in Culture and Society , 28: 801–31.
—— (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning . Durham and London: Duke
University Press.
Bernhard, I., Gustafsson, M., Hedstr ¨om, K., et al. (2019) ‘A Digi-
tal Society for All? – Meanings, Practices and Policies for Digital
Diversity’. In: Bui T. X. (ed.) Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii Inter-
national Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-52) , pp. 3067–76.
Bertot, J. C. (2016) ‘Building digitally inclusive communities: the roles
of public libraries in digital inclusion and development’. In: BertotDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

Science and Public Policy 847
J., EstevezE.&MellouliS.(eds.) Paper presented at the 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance
(ICEGOV ‘15–16) , pp. 95–102. New York, NY.
Bijker, W. E. (2009) ‘How is Technology Made?—That is the Ques-
tion!’, Cambridge Journal of Economics , 34: 63–76.
Bowker, G. C. and Star, S. L. (1999) Sorting Things Out: Classification
and Its Consequences . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Butler, J. (2011) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of Sex .
New York and London: Routledge.
Butler, R. (2019) ‘Health Information Seeking Behaviour: The Librar-
ian’s Role in Supporting Digital and Health Literacy’, Health
Information and Libraries Journal , 36: 278–82.
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2011) ‘Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assem-
bling Neglected Things’, Social Studies of Science , 41: 85–106.
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2017) Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more
than human worlds . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
—— (2012) ‘Nothing Comes without Its World: Thinking with Care’,
The Sociological Review , 60: 197–216.
—— (2015) ‘Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the
Pace of Care’, Social Studies of Science , 45: 691–716.
Gilligan, C. (1982) In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and
Women’s Development . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Glenn, E. N. (2000) ‘Creating a Caring Society’, Contemporary Sociol-
ogy, 29: 84–94.
Haraway, D. (1991) ‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in
Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective’. In: D. Haraway
(ed)Simians, Cyborgs, and Women. The Reinvention of Nature , pp.
183–201. New York, NY: Routledge.
—— (1997) Modest_ Witness@ Second_Millennium. FemaleMan.©
Meets_Oncomouse™: Feminism and Technoscience . New York and
London: Routledge.
—— (2016) Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene .
Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Henry, R. L. (2016) ‘Library Technologies and the Ethics of Care’, The
Journal of Academic Librarianship , 3: 284–5.
Hunsaker, A.andHargittai, E.(2018)‘AReviewofInternetuseAmong
Older Adults’, New Media and Society , 20: 3937–54.
Internetstiftelsen. (2018) The Swedes and the Internet . <https://svens
karnaochinternet.se/english/ > Accessed 20 Aug 2020.
—— (2019), The Swedes and the Internet <https://svens
karnaochinternet.se/english/ > Accessed 20 Aug 2020.
Jaeger, P. T., Bertot, J. C., Thompson, K. M., et al. (2012) ‘The Inter-
section of Public Policy and Public Access: Digital Divides, Digital
Literacy, Digital Inclusion, and Public Libraries’, Public Library
Quarterly , 31: 1–20.
Karasti, H. and Blomberg, J. (2018) ‘Studying Infrastructuring Ethno-
graphically’, Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) , 27:
233–65.
Kohlberg, L. (1981) The Philosophy of Moral Development . San
Francisco: Harper & Row.
Latour, B. (2005) Reassembling the Social. An Introduction to Actor-
Network-Theory . Oxford: Oxford University press.
Lips, M. (2019) Digital Government: Managing Public Sector Reform
in the Digital Era . New York: Routledge.
Macevi ˇci¯ut˙e, E. and Wilson, T. D. (2018) ‘Digital Means for Reduc-
ing Digital Inequality: Literature Review’, Informing Science: The
International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline , 21: 269–87.
Martin, A., Myers, M., and Viseu, A. (2015) ‘The Politics of Care in
Technoscience’, Social Studies of Science , 45: 625–41.
Mersand, S., Gasco-Hernandez, M., Udoh, E., et al. (2019) ‘Public
Libraries as Anchor Institutions in Smart Communities: Current
Practices and Future Development’. In: Proceedings of the 52nd
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS-52) ,
pp. 3305–14.
Mol, A. (2008) The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient
Choice. New York and London: Routledge.
—— Moser, I., and Pols, J. (eds) (2015) Care in Practice: On Tinkering
in Clinics, Homes and Farms . Bielefield: Transcript.Murphy, M. (2015) ‘Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational
Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health Practices’, Social Studies of
Science, 45: 717–37.
Myers, M. D. (2013) Qualitative Research in Business & Management .
London: SAGE.
NowéHedvall, K., Lindberg, J., Michnik, K., et al.(2019)‘Anv ¨andarna
f¨orst med det digitala i fokus: Folkbibliotekariers arbete inom den
nationella satsningen f ¨or¨okad digital kompetens’, Report, Univer-
sity of Borås.
Orlikowski, W. J. and Barley, S. R. (2001) ‘Technology and Institu-
tions: WhatCanResearchonInformationTechnologyandResearch
on Organizations Learn from Each Other?’ MIS Quarterly , 25:
145–65.
—— and Iacono, C. S. (2001) ‘Research Commentary: Desperately
Seeking the “IT” in IT Research – A Call to Theorizing the IT
Artifact’, Information Systems Research , 12: 121–34.
—— and Scott, S. V. (2008) ‘Sociomateriality: Challenging the Sepa-
ration of Technology, Work and Organization’, The Academy of
Management Annals , 2: 433–74.
Pilerot, O.andHultgren, F.(2017)‘Folkbibliotekensarbetef ¨orochmed
nyanl ¨anda’, Report, L¨ansbibliotek Uppsala.
—— and Lindberg, J. (2018) “‘Sen går jag hem n ¨ar det st ¨anger”: En
studie av nyanl ¨andas biblioteksanv ¨andning’, Report, L¨ansbibliotek
Uppsala.
Pipek, V., Karasti, H., and Bowker, G. C. (2017) ‘A Preface to ‘Infras-
tructuring and Collaborative Design”, Computer Supported Coop
Work, 26: 1–5.
—— and Wulf, V. (2009) ‘Infrastructuring: Toward an Integrated
Perspective on the Design and use of Information Technol-
ogy’, Journal of the Association for Information Systems , 10:
447–73.
Richter, S., Bell, J., Jackson, M. K., et al. (2019) ‘Public Library Users:
Perspectives of Socially Vulnerable Populations’, Journal of Library
Administration , 59: 431–41.
Robinson, L., Cotten, S. R., Ono, H., et al. (2015) ‘Digital Inequalities
and Why They Matter’, Information, Communication and Society ,
18: 569–82.
Schrader, A. (2015) ‘Abyssal Intimacies and Temporalities of
Care: How (Not) to Care About Deformed Leaf Bugs in
the Aftermath of Chernobyl’, Social Studies of Science , 45:
665–90.
Star, S. L. and Ruhleder, K. (1996) ‘Steps Toward an Ecology of
Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information Spaces’,
Information Systems Research , 7: 111–34.
Stens ¨ota, H. O. (2010) ‘The Conditions of Care: Reframing the Debate
About Public Sector Ethic’, Public Administration Review , 70:
295–303.
—— (2015) ‘Public Ethics of Care - A General Public Ethics’, Ethics
and Social Welfare , 9: 183–200.
Suchman, L. (2007) Human–Machine Reconfigurations: Plans and Sit-
uated Actions , 2nd edn. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Swedish Statute Book. (2013:801) The Swedish Library Law.
Taylor, N. G., Jaeger, P. T., Gorham, U., et al. (2014) ‘The Circular
Continuum of Agencies, Public Libraries, and Users: A Model of
E-GovernmentinPractice’, Government Information Quarterly ,31:
S18–25.
Tronto, J. (1993) Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic
of Care. New York, NY: Routledge.
——(2001)‘AnEthicofCare’.In: M.B.HolsteinandP.B.Mitzen(eds)
Ethics in Community-based Elder Care , pp. 60–8. New York, NY:
Springer.
van Deursen, A. J., Helsper, E. J., Eynon, R., et al. (2017) ‘The Com-
poundness and Sequentiality of Digital Inequality’, International
Journal of Communication , 11: 453–73.
—— and van Dijk, J. A. (2019) ‘The First-Level Digital Divide Shifts
From Inequalities in Physical Access to Inequalities in Material
Access’, New Media and Society , 21: 354–75.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

848 Science and Public Policy
van Dijk, J. A. (2012) ‘The Evolution of the Digital Divide: The Dig-
ital Divide Turns to Inequality of Skills and Usage’. In: J. Bus,
M. Crompton, M. Hildebrandt, et al. (eds) Digital Enlightenment
Yearbook , pp. 57–75. Amsterdam: IOS Press.Wajcman, J. (2009) ‘Feminist Theories of Technology’, Cambridge
Journal of Economics , 2010: 143–52.
Woolgar, S. and Neyland, D. (2013) Mundane Governance: Ontology
and Accountability . Oxford: Oxford University Press.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/spp/article/48/6/841/6353893 by Centro Federal de Educacao Tecnologica Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ) user on 05 October 2025

