Alterlivability
Speculative Design Fiction and the Urban
Good Life in Starhawk ’sFifth Sacred
Thing and City of Refuge
AIMI HAMRAIE
Center for Medicine, Health, and Society, Vanderbilt University, USA
Abstract This article responds to two diverging notions of “livability ”: the normative New
Urbanist imaginary of livable cities, where the urban good life manifests in neoliberal
consumer cultures, green gentri ﬁcation, and inaccessible infrastructures, and the feminist
and disability concept of livable worlds, such as those in which nonnormate life thrives.
Whereas the former ought to broaden its notion of “lives worth living, ”the latter would ben-
eﬁt from a more speci ﬁct h e o r yo fd e s i g n —t h em a k i n ga n dr e m a k i n go fm o r el i v a b l ew o r l d s .
In response, this article offers the concept of “alterlivability, ”a design philosophy grounded
in permaculture ethics. Drawing on two n ovels by ecofeminist writer Starhawk —The Fifth
Sacred Thing (1994) and City of Refuge (2016) —the article explores the genre of speculative
design ﬁction for its insights into prototyping mo re livable futures in the Anthropocene.
Starhawk ’s novels illustrate alterlivability as a set of political commitments, design method-
ologies, and spatial forms that place disabled , racialized, and poor people at the center of
alterlivable worlds.
Keywords livability, urban design, speculative ﬁction, prototyping, sustainability, permacul-
ture, disability
Perhaps it is time for all of us to reconsider our loyalties, to consider what might further
human survival. Our work is not just sawing the legs off the ladders, but building thestructures that can replace them.—Starhawk, Dreaming the Dark
The late twentieth-century North American “livable cities ”movement imagines fu-
ture cities as dense, compact, and sustainable. While urban governments promote
livability improvements to counteract climate change, however, critics question livabil-
ity’s neoliberal sustainability politics, particularly its tendency to emphasize individual
Environmental Humanities 12:2 (November 2020)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-8623197 © 2020 Aimi Hamraie
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

accountability, harness market forces, and result in “green gentri ﬁcation. ”1These cri-
tiques dovetail with research on urban beauti ﬁcation and modern eugenics.2Indeed,
so-called livable cities often shape the urban good life in relation to normative (White,
nondisabled, nonfat, and middle class) embodiments deemed worthy of life.3Although
urban planners invoke livability as progressive, a critical livability concept must address
uneven distributions of bene ﬁts across populations, in addition to showing how philos-
ophies of life shape design praxis.
Reading livability alongside Maria Puig de la Bellacasa ’s“alterbiopolitics ”and Mi-
chelle Murphy ’s“alterlife, ”4this paper theorizes alterlivability to craft alternatives to
neoliberal, eugenic, and colonial world-building. Rather than take capitalism for granted
as inevitable, alterlivability conjures visions of livability in spite of (what Anna Tsing
calls) “capitalist ruins. ”5I frame alterlivability as a “material-discursive ”phenomenon
naming entangled ideologies, practices, and built environments.6In so doing I urge
urban planners to expand their notions of lives worth living, and push humanities
scholars to theorize how livable worlds materialize through design.
Whereas capitalist livability de ﬁnes the urban “good life ”as a consumable com-
modity, feminist and disability scholars call for counter-eugenic futures in which lives
currently devalued are made to thrive. But while these “alternative, livable relational-
ities ”7imagine paths beyond our current lived conditions, the tensions between these
aspirations and the built realities of so-called livable cities reveal that imagining the sta-
tus quo otherwise is insuf ﬁcient for preventing oppressive urban design practices. Given
the capitalist and ableist logics guiding urban design, an alterlivability design praxis
is needed that, in ecofeminist, permaculture designer and novelist Starhawk ’s words
not only “saw[s] the legs off of ladders, ”but also can “build the structures to replace
them. ”8Speculative design ﬁction offers a key site for exploring alterlivable world-
building.9By removing realist constraints (such as capitalism), this genre narrates
world-prototyping as pre ﬁgurative politics.10
Whether invoked by urban planners or humanists, livability offers prescriptive de-
sign blueprints , or outcomes of completed design decisions, for desired futures. By con-
trast, prototyping , the domain of alterlivability, is an incomplete, iterative, and frictioned
1. Checker, “Wiped Out By the ‘Greenwave ’”; Dale and Newman, “Sustainable Development for Some ”;
McCann, “Livable City/Unequal City. ”For further discussion of these debates, see below.
2. López-Durán, Eugenics in the Garden .
3.“Life unworthy of life ”is a Nazi eugenicist term indicating embodiments that were deemed to have no
right to live. See Lifton, The Nazi Doctors ; Hamraie, “Enlivened City. ”
4. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care , 165; Murphy, “Alterlife. ”
5. Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World .
6. Hamraie, Building Access , 107.
7. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”692.
8. Starhawk, Dreaming the Dark ,1 3 4 .
9. Speculation is a rich resource for feminist and disability scholars. See Schalk, Bodyminds Reimagined .
10. Boggs, “Revolutionary Process, Political Strategy, and the Dilemma of Power. ”408 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

process. In this article I analyze ﬁctional representations of alterlivable prototyping in
two speculative ﬁction novels by Starhawk: The Fifth Sacred Thing (1994) and City of Refuge
(2016), both of which center on postapocalyptic California.11Starhawk illustrates alter-
livability as a set of political commitments, design methodologies, and spatial forms
that privilege vulnerable populations and embody the principles of permaculture, an
alternative to industrial agriculture that emphasizes sustainable, self-suf ﬁcient ecologi-
cal and social systems. I show that, using pedagogical narration, Starhawk draws on herwork in this design movement to explore ﬁctional design prototyping as an ongoing
commitment to environmental and social justice.
I begin with a brief background section on the livable cities movement and de-
velop a theoretical framework for alterlivability by drawing on feminist and disability
theories. Then I analyze The Fifth Sacred Thing and City of Refuge for their representations
of alterlivable design. I show that alterlivability is not simply a matter of additive liberal-
ism, in which cities expand to include more populations; rather, it is an iterative process
in which new ways of living otherwise unfold to transform sociopolitical relations and
material practices.
Philosophies of Livability
The livable cities movement emerged in the 1980s to de ﬁne the characteristics of a
good city.
12Proponents in North American cities such as Vancouver, British Columbia,
and Austin, Texas, touted small-scale, walkable, and dense neighborhoods with farm-
ers markets, parks, and sidewalk café seating —the opposite of suburban sprawl. In
the 1990s, however, livability became the focus of neoliberal urban development in the
United States and Canada. While maintaining the aesthetic and social vision of walk-able neighborhoods, livability came to mean privatized mixed-use housing, greenway-
centric development, and condominiums promoting density. Aligned with the urban
planning profession ’s overwhelming emphasis on economic growth, livability is now
dominated by rationalist economic frameworks that calculate the value (and risks) of
particular populations to urban economies. Real estate research about “what makes a
city livable ”also disseminates neoliberal livability through indices published by eco-
nomic magazines, global ﬁnance organizations, and even public health authorities
quantify the relative “good life ”each city can offer.
13
Critical geographers differentiate between urban planners ’goals (such as eco-
nomic revitalization) and livability ’s material outcomes for devalued populations. Some
frame livability as an “empty signi ﬁer”for prevailing development trends.14For others,
11. The novels are part of a trilogy that includes the prequel Walking to Mercury , which addresses activism
in the 1960s and 1970s but does not engage design themes.
12. On the histories of livability described here, see Hamraie, “Enlivened City, ”35–36.
13. Ling, Hamilton, and Thomas, “What Makes a City Livable? ”
14. Wetzstein, “Intervention. ”Hamraie / Alterlivability 409Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

livability reinforces neoliberal governance by aligning what is considered “livable ”with
White, middle-class interests.15Highlighting connections to so-called sustainable lux-
ury and consumption, geographic case studies point out that livability can cause “green
gentri ﬁcation ”when new parks and greenways raise property values, pushing out low-
income residents.16
New Urbanist livability advocates rely on historical and cultural narratives about
urban spaces to prove that “because growth is inevitable, it must be shaped into the
most intelligent possible form, ”manifested in mixed-use neighborhoods and ef ﬁcient
regional planning.17Some claim that urban form ought to supersede concerns with
structural inequality. In Where We Want to Live , Ryan Gravel, designer of the “Beltline ”
greenway project in Atlanta, Georgia, argues, “the problem with the way we have been
building cities over the last sixty years is . . . not only the physical separation of peopleby income, race, and age . . . The real problem is . . . [that] generations of people . . . grew
up with the shopping mall as the highest standard of how we build our cities. ”
18While
framing shopping malls as the epitome of urban homogeneity, Gravel does not consider
structural racism, slavery, or segregation as producing what he describes as “neighbor-
hoods [without] people who were signi ﬁcantly different from ourselves. ”19He discusses
“White ﬂight ”in race-neutral, consumer-centric terms —“the massive suburbanization
in the second half of the last century when people with mobility left the city and cre-ated an entirely new lifestyle for themselves ”—rather than the result of racist policies
or decisions.
20His claims render segregation as a neutral accident of infrastructural
development or consumer preference.
On social issues with clear infrastructural elements, such as disability accessibil-
ity, New Urbanists are ambivalent or resistant. In their Smart Growth Manual , Andres
Duany and Jeff Speck argue that inclusive design (such as stair-free entrances) pre-
vents the goal of building dense, townhome-style housing (which necessitates stairs).
They claim that accessibility “can con ﬂict with other worthwhile goals, notably historic
preservation and affordable housing. ”21Invoking “affordable housing ”pits accessibil-
ity against the needs of lower-income people, while ignoring that disabled people also
need accessible and affordable housing. Recalling Gravel, traditional development con-
siderations, such as zoning, historical preservation, and architectural aesthetics, cometo outweigh analyses of structural inequality.
15. Ley, “Liberal Ideology. ”
16. McCann, “Livable City/Unequal City ”; Godschalk, “Land Use Planning Challenges ”; Curran and Ham-
ilton, “Just Green Enough ”; Checker, “Wiped Out by the ‘Greenwave. ’”
17. Duany and Speck, The Smart Growth Manual , section 1.
18. Gravel, Where We Want to Live ,1 5 .
19. Gravel, Where We Want to Live ,1 5 .
20. Gravel, Where We Want to Live , 19. On segregation as the result of racist policies, see Erickson, Mak-
ing the Unequal Metropolis .
21. Duany and Speck, The Smart Growth Manual , section 14.5.410 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Critical geographers respond to livability by raising questions about “life”as re-
lated to class and race inequality. As Katherine Hankins and Emily Powers observe, “If
we examine city spaces that are lauded as highly livable, we can get a sense of who is
able to live and how. ”22In addition to infrastructural development, New Urbanist livabil-
ity emphasizes individual and consumer action against climate change: riding bicycles,
taking stairs rather than elevators, and growing food.23Human bodies become energy
sources for active transportation. Thus, livability opens up bodies as arenas for (human)energy resource “extractivism, ”which Macarena Gómez-Barris describes as “converting
life into commodities. ”
24Although dominant sustainability paradigms, such as bicycling
infrastructure, mitigate resource use, they do not curtail extractivism from marginalized
forms of life.25For example, livability economizes life through calculations of produc-
tive and unproductive bodies: a frequent argument for walkability, for example, is that itcounteracts obesity, and thus decreases insurance costs for employers.
26Fat bodies are
represented as stores of excess energy awaiting extraction through active transportation.
Consequently, livability seeks to eliminate obesity (and fat people) from cities.27Addi-
tionally, accessibility and habitability are often peripheral to sustainability. Similar to
mainstream sustainability advocates who (according to Stacy Alaimo) demonstrate “hid-
den attachments ”to the “abled, hyper ﬁt body, ”livability improvements such as “walk-
ability ”infrastructures may reduce accessibility for disabled people by building cities
where ﬁtness, rather than rest or access, is central.28
Livability thus streamlines populations and spaces. Urban greening, beauti ﬁca-
tion, and exercise promotion reproduce twentieth-century eugenic efforts to revitalize
and beautify cities by eliminating supposedly undesirable (disabled, unemployed, un-
housed, and fat) bodies and “cleaning up ”supposedly “toxic neighborhoods. ”29Accord-
ing to Leslie Kern, economic revitalization has “commodi ﬁed”the “key principles of
feminist urbanity, ”such as “interconnectivity and mixed use, ”excluding a focus on
“social justice and the equitable distribution of these bene ﬁts of city living. ”30Whereas
livable cities evoke conviviality through activated public spaces and walkable cities,
they take for granted the bodies able to access such spaces. As earlier examples demon-
strate, these raced, classed, gendered, and ableist dimensions of livability are unac-
knowledged by New Urbanists, who frame their preferred types of growth as positiveurban development.
22. Hankins and Powers, “Disappearance, ”846.
23. Hamraie, “Enlivened City. ”
24. Gómez-Barris, The Extractive Zone , xix.
25. Tsing, “Threat, ”51.
26. Hamraie, “Enlivened City, ”44–45. Also see Murphy, The Economization of Life .
27. Andrews et al., “Moving Beyond Walkability. ”
28. Alaimo, foreword, ix. On walkability and ableism, see Hamraie, “Enlivened City ”; Imrie, “Disability and
Discourses of Movement and Mobility. ”
29. López-Durán, Eugenics in the Garden ; Hamraie, “Enlivened City ”; Kern, “From Toxic Wreck to Crunchy
Chic. ”
30. Kern, Sex and the Revitalized City , 197.Hamraie / Alterlivability 411Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Livability, Otherwise
Alterlivability draws on feminist and disability theory to rede ﬁne livability ’s biopolitics,
political economies, and theories of design. It aligns with Rosemarie Garland-Thompson ’s
theory of “habitable worlds ”:“eugenic worlds ”aim to streamline and optimize popula-
tions, whereas habitable worlds anticipate life as heterogeneous and build infrastruc-
tures to support diverse ways of living-being.31Nonnormate disabled lives, Alison Kafer
argues, are often understood as suffering and in need of elimination; by contrast,“accessible futures ”deﬁne disabled people as part of what makes future human life
sustainable.
32As Kim Q. Hall argues, disability and difference ought to be central to “in-
sight about how the border between the natural and the unnatural is maintained and
for whose bene ﬁt. It means understanding a sustainable world as a world that has
disability in it, a perspective that recognizes the instabilities, vulnerabilities, and dyna-mism that are part of nature cultures. ”
33Following Hall, centering disability in sustain-
ability transforms the concept of livability by de ﬁning life as complex, nonstandard,
and open to change. But habitable worlds name the outcome of desired futures, rather
than the design philosophy or prototyping process that can explain how to arrive
there. I offer the concept of alterlivability to capture the iterative, messy process of pro-
totyping livable cities otherwise. This concept builds on previous work by María Puig de
la Bellacasa and Michelle Murphy. Puig de la Bellacasa devises “alterbiopolitics ”as care
ethics in relation to Starhawk ’s (non ﬁction) writing on the permaculture movement. Ac-
cording to Puig de la Bellacasa, the pre ﬁx“alter, ”meaning “otherwise, ”captures “world-
making relationalities —that would, in the words of Starhawk, cultivate ‘power-with ’
and ‘power-from-within ’rather than ‘power-over. ’”34
Alterlivability reorients the power of urban design by placing livability into explicit
contact with permaculture, particularly principles of regeneration and biodiversity as
alternatives to shallow sustainability. By some accounts permaculture originated in
Australia in the late 1970s through the work of Dave Holmgren and Bill Mollison, who
developed methodologies for growing ecosystems that learn from and adapt to existing
conditions.35In contrast to mainstream monocultural agriculture, which typi ﬁes the
Plantationocene ’s racist, capitalist, and eugenicist treatment of life, permaculture
favors polycultures: self-maintaining forests ecosystems model the conditions for ﬂour-
ishing life.36Core permaculture principles —environmental observation, energy stor-
age, self-regulation and feedback, producing no waste, using natural patterns to design
31. Garland-Thompson, “A Habitable World. ”
32. Kafer, Feminist Queer Crip , 149 –69.
33. Hall, “Cripping Sustainability, ”438.
34. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care ,1 6 5 .
35. Grayson, “A Short and Incomplete History of Permaculture. ”Holmgren and Mollison are sometimes
framed as adopting a neocolonialist approach to agricultural knowledge and failing to credit Indigenous knowl-
edge. The social permaculture movement attempts to remedy erasure of Indigenous knowledge.
36. Haraway, “Anthropocene. ”412 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

interactions, designing interdependence rather than segregation, using and valuing
diversity, valuing the marginal, and responding to change creatively —convey a “regen-
erative ”design philosophy, wherein ecosystems are dynamic, complex, and emergent.37
Beyond planting forests in deserts or collecting rainwater for irrigation, permaculture
includes the perspective that diversity and attention to marginal life are central to a
thriving ecosystem. Furthermore, the “social permaculture ”movement forwarded by
Starhawk and Pandora Thomas (leader of the Black Permaculture Network) argues thatthis diversity imperative ought to apply to human relationships.
38They posit that ra-
cialized and disabled people ought to be central to environmental design because they
are most at risk of climate-induced harm.39Following Starhawk ’s imperative “to grow
soil”as a web of relations, social permaculture adopts what Puig de la Bellacasa calls “bio-
infrastructural ”design,40merging nature and culture in community organizing projects
such as “Earth Repair ”and “City Repair ”to transform gardening into placemaking and
antigentri ﬁcation work.41Social permaculture thus challenges the shallow environmen-
talism of resource preservation by proposing that commitments to marginalized life
must shift structures of interaction and decision making.
Alterlivability built from social permaculture departs from the livability move-
ment ’s emphasis on optimizing already-privileged life for economic growth. But most
social permaculture theories are not informed by feminist or disability perspectives on“lives worth living. ”In their focus on repair they often emphasize bodily and environ-
mental brokenness. Murphy contrasts the “economization of life ”(life maximized for
economic growth, often toward eugenic imperatives) with “alterlife, ”or“life already al-
tered, which is also life open to alteration. ”
42Whereas eugenicists would devalue life
disabled by toxicity, Murphy follows Eve Tuck ’s concept of “suspending damage, ”refus-
ing to treat harmed populations as “broken and conquered. ”43Alterlivability combines
feminist disability insights about accessible futures with Murphy ’s alterlife to enable
new regimes of valuation surrounding built spaces. As Starhawk ’s novels will show, rec-
ognizing that the residents of car-dependent neighborhoods are harmed by urban plan-
ning does not necessitate creating conditions that gentrify these neighborhoods and
displace residents. Likewise, it is possible to acknowledge that toxicity produces disabil-
ity without pursuing sustainable infrastructures that exclude or eliminate disabled peo-ple. Alterlivability thus accounts for the conditions under which life is already harmed
by the environment, and nevertheless ﬁnds ways to thrive.
37. David Holmgren, “Twelve Principles of Permaculture, ”permacultureprinciples.com/principles .
38. Starhawk, “Social Permaculture, ”88–91; Starhawk, The Empowerment Manual . For example, by ana-
lyzing Indigenous appropriation within permaculture. See Hardland, “Permaculture and Indigenous Cultures. ”
39. Starhawk, “A Wild and Diverse Earth Activist Training! ”; Thomas, “Social Permaculture. ”
40. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Encountering Bioinfrastructure, ”27.
41. Darwish, Earth Repair ; The City Repair Project (website), cityrepair.org/ .
42. Murphy, “Alterlife, ”497.
43. Tuck, “Suspending Damage, ”416.Hamraie / Alterlivability 413Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Speculative Design Futures
Speculative design ﬁction illustrates alterlivability as design praxis. Prototyping —a
speculative design methodology —creates new worlds by revising elements of the pres-
ent reality. But “world-making, ”Susan Yelavich contends, ”is“not only possible but is
also the essence of what design does. Design acts otherwise. ”44Prototyping does not
simply make new worlds by paving over existing ones; it interrogates through “design
friction ”and con ﬂict.45In the trial-and-error processes of speculation and prototyping,
infrastructures are politicized and contested; consequently, all invoked futurities are
not automatically more livable or progressive. Alterlivability requires evaluating the
consequences of each iterative alternative.
Speculative ﬁction designs new social realities. Literary scholars describe imagined
cities as laboratories for technologies (as in science ﬁction) and social structures (sug-
gesting a genre of “social science ﬁction ”).46As Carl Abbott writes, urban ﬁction emerges
from a “desire to consider future social and cultural systems that ﬁnd their most devel-
oped and con ﬂicted form in cities. ”47He notes, however, that urban designers also use
speculative techniques to imagine the future needs and possibilities of entire popula-
tions, to prioritize future outcomes, and to speculate on mass human behaviors in
designed spaces.48Admittedly, urban planning responds to the world as it is, taking eco-
nomic structures as inevitable. Given their realist constraints within a capitalist system,when urban planners engage in speculation, ideology is often taken as nonexistent.
Likewise, some speculative urban ﬁctions “ignor[e] the primacy of [capitalist] economic
relationships that truly determined spatial patterns, ”such as gentri ﬁcation.
49Similarly,
livability-centered planning predicts economic futures according to existing systems of
power. In contrast to the speculations of “ﬁnance capitalism, ”alterlivability offers anti-
capitalist speculation, what Aimee Bahng calls “speculating from the margins. ”50Radical
speculative ﬁctions highlight the frictioned relations of decolonization and anticapital-
ism: “speculation as a modality more fundamentally rooted in inconclusive re ﬂection, ”
where the priority is not “tidy resolution ”but “inventing other possibilities (alternate
realities, upside-down hierarchies, and supernatural interventions). ”51Nonrealist spec-
ulative mediums thus disorient taken-for-granted assumptions about the place of mar-
ginalized life in the future.
44. Yelavich, introduction, 17.
45. Marshall, “Afterword, ”245; Forlano and Mathew, “Design Friction, ”7–24.
46. Abbott, Imagining Urban Futures , 11.
47. Abbott, Imagining Urban Futures ,7 .
48. Abbott, Imagining Urban Futures ,8 .
49. Abbott, Imagining Urban Futures ,7 .
50. Bahng, Migrant Futures ,2 ,2 3 .
51. Bahng, Migrant Futures ,8 .414 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Alterlivability in Fifth Sacred Thing and City of Refuge
Starhawk is most known to environmental humanists in reference to the work of
Donna Haraway (whose “Cyborg Manifesto ”references Starhawk ’sSpiral Dance ),52Isa-
belle Stengers (who adopts from Starhawk her concept of “reclaiming ”),53and María
Puig de la Bellacasa (who uses Starhawk ’s work to theorize care).54Lesser known outside
of the permaculture world is Starhawk ’s ecofeminist permaculture work, including her
book The Earth Path (2004) and her design school (Earth Activist Training). That Star-
hawk, a designer, activist, and theorist of regeneration, has written two speculative de-
sign novels is signi ﬁcant because she uses ﬁction as a pedagogical and strategic tool.
Characters learn permaculture principles, test design prototypes, practice social perma-
culture in decision making, and rede ﬁne theories of livability.55As Starhawk writes
in the afterword to City of Refuge ,“the job of ﬁction is not to espouse a position but to
deeply explore a question, through the actions and behaviors and realizations of the
characters ...[ T h e books] are not meant to be prescriptive, but rather, to experiment
with possibilities that are easier lived in ﬁction than in real life. ”56This understanding
of speculative ﬁction as a tool for activist design prototyping distinguishes Starhawk ’s
novels from the feminist speculative ﬁction canon that includes Octavia Butler ’s
Parable of the Sower (1993) and Margaret Atwood ’sThe Handmaid ’s Tale (1985), which also
include themes of global climate devastation, human engineering, and authoritariangovernance.
Speci ﬁcally, The Fifth Sacred Thing and City of Refuge dramatize design prototyping
and permaculture as alterlivable challenges to dystopia. What most distinguishes Star-
hawk ’s novels, however, is that ﬁction mirrors and shapes her work as a designer and
permaculture teacher. Thus, while ﬁction allows her to imagine utopias and their limi-
tations, the novels also have the potential to shape non ﬁctional approaches to urban
design. Here, I examine the novels ’use of design prototyping in two ways: ﬁrst, as a de-
sign activity taught and undertaken by the characters, and second, in the novels ’plot
structures, in which unfolding scenes offer new alterlivability prototypes.
Hopelessness and Dystopia
Set in 2048 on the US West Coast, the two novels look back on the previous twentyyears, using near-term history to explore the frictions between an unlivable Anthropo-
cene, neoliberal livability, and regenerative alterlivability. In The Fifth Sacred Thing
resource extraction has left California “dead from years of abuse and from climate
change, ”“dust storms, ”and the practices of large corporations “stockpiling grain and
52. Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women .
53. Stengers, “Reclaiming Animism. ”
54. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care .
55. While scholarship on the Fifth Sacred Thing focuses on feminist utopianism, ecofeminism, and hope, it
does not address these design themes. See Fancourt, “Accessing Utopia ”; Haran, “Rede ﬁning Hope as Praxis. ”
56. Starhawk, City of Refuge (hereafter COR ), 662.Hamraie / Alterlivability 415Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

seed and medical supplies. ”57After a global disease outbreak, wealthy elites called the
Stewards seize power and instate a fundamentalist Christian government. As resisters
living on this society ’s margins explain to visitors from a faraway utopia, the govern-
ment mandates “family purity, ”“spiritual purity, ”and “racial purity, ”alluding to histo-
ries of eugenics and slavery in the United States.58The purity laws re ﬂect the Stewards ’
philosophy of life, in which streamlining and optimizing bodies enables them to extract
resources from human and nonhuman beings.
Throughout the novel Starhawk uses engineered life —genetically modi ﬁed hu-
mans and foods, biological warfare, and water rationing —to signify unlivable Anthropo-
cene conditions, illustrating Tsing ’s observation that the Plantationocene comprises
“simpli ﬁed ecologies designed to create assets for future investments —and to knock
out resurgence. ”59The regime manifests in speci ﬁc built environments: sprawling con-
crete developments, large-scale factories, farmlands turned to desert, and oceans ﬁlled
with land ﬁll waste. Eugenics is thus spatialized. Designated as soulless for failing to be
productive, former citizens are slated for biocapitalist extraction in work camps and
brothels. Their children become purchasable trophy wives, soldiers, athletes, workers,
entertainment, and bodies designed to withstand torture. The creation of new life is
also racially economized: Isis, a queer Black woman, describes being “bred. You know,
engineered ”as a competitive runner who is also forced to have sex with the Stewards.60
First-person accounts reveal the Stewards ’repeated the captivity and rape of Black
women to produce enslaved bodies, a reference to slavery in the US South. Both the
Stewards ’victims and their agents take these conditions as inevitable.
Designing Possible Utopias
InThe Fifth Sacred Thing Starhawk contrasts the dystopian Steward regime with the uto-
pian city of Cali ﬁa (a future San Francisco), which resisted colonization by the Stew-
ards.61The reader ﬁrst encounters Cali ﬁa through elder and activist, Maya, described as
disabled and Jewish. Through a third person limited perspective, Maya observes the city
as a character in her own story, embodying nurturing and regeneration: “Look at it!
Maya paused again, breathing heavily. The city was a place of riotous ﬂowers and clam-
bering vines, whose boughs are heavy with ripening fruit ”62In Maya ’s telling, Cali ﬁa’s
regeneration is also affective and aesthetic: it “has a beautiful beating heart. It cares for
its own, and for the stranger. Its streams run with clear water, and the trees that line its
57. Starhawk, The Fifth Sacred Thing (hereafter FST), 297.
58. Starhawk, FST, 298 –99.
59. Tsing, “Threat, ”51–52.
60. Starhawk, FST, 185.
61. The name “Caliﬁa”recalls Cala ﬁa, a mythical Black Muslim warrior queen of California who appears in
Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo ’sLas sergas de Esplandián (circa 1500).
62. Starhawk, FST,2 .416 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

pathways bow under the weight of fruit anyone is free to pick ”63Thus, Cali ﬁa represents
an ethos of hope, presaging the genres of solarpunk64and “visionary ﬁction ”(which Wa-
lida Imarisha frames as “fantastical writing that helps us imagine new just worlds ”).65
Urban design, permaculture, and magic af ﬁliate humans and nonhumans in the trans-
formation of energy, land use, transportation, housing, and governance.
Whereas Claire Colebrook asks, “what is life such that it is able to generate a spe-
cies capable of destroying all life? ”66Starhawk counters that this same species can cre-
ate systems that regenerate life through permaculture design ethics: care for the earth,
care for people, and care for the future. As Puig de la Bellacasa writes, “in permaculture
practices, ethical obligation is related to avoiding and remediating the neglect of the
earth ’s needs. ”67Caliﬁans identify with the ethical responsibility to reclaim ruined
urban spaces. In the city ’s foundational (design) narrative, four elderly women (the
“Cuatro Viejas ”) take sledgehammers to streets and to “liberate ”the soil from pavement
(a permaculture practice known as “depaving ”). This approach contrasts with non ﬁc-
tional livable cities, where increased development may, ironically, produce more paving
and construction. Removing concrete regenerates soil life, regrows wild forests full of
fruit trees, and restores springs. The Cuatro Viejas ’noncompliant action, in turn, spurs
further design prototyping. Depaved spaces become “food forests ”with layers of edible
plants and trees arranged together into self-sustaining systems that solve the problemof hunger by making communal food available in every season. To borrow from Nata-
sha Myers, the gardens “vegetalize ”the city through human-plant conspiracies that
counteract toxicity and scarcity.
68
Caliﬁa thus responds to defeatist “misanthropocene ”thinking with “abundant fu-
tures, ”69or“participatory, experiential infrastructure that offers room for enchant-
ment. ”70The city resists fear-based strategies for addressing climate change that can
distance humans from the nonhuman world. As Holly Jean Buck suggests, strategies
that “enchant humans-in-nature ”by creating immediate connections to nonhumans —
such as urban gardening, depaving, and rewilding —can overcome Anthropocene defeat-
ism.71While many of the characters also practice magic (for example, by entering traces
to channel nonhumans ’interests in Council meetings, or by performing healing rituals),
permaculture strategies for enchantment offer explicit prototypes for alterlivability.
63. Starhawk, FST, 11.
64. Lodi-Ribeiro, Solarpunk .
65. Exangel, “Visionary Fiction. ”
66. Colebrook, “Post-Anthropocene, ”12.
67. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Ethical Doings, ”165.
68. Myers, “From Edenic Apocalypse, ”35–66.
69. Collard, Dempsey, and Sundberg, “Manifesto. ”
70. Buck, “On the Possibilities of a Charming Anthropocene, ”370, 376.
71. Buck, “On the Possibilities of a Charming Anthropocene, ”373.Hamraie / Alterlivability 417Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Starhawk combines realist and nonrealist elements to imagine alterlivable utopia.
In crafting Cali ﬁa as an apparently utopian setting, she removes capitalism as a struc-
ture shaping access to livability: anticapitalist property relations, labor, access to resour-
ces, and social life informs Cali ﬁan society. According to Cali ﬁa’s Declaration of the
“Four Sacred Things, ”life cannot be economized, bought, or sold.72Caliﬁa also resists
the Stewards ’eugenicist “Racial Purity ”laws by centering racial, ethnic, and linguistic
diversity. Most leaders are people of color and elders. Children learn at least three lan-guages, and “lessons and Council Meetings are always signed as well as spoken, so the
deaf are easily integrated into public life. ”
73Caliﬁa’s cultural diversity thus includes dis-
ability alongside race and ethnicity, signaling the place of “polycultures ”within Cali ﬁa:
diverse forms of life are nurtured, regardless of their biocapitalist value. Although some
of these elements would be dif ﬁcult to implement in non ﬁctional cities, the combina-
tion of familiar phenomena (such as renewable energy and linguistic diversity) with
utopian anticapitalism makes the latter appear more achievable.
Permaculture ethics also shape Cali ﬁa’s built environment. The city is a place of
abundance: solar panels, wind turbines, and magical earth crystals provide energy for
everyone. When sea level rise ﬂoods downtown, Cali ﬁa transitions away from car-
centric transportation to accessible paths ( “Trackways ”) and ﬂying gondolas accessible
to bicycles, wheelchairs, and pedestrians. At ﬁrst glance these designs read as New
Urbanist fantasies of the livable city, with the emphasis on close-quartered density, sus-
tainability, and multiple forms of mobility. Yet the absence of capitalism renders differ-
ent outcomes both in terms of design and social relations. In real-world livability devel-
opments, such as Atlantic Station in Atlanta, Georgia, planners purport to design spaces
that are public, and therefore accessible to all. However, as geographers have shown,such spaces prioritize particular individuals, such as consumers seeking luxury goods.
74
Unlike such developments, all features of Cali ﬁa are public and free to use. They do not
depend on access to wealth-centered housing or neighborhoods, because all Cali ﬁans
are housed. As a result people who are most at risk of displacement by gentri ﬁcation —
including people who are disabled, elderly, and do not work —are given primary access
to the city. The city ’s“ethical doings ”thus include both the traditional permaculture
emphasis on “avoiding and remediating the neglect of the earth ’s needs, ”and also a so-
cial framework of valuing human biodiversity as a necessary component of more-than-
human survival.75
Caliﬁa is designed with the inclusion of marginalized people at the center of
its regenerative urban ethic. The city rejects capitalist and ableist imperatives for
72. The four sacred things are earth, air, water, and ﬁre. The ﬁfth sacred thing referenced in the title is
spirit.
73. Starhawk, FST, 49, 47.
74. See Hankins and Powers, “Disappearance. ”
75. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Ethical Doings, ”151 –69.418 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

productivity: every citizen earns a basic income and is not required to work to be recog-
nized as part of the community. With their basic needs met, citizens such as Maya ’s
grandson Bird, a disabled, queer, multiracial Black man, participate in the city without
the requirement to contribute economically. Unlike livable cities where able-bodied ﬁt-
ness is the norm, disability is everywhere in Cali ﬁa. All three of the main characters —
Madrone, Bird, and Maya —have physical and mental disabilities resulting from injury,
chronic illness and overwork, and aging. All three struggle with internalized ableism,making claims such as “I still have use of my legs, ”“I am not lame, ”or“I am no crip-
ple.”
76Nevertheless, the city works toward accessibility: “Streets, pathways and new
buildings are designed to be accessible for wheelchairs and those with mobility prob-
lems. Retro ﬁtting all of the city ’s three story Victorians would be an undertaking beyond
the city ’s capabilities, but any citizen who becomes disabled can have their own home
rebuilt. ”77But while health care is free and while gondolas provide access to the upper
hillsides, this society does not completely overhaul its inaccessible structures. Rather, it
replicates the existing methods of “retroﬁtting ”to make spaces accessible on a case-by-
case basis. This individualization of disability accounts for disparities between social
structures and the main characters ’internalized ableism. Nevertheless, Cali ﬁa reverses
typical utopian narratives in feminist speculative ﬁction that often imagine futures in
which disability has been eliminated.78By making disabled people (and the structures
required for accessibility) central to the imagined future, Cali ﬁad eﬁnes disability as val-
ued difference. In this way permaculture design principles shape philosophies of urban
lives worth living.
Alterlivable Frictions
While Cali ﬁai sa t ﬁrst represented as an alterlivable eco-utopia, Starhawk uses internal
monologues and dialogues to put this society into friction with the surrounding condi-
tions of unlivability. Maya quali ﬁes her observation of Cali ﬁa as a utopian “place of riot-
ousﬂowers ”by thinking, “You ’d think we had plenty of . . . land, plenty of water.
Whereas we ’ve simply learned how not to waste, how to use and reuse every drop. ”79
Similarly, Madrone, a queer, multiracial Black woman who works as a healer, contrasts
the city ’s apparent successes with the Steward-engineered ecosystem. Speaking in a
council meeting about the Stewards ’biological warfare tactics, she argues, “We’re living
in a toxic stew ...D o n ’t let the ﬂourishing of the gardens and the clarity of the waters
delude you. There are still chemicals in the Bay ...I t ’s not surprising that we have
recurring epidemics. If anything ’s surprising, it ’s that we ’re doing as well as we are. ”80
76. Starhawk, FST, 10, 143, 169.
77. Starhawk, “Vision of the City. ”
78. On eugenicist tropes in speculative ﬁction regarding disability, see Kafer, Feminist Queer Crip ,6 9 –89,
149; Allen, Disability and Science Fiction .
79. Starhawk, FST, 3.
80. Starhawk, FST, 51.Hamraie / Alterlivability 419Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Both Maya and Madrone draw attention to what Murphy calls “alterlife, ”life already al-
tered but searching for ways to live on. Madrone experiences toxicity ﬁrsthand in her
own chronic illness. She suggests that permaculture gardening alone does not resolve
historical legacies of toxicity and pollution that are resulting in epidemics in Cali ﬁa.
Thus, Cali ﬁa’s permaculture utopia is an imperfect iteration of designed survival in a
ruined world.
Alterlivability also manifests in the frictions between toxicity and world-building
projects premised on care. Cali ﬁans use permaculture for “calling forth alterlife, ”imag-
ining ways beyond environmental apocalypse through a methodology of “reclaiming. ”81
Isabelle Stengers, borrowing the term “reclaiming ”from Starhawk, argues, “Reclaiming
means recovering what we have been separated from, but not in the sense that we can
just get it back. Recovering means recovering from the very separation itself, regenerat-ing what this separation has poisoned. The need to struggle and the need to heal, in
order to avoid resembling those we have to struggle against, are thus irreducibly allied.
A poisoned milieu must be reclaimed. ”
82Reclaiming, in other words, does not mean res-
toration or cure. Instead, Cali ﬁans reclaim urban planning as an alterlivable method
that dispenses with the Stewards ’ﬁxation development and capital accumulation. Ret-
roﬁtting the existing built environment to meet the needs of the new society (rather
than building new developments) allows Cali ﬁans to avoid development-based extracti-
vism, gentri ﬁcation, and dependence on the Stewards.83Yet these spaces remain imper-
fect, sometimes inaccessible, and nearly always embedded in the “toxic stew. ”
As Starhawk further prototypes the concept of alterlivability in the narrative, she
challenges the Cali ﬁans’beliefs about their society. In another prototype, Starhawk con-
trasts Cali ﬁa with other resistant communities that Bird and Madrone visit on their
travels. Bird had previously escaped incarceration by the Stewards with the help of
two Hillboys, a community of resisters who live in the desert by surviving on chestnuts
and small amounts of water. Madrone reverses Bird ’s journey by traveling south to
learn healing techniques from the desert-dwellers. Starhawk renders Bird and Madrone
through the characteristics of their nonhuman namesakes to illustrate how ecosystems
regenerate. Bird, the musician, sings, travels, and organizes others. Madrone, the healer,
is an understory tree and so-called “pioneer species, ”which can grow entire forests
from one stump after a ﬁre and provide shade for smaller bushes until a more vibrant
ecosystem emerges.
Throughout their travels, Bird and Madrone share stories of Cali ﬁa to inspire hope,
but their encounters with other resisters challenge them to think differently about
livability. Both use pedagogical narration to teach permaculture. In the desert, Madronemeets the Hillboys, who survive scarcity by stealing and foraging. Conversations
81. Murphy, “Alterlife, ”494 –503.
82. Stengers, “Reclaiming Animism. ”
83. On retro ﬁt in Cali ﬁa, see Drapeaud, “Founding the Feminist Utopia. ”420 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

between Madrone and the Hillboys illustrate permaculture pedagogy. First, the Hillboys
share details about the Steward regime, including the devastated environment and pu-
rity laws. Most of what the reader learns about this regime comes from dialogue with
the Hillboys. In response, Madrone describes Cali ﬁa using pedagogical narration and
instruction: “We don ’t just plant a garden, ”she explains. “We create an ecosystem that
can sustain itself as much as possible with a minimum of outside energy —including
our own. ”84Illustrating design friction, Madrone ’s perceptions of the Hillboys as living
in scarcity are shattered, however, when she meets the Melissas. These apiarists live
among and care for bees that pollinate chestnut trees necessary for the Hillboys sur-
vival. The Melissas embrace what Murphy frames as “entanglement, kinship, and
responsibility ”: by caring for and becoming physically and psychically bonded with the
bees, they share both the “symbiosis of multispecies being ”and “the material enmesh-
ments of chemical exposures ”in which bees can account for their environmental condi-
tions by producing healing honey.85After the bees call Madrone to join the Melissas, she
gains the ability to communicate with them and produce honey medicines with her
body. The Melissas personify Tsing ’s distinction that livability is “never exclusively a
human issue; like all other forms of life, we can only live successfully by living together
with others. ”86In her becoming-bee, staunchly independent Madrone becomes interde-
pendent with other beings, and her ability to regenerate life reaches beyond permacul-ture to forms of organizing that become more salient in the next book.
The most explicit challenge to Cali ﬁan utopianism appears when Madrone and
Bird come upon the self-identi ﬁed“Monsters, ”a group of people with congenital disabil-
ities resulting from living in a nuclear testing site long thought to be abandoned.
87Star-
hawk ’s descriptions of the Monsters recalls Tod Browning ’s 1932 ﬁlmFreaks in which a
nondisabled outsider is initiated into a group of disabled circus performers who declare
her “one of us! ”From Bird and Madrone ’s perspectives, the Monsters appear as hav-
ing“faces oddly distorted, ”to be “missing a hand or an arm; ”one woman has a congen-
ital amputation, another person a cleft palate, and a pair of twins both have hump
backs.88The Monsters immediately challenge the Cali ﬁans’perspectives. Morton,
whose body is described as “end[ing] at the hips, ”explains their home to Bird: “It’s liv-
able....F o ru s .Y eah, there ’s probably still radiation. ”89“We work to heal the land ”
with magic and regenerative agriculture, clari ﬁes Rhea, who has a cleft palate.90The
Monsters embody what Gómez-Barris frames as “heterogeneous forms of living that
are not about destruction or mere survival within the extractive zone, but about the
84. Starhawk, FST, 296.
85. Murphy, “What Can a Body Do?, ”7.
86. Tsing, “Threat, ”abstract.
87. Starhawk, FST,9 3 .
88. Starhawk, FST, 92, 91, 94, 99.
89. Starhawk, FST, 92.
90. Starhawk, FST,9 2 –93.Hamraie / Alterlivability 421Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

creation of emergent alternatives. ”91Not only do they live in a community on con-
demned land that they regenerate, but as people whose bodies take shape through tox-
icity, the Monsters also embody alterlife. They are not, in Murphy ’s words, “waiting for
apocalypse —apocalypses of many kinds have already happened, livable worlds keep
being snatched away. ”92The Monsters insist that the land is still habitable: by approach-
ing the apocalypse through regeneration, they carve out space for bodies deemed “in-
jured, disturbed, or ‘abnormal ’...i n ﬁelds such as ecology, toxicology, and epigenetics ”
to“push back against the eugenic residues that calculates lives worth living. ”93In their
radical embrace of disability, the Monsters challenge Cali ﬁan exceptionalism and able-
ism, particularly narratives of impairment and toxicity as lack or disquali ﬁcation.
Despite appearances the Monsters ’territory is habitable and accessible, designed
by and for disabled people. Their alterlivability is even more radical than that of theCaliﬁans: while Bird and Madrone are both disabled and lived in Cali ﬁa, a disability-
inclusive society, they react with shock when they encounter the Monsters. Bird is
initially surprised by Morton, but soon recognizes his own disablement (he “hadn ’t real-
ized what a toll enforced immobility [in the prison] would take on him ”).
94He learns
strategies for organizing and survival from the disabled “Monsters ”that he uses in City
of Refuge . But Madrone, a healer with chronic illness, continues to treat the Monsters as
potential patients, feeling “a temptation to return and help them, ”rather than accept-
ing their differences.95Starhawk turns a critical lens onto the Cali ﬁans by shifting to
the third person to describe these encounters.
Building a City of Refuge
Another iteration of alterlivability appears in City of Refuge , when Bird and Madrone
travel to Angel City (a future Los Angeles) to “build a city of refuge in the heart of the
enemy ’s territory. ”City of Refuge enters into more direct conversation with urban plan-
ning discourses than The Fifth Sacred Thing . Angel City ’s structure illustrates class hierar-
chies: Bird and Madrone pass the “wealthy haunts of the Primes [Steward leaders] near
the university, ”the “tree-lined streets of Beverly Hills, ”“giant apartment buildings that
housed techies and professionals, ”and “crowded tenements of concrete that towered
toward the sky. ”96While for the rich, the city is largely car-centric and sprawling, work-
ing class people walk and bike by economic necessity due to a lack of public transit,
rather than ﬁtness imperatives.97This architectural and scenic imagery, which closely
91. Gómez-Barris, The Extractive Zone ,4 .
92. Murphy, “What Can a Body Do?, ”5.
93. Murphy, “What Can a Body Do?, ”8.
94. Starhawk, FST, 209.
95. Starhawk, COR, 184.
96. Starhawk, COR , 206.
97. Starhawk, COR , 196.422 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

resembles present-day non ﬁctional Los Angeles, reinforces the story ’s location in the
near-term, possible future, lending realism to the design interventions that follow.
InCity of Refuge , the reader learns that the Stewards rose to power as a result of
events sparked by so-called livable urban development. An area called the “Death
Zone ”was formerly “Harmony Village, ”a livability development that housed a “popular
spa, with natural hot springs, ”where “enterprising New Urbanists had renovated the
old hotel. ”98Connecting livability to green gentri ﬁcation, Starhawk writes,
In the 2020s, the area became the site of one of the last great venues of the old regime.
Developers pushed out poor people and built a shopping mall along the street front,with high-rise condos behind. Two years of construction noise had done in the spa, andthe new buildings blocked the sunlight from the gardens of the older houses. Many ofthe more stable residents left, and the area fell into decay once more. Harmony Villageopened its doors in 2025. The developers pocketed a fortune, in part by skimping on thecement in their concrete. The shortfalls became evident when the earthquake hit. Wallscrumpled, and roofs fell in. Doubly unfortunate, Harmony lay in the direct path of thetoxic fumes that decimated the city.
99
The Stewards used this event to seize control of the government. In other words, the
Stewards ’regime and the violence that followed were a direct consequence of livability-
centered gentri ﬁcation and development.
Starhawk ’s use of Harmony Village as the Death Zone ’s setting places concepts of
regeneration and alterlivability in direct conversation with the New Urbanist livable cit-
ies movement, suggesting that spatial design has consequences and must be reclaimedif life is to ﬂourish. When Bird and Madrone enter the Death Zone, they ﬁnd“collapsed
buildings, canyons of ruins separated by dry ravines of asphalt backed with rubble,
utterly deserted. ”
100These scenes reveal the necropolitics of capitalism: of ﬁce buildings
full of the skeletons of the poisoned, still sitting at desks, surrounded by dust.101Yet
the Death Zone harbors conditions for new life to ﬂourish: a Chinese Tree of Heaven
(typically considered invasive and undesirable) and thistles, dandelions, and lamb ’s
quarters —all nutritious and medicinal plants that ﬂourish as wild weeds —are found
“growing in the dirt that ’s blown into the cracks ”of pavement and serving as meta-
phors for regeneration.102Devalued plant life catalyzes alterlivable resistance.
In the Death Zone, Bird and Madrone combine learned lessons from Cali ﬁa, the
Hillboys, the Monsters, and the Melissas. A comrade asks, “nobody goes into the Death
98. Starhawk, COR , 208.
99. Starhawk, COR , 208.
100. Starhawk, COR , 208.
101. Starhawk, COR , 210.
102. Starhawk, COR , 207.Hamraie / Alterlivability 423Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Zone . . . How can you show people an alternative in a place they ’re afraid to go? ”103Yet
Bird and Madrone ﬁnd this site ripe for regeneration because the Monsters have taught
them that it is possible to occupy seemingly toxic territories without being noticed.
They continue the Cali ﬁan permaculture practice of removing concrete, composting,
and building soil. They plant seeds, summon bees for pollination, and tap into the
city’s water lines to help the plants grow.104Because the Stewards ’control of water is
central to their control over life, Madrone and Bird reclaim water from the guts of thecity’s pipe infrastructure, allowing it to ﬂow without ration. They use the skeletons left
behind to design a tunnel-like “Gateway of the Dead ”that leads into a “Womb of Re-
birth, ”a courtyard featuring sculptures signifying hope and welcome for new members
of their community.
105With small-scale gardens and decorative structures in place, they
recruit people away from life in debt to the Stewards and convince them to join thecity of refuge.
In this design process, Starhawk again turns to themes of friction, con ﬂict, and
diversity. Unlike the Cali ﬁan utopia, where racial and bodily diversity are allowed to ﬂour-
ish, in the Stewards ’territory, there are few disabled people: most have been eutha-
nized or forced to work to death in camps. People of color exist, but work in subservient
positions due to the Racial Purity laws. In this setting, the Cali ﬁan’s simultaneous use of
American Sign Language (ASL) and spoken English to communicate, coupled with theirdark skin, make them dangerously conspicuous. Despite discontinuing the use of ASL,
Bird uses his apparent disability and dark skin to his advantage by dressing as a dis-
abled busker.
106This allows him to reenter Angel City and sing songs with coded mes-
sages that he uses to recruit others to the city of refuge. Those who decode the mes-
sages arrive at the Gateway of the Dead. Passing through, they ﬁnd unexpected
gardens, free living spaces built into the ruins, and a growing community of people
building political power. Such design elements are pedagogical and affective: they con-
vey passage from unlivable dystopia into alterlivable prototyping.
To demonstrate alterlivable design, Starhawk once again adopts pedagogical nar-
ration. First, Bird and Madrone teach the defectors about permaculture principles and
encourage them to work. In one scene residents clear space for a plaza: “With four
adults working together, they could lift heavier chunks of rubble. Madrone rigged leversand Bird made rope slings to haul some of the bigger boulders. While the grown-ups
worked, the children were set to stomp clay and sand together into a kind of natural ce-
ment called cob. ”
107This pedagogical scene provides technical directions for natural
building, a common permaculture practice. It clearly delineates materials, roles, and
103. Starhawk, COR , 200.
104. Starhawk, COR , 276.
105. Starhawk, COR , 222, 328 –9.
106. Starhawk, COR , 291.
107. Starhawk, COR ,3 1 8 .424 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

steps toward an outcome. The third-person perspective also adds social commentary
on the city ’s evolving structure:
Forming the Refuge out of rubble had resulted in an odd, organic city plan of small, open
squares linked by narrow corridors, like a walled medieval town or an ancient casbah. It
offered surprise after surprise, like opening a set of nested boxes, each revealing a new
mystery. This next plaza was wider, and someone with a strong sense of geometry haddivided it into a mandala of alternating patches of quinoa and bush beans, surroundedby beds of the extremely drought-tolerant chia. Surprising, really, how much they couldactually grow in this space.
108
These descriptions point to the affective possibilities of designing the city of ref-
uge, where design results in wonder and hope about regeneration. From Madrone ’s
close-limited perspective, “we’re no longer a bunch of refugees, huddled in the ruins,
she thought. We have a culture. We are a city. ”109But because the residents are still
healing from the trauma of life under the Steward regime, the city of refuge is not a
conﬂict-free utopia. In one scene, “a huge argument broke out [over how to design
neighborhoods], that threatened to escalate into a ﬁstﬁght. ”110When community mem-
bers quarrel over resources, or vestiges of racist and eugenicist beliefs, Bird and Ma-
drone facilitate a social permaculture process that teaches design and communication
skills. They guide the community to set up workers ’“guilds, ”schools, and other social
structures to address the needs of this new society.111
So successful is the city of refuge that it builds a massive population without the
Stewards ’notice, and this population leads public revolts that eventually lead to the
downfall of the government. In a ﬁnal scene of permaculture design, instituted on a
broad scale, an omniscient narrator reveals the outcome of previous permaculture
training. Following the successful revolution,
Crews fanned out into the city, tearing up the streets, sculpting the land to capture and
hold the rain, liberating the pipes for water. They planted groves of citrus trees andstarted new groves. On the drier slopes of the hills, they set saplings of olives that couldlive for a thousand years, underplanted with fragrant hedges of lavender and rosemaryand thyme. They resurrected the sad trickle that had once been a river, brought it out ofthe imprisoning concrete to nourish cattails and sedges and birds.
112
Affectively and aesthetically, this scene connects the City of Refuge to Cali ﬁa, turning
to tactics of depaving and rewilding. Like the madrones, bees, and chestnut trees that
108. Starhawk, COR 398.
109. Starhawk, COR 333.
110. Starhawk, COR 336.
111. Starhawk, COR , 399.
112. Starhawk, COR , 659.Hamraie / Alterlivability 425Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

facilitate life on the margins of the Stewards ’regime, life already-altered becomes the
progenitor of refuge and regeneration.
Despite these successes, some accessible elements of habitable worlds and acces-
sible futures (so central to The Fifth Sacred Thing ) appear to drop out of City of Refuge .
The focus rests instead on designing permaculture solutions oriented toward a more
lasting revolution. This shift in perspective lends the impression that radical inclusion
is more possible within a utopian, anticapitalist society than in one closer in historicalmemory to the Steward regime. But this point also underscores the role of prototyping
in the narrative: rather than strive for utopian purity or perfection at each stage, Star-
hawk tests scenarios for world-building in an already-colonized, already-toxic world.
Conclusion
Livable cities aspire toward futures characterized by hyper ﬁt bodies, verdant plant
growth, and mixed-use zoning. Visitors to such cities may perceive them as utopian.
Like Cali ﬁa, where clear streams of water ﬂow, food grows abundantly, and streets
stage diverse social scenes, livable cities may appear to embody a liveliness that coun-
teracts suburban sprawl. In both realist and speculative cities, however, perceptions of
livability are shaped by narrative and representation. Design narratives of urban green-
ing may promise sustainability while eclipsing gentri ﬁcation. Activated public spaces
may exclude people who are racialized, poor, fat, unhoused, and disabled from repre-
sentations of the good urban life. Despite advocating for infrastructure as a tool for
healing cities, New Urbanist theories of livability, smart growth, and urban diversity
often preclude an analysis of structural inequality. Thus, livability is a value assigned to
built environments that materialize through speci ﬁc values and practices, not a self-
evident concept with universal meaning.
Feminist and crip philosophies of livability, by contrast, de ﬁne livable worlds as
those in which social and environmental justice are coextensive imperatives. Alterliv-
ability is the term that I offer to reclaim livability as a justice-driven and anticapitalist
design method that commits itself to the ongoing work of prototyping, trial-and-error,
friction, and revision on the way to better urban futures. By highlighting alterlivability
as design praxis, I foreground the nonstandard urban forms, agents, and values thatcan render cities as regenerative, and thus resist New Urbanism ’s exclusionary ap-
proach to livability. Starhawk ’s speculative design novels, The Fifth Sacred Thing and City
of Refuge, dramatize permaculture as a nonutopian prototyping practice that can inform
antieugenic design in support of the most marginal forms of life. The novels thus
bring alterlivability theory to bear on critical sustainability concepts, showing that per-maculture principles provide useful alternatives to New Urbanist economic and social
imperatives.
As speculative design ﬁction demonstrates, imagining the future is an un ﬁnished
project, the beginning of a story rather than its culmination. These points about specu-
lative design ﬁction also have implications for urban planning and design practice.426 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Although urban planning is ﬁeld driven by capitalist development objectives, alter-
livability offers urban planners tools for more careful analyses of the good urban life,
coupled with a design praxis centering prototyping and experimentation. Building on
existing efforts to desegregate cities on the basis of race, class, and disability, Star-
hawk ’s novels invite urban planners to subvert economic and eugenicist logics. Alterliv-
ability can thus challenge the racial and economic displacements that produce housing
insecurity, the “hostile architectures ”(such as divided bench seats) that prevent public
sleeping, or the resource extraction and construction processes that create toxic envi-
ronmental conditions. Crucial to this theoretical and political transition, however, is
the recognition of life as livable beyond economic calculations regarding extraction or
productivity. As alterlivable designs in Starhawk ’s novels demonstrate, urban design
can draw on disability, race, and gender as unexpected sources of knowledge aboutbuilding urban spaces and communities that subvert capitalist imperatives. For urban
planners committed to more just worlds, alterlivable prototyping, politics, and ethics
can thus grow the soils for the worlds to come.
AIMI HAMRAIE is associate professor of Medicine, Health, and Society and American Studies
at Vanderbilt University, where they direct the Critical Design Lab. They are author of Building
Access: Universal Design and the Politics of Disability (2017).
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Ken MacLeish, Sara Safransky, Laura Stark, and Tasha Rijke-Epstein for comments on
earlier drafts.
References
Abbott, Carl. Imagining Urban Futures: Cities in Science Fiction and What We Might Learn from Them .M i d -
deltown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2016.
Alaimo, Stacy. Foreword to Disability Studies and the Environmental Humanities: Toward an Eco-Crip
Theory , edited by Sarah Jaquette Ray and Jay Sibara, ix –xvi. Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 2017.
Allen, Kathryn. Disability and Science Fiction: Representations of Technology as Cure . Basingstoke, UK:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Andrews, Gavin J., Edward Hall, Bethan Evans, and Rachel Colls. “Moving Beyond Walkability: On the
Potential of Health Geography. ”Social Science and Medicine 75, no. 11 (2012): 1925 –32.
Bahng, Aimee. Migrant Futures: Decolonizing Speculation in Financial Times . Durham, NC: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 2017.
Boggs, Carl. “Revolutionary Process, Political Strategy, and the Dilemma of Power. ”Theory and Society
3, no. 4 (1977): 359 –93.
Buck, Holly Jean. “On the Possibilities of a Charming Anthropocene. ”Annals of the Association of Amer-
ican Geographers 105, no. 2 (2015): 369 –77.
Checker, Melissa. “Wiped Out by the ‘Greenwave ’: Environmental Gentri ﬁcation and the Paradoxical
Politics of Urban Sustainability. ”City and Society 23, no. 2 (2011): 210 –29.
Colebrook, Claire. “We Have Always Been Post-Anthropocene. ”InAnthropocene Feminism , edited by
Richard Grusin, 1 –20. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.Hamraie / Alterlivability 427Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Collard, Rosemary-Claire, Jessica Dempsey, and Juanita Sundberg. “AM a n i f e s t of o rA b u n d a n t
Futures. ”Annals of the Association of American Geographers 105, no. 2 (2015): 322 –30.
Curran, Winifred, and Trina Hamilton. “Just Green Enough: Contesting Environmental Gentri ﬁcation
in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. ”Local Environment 17, no. 9 (2012): 1027 –42.
D a l e ,A n n ,a n dL e n o r eL .N e w m a n . “Sustainable Development for Some: Green Urban Development
and Affordability. ”Local Environment 14, no. 7 (2009): 669 –81.
Darwish, Leila. Earth Repair: A Grassroots Guide to Healing Toxic and Damaged Landscapes .G a b r i o l aI s -
land, BC: New Society Publishers, 2013.
Drapeaud, Léone. “Founding the Feminist Utopia. ”Site Magazine , November 9, 2018. www.thesitemagazine
.com/read/founding-the-feminist-utopia .
Duany, Andres, and Jeff Speck. The Smart Growth Manual . New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Erickson, Ansley. Making the Unequal Metropolis: School Desegregation and Its Limits . Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2016.
Exangel. “What Is ‘Visionary Fiction ’? An Interview with Walidah Imarisha. ”EAP: The Magazine ,
March 31, 2016. exterminatingangel.com/eap-the-magazine/what-is-visionary- ﬁction-an-interview
-with-walidah-imarisha/ .
Fancourt, Donna. “Accessing Utopia through Altered States of Consciousness: Three Feminist Uto-
pian Novels. ”Utopian Studies 13, no. 1 (2002): 94 –113.
Forlano, Laura, and Anijo Mathew. “From Design Fiction to Design Friction: Speculative and Partici-
patory Design of Values-Embedded Urban Technology. ”Journal of Urban Technology 21, no. 4
(2014): 7 –24.
Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie. “A Habitable World: Harriet McBryde Johnson ’s‘Case for My Life. ’”
Hypatia 30, no. 1 (2015): 300 –306.
Godschalk, David. “Land Use Planning Challenges: Coping with Con ﬂicts in Visions of Sustainable
Development and Livable Communities. ”Journal of the American Planning Association 70, no. 1
(2004): 5 –13.
Gómez-Barris, Macarena. The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial Perspectives . Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2017.
Gravel, Ryan. Where We Want to Live: Reclaiming Infrastructure for a New Generation of Cities .N e wY o r k :
St. Martin ’s Press, 2016.
Grayson, Russ. “A Short and Incomplete History of Permaculture. ”PaciﬁcE d g e , July 2, 2007. paciﬁc
-edge.info/2007/07/a-short-and-incomplete-history-of-permaculture/ .
Hall, Kim Q. “Cripping Sustainability. ”InDisability Studies and the Environmental Humanities: Toward
an Eco-Crip Theory , edited by Sarah Jaquette Ray and Jay Sibara, 422 –47. Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 2017.
Hamraie, Aimi. Building Access: Universal Design and the Politics of Disability . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2017.
Hamraie, Aimi. “Enlivened City: Inclusive Design, Biopolitics, and the Philosophy of Liveability. ”Built
Environments 44, no. 1 (2018): 77 –104.
Hankins, Katherine B., and Emily M. Powers. “The Disappearance of the State from ‘Livable ’Urban
Spaces. ”Antipode 41, no. 5 (2009): 845 –66.
Haran, Joan. “Rede ﬁning Hope as Praxis. ”Journal for Cultural Research 14, no. 4 (2010): 393 –408.
Haraway, Donna. “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin. ”Envi-
ronmental Humanities 6, no. 1 (2015): 159 –65.
Haraway, Donna. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature . London: Routledge, 2013.
Hardland, Maddy. “Permaculture and Indigenous Cultures. ”Permaculture Magazine , May 21, 2015.
www.permaculture.co.uk/articles/permaculture-indigenous-cultures .
Imrie, Rob. “Disability and Discourses of Mobility and Movement. ”Environment and Planning A: Econ-
omy and Space 32, no. 9 (2000): 1641 –56.
Kafer, Alison. Feminist, Queer, Crip . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.428 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Kern, Leslie. “From Toxic Wreck to Crunchy Chic: Environmental Gentri ﬁcation through the Body. ”
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 33, no. 1 (2015): 67 –83.
Kern, Leslie. Sex and the Revitalized City: Gender, Condominium Development, and Urban Citizenship .V a n -
couver: University of British Columbia Press, 2010.
Ley, David. “Liberal Ideology and the Postindustrial City. ”Annals of the Association of American Geogra-
phers 70, no. 2 (1980): 238 –58.
Lifton, Robert Jay. The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killing and the Psychology of Genocide .N e wY o r k :B a s i cB o o k s ,
1986.
Ling, Chris, Jim Hamilton, and Kathy Thomas. “What Makes a City Liveable? ”CRC Research , Decem-
ber 19, 2006. crcresearch.org/case-studies/case-studie s-sustainable-infras tructure/land-use
-planning/what-makes-a-city-liveable .
Lodi-Ribeiro, Gerson, ed. Solarpunk: Ecological and Fantastical Stories in a Sustainable World , translated by
Fábio Fernandes. Albuquerque, NM: World Weaver Press, 2018.
López-Durán, Fabiola. Eugenics in the Garden: Transatlantic Architecture and the Crafting of Modernity .
Austin: University of Texas Press, 2018.
Marshall, Tim. “Afterword: The Designer and the Designed. ”InDesign as Future-Making , edited by
Susan Yelavich and Barbara Adams, 242 –44. London: Bloomsbury, 2014.
McCann, Eugene. “Livable City/Unequal City: The Politics of Policy-Making in a ‘Creative ’Boom-
town. ”Interventions économiques/Papers in Political Economy , no. 37 (2008): 1 –18.
Murphy, Michelle. “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations. ”Cultural Anthropology 32, no. 4 (2017):
1–10.
Murphy, Michelle. The Economization of Life . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.
Murphy, Michelle. “What Can ’t a Body Do? ”Catalyst: Feminism Theory Technoscience 3, no. 1 (2017): 1 –15.
Myers, Natasha. “From Edenic Apocalypse to Gardens against Eden: Plants and People in and after
the Anthropocene. ”InInfrastructure, Environment, and Life in the Anthropocene ,e d i t e db yK r e g g
Hetherington, 115 –48. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Encountering Bioinfrastructure: Ecological Struggles and the Sciences of
Soil. ”Social Epistemology 28, no. 1 (2014): 26 –40.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Ethical Doings in Naturecultures. ”Ethics, Place, and Environment 13, no. 2
(2010): 151 –69.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”
Social Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Schalk, Sami. Bodyminds Reimagined: (Dis)ability, Race, and Gender in Black Women ’s Speculative Fiction .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2018.
Starhawk. “A Wild and Diverse Earth Activist Training! ”Earth Activist Training, February 2, 2016.
earthactivisttraining.org/a-wild-and-diverse-earth-activist-training/ .
Starhawk. City of Refuge .S a nF r a n c i s c o :C a l i ﬁa Press, 2016.
Starhawk. Dreaming the Dark: Magic, Sex, and Politics . Boston: Beacon Press, 1997.
Starhawk. “Social Permaculture. ”InSustainable Revolution: Permaculture in Ecovillages, Urban Farms, and
Communities Worldwide , edited by Juliana Birnbaum and Louis Fox, 88 –91. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic Books, 2014.
Starhawk. The Empowerment Manual: A Guide for Collaborative Groups . Gabriola Island, BC: New Society
Publishers, 2011.
Starhawk. The Fifth Sacred Thing . New York: Bantam, 1994.
Starhawk. “The Vision of the City. ”Starhawk homepage, November 2007. starhawk.org/writing
/books/starhawks-vis ion-of-san-Francisco .
Stengers, Isabelle. “Reclaiming Animism. ”e-ﬂux, no. 36 (2012). www.e- ﬂux.com/journal/36/61245
/reclaiming-animism/ .Hamraie / Alterlivability 429Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

Thomas, Pandora. “Social Permaculture: The Magic of Diversity. ”Public lecture at the Kresge
Town Hall, University of California, Santa Cruz, May 29, 2015. www.youtube.com/watch?v=iJP
-ZsLi5xE .
Tsing, Anna. “A Threat to Holocene Resurgence Is a Threat to Livability. ”InThe Anthropology of Sus-
tainability , edited by Marc Brightman and Jerome Lewis, 51 –65. New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
2017.
Tsing, Anna. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins .P r i n c e t o n ,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Tuck, Eve. “Suspending Damage: A Letter to Communities. ”Harvard Educational Review 79, no. 3
(2009): 409 –28.
Wetzstein, Steffen. “Intervention —‘Reclaiming the “Liveable City ”as Normative Reference Point:
Against Totalising Aspirational Political Discourses. ’”AntipodeOnline , May 5, 2016. antipodeonline
.org/2016/05/05/reclaiming-the-liveable-city/ .
Yelavich, Susan. Introduction to Design as Future-Making , edited by Susan Yelavich and Barbara
Adams, 12 –17. London: Bloomsbury, 2014.430 Environmental Humanities 12.2 / November 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/2/407/826472/407hamraie.pdf by guest on 07 October 2025

