Environment and Society: Advances in Research 15 (2024): 110–141 © The Author(s)
doi:10.3167/ares.2024.150106  Amphibious Land Repair
Restoration, Infrastructure and Accumulation  
in Southeast Asia’s Wetlands
Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
 ◾ ABSTRACT:  Amphibious landscapes, wetlands such as coasts, mangroves, peatlands, 
and deltas, have seen a recent surge in large-scale restoration efforts. This article exam -
ines this trend in Southeast Asia, reviewing the history and contemporary dynamics of 
wetland restoration in the region. Drawing from literatures on the political ecology of 
restoration, infrastructure studies, and the financialization of nature, we understand 
wetland restoration as a form of repair to highlight it as a socio-political process. We conceptualize restoration as infrastructural land repair , the process of restoring dynamic 
ecosystems for specific anthropocentric and economic aims, mediated through an amalgam of expertise, technology, and finance. We reveal how restoration can function as a socio-ecological fix, maintaining the same political-economic systems that initially 
caused wetland degradation. Finally, we identify a need for three areas of scholarship 
to be expanded on how restoration unfolds in practice within the SEA context, which 
will be crucial to informing more reparative forms of restoration.
 ◾ KEYWORDS:  accumulation, infrastructure, repair, restoration, socio-ecological fix, 
Southeast Asia, value, wetlands
The year 2021 marked the beginning of the UN’s Decade of Ecosystem Restoration, an initia -
tive focused on rehabilitating and protected ecosystems across the globe to counteract climate 
change (Waltham et al. 2020). A crucial focus of restoration efforts centers wetlands, which include marshes, swamps, bogs, coasts, river basins, deltas, and mangrove ecosystems. As an 
amphibious landscape, they defy typical categorization, not fitting neatly into the category of 
water or land (Jensen 2017). Following decades of drainage, deforestation, and agribusiness 
development over the past few decades, Southeast Asia (SEA) has become a hotspot of large-
scale wetland restoration as part of the global momentum toward restoration. There are over two million square kilometers of wetlands in SEA, including over 60 percent of the world’s 
tropical peatlands and 42 percent of global mangrove ecosystems. Coastal wetland areas make 
up the highest proportion of wetlands in SEA, followed by inland wetland areas (Liu et al. 2022). 
An estimated 54 percent to 87 percent of global wetlands have been lost since 1900, with the 
highest rate of loss in Asia: over 80 percent of Southeast Asian wetlands are already degraded or threatened by conversion to agricultural development (Davidson 2014; Hughes 2017). Wet -
lands are sometimes flooded and sometimes dry, with burps of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) as rising and falling water levels expose soils to air, emitting 
This article is available open access under a CC BY 4.0 license as part of Berghahn Open Anthro, 
a subscribe-to-open model for APC-free open access made possible by the journal’s subscribers.
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 111
gasses into the atmosphere. Wetlands perform essential ecosystem roles, including water filtra -
tion and regulation, carbon sequestration, sea-level regulation, and biodiversity. They provide 
critical habitat to diverse species, such as migratory birds (Hughes 2017; Y ong et al. 2022). They 
are no less important for the livelihoods and culture of local communities. 
In SEA, wetlands are drained for oil palm and pulpwood plantations, flooded for rice cul -
tivation, or converted to shrimp ponds. In manipulated wetlands, the ecosystem’s hydrology 
is often damaged through canal construction that prevents seasonal water flux (Nugraha et al. 
2022). A key objective of wetland restoration is thus hydrological rehabilitation, which dams 
the canals or re-establishes channels to allow water to flow freely, cycling nutrients through 
the ecosystem and preventing greenhouse gas emissions. Efforts toward more holistic forms of 
forest restoration, rather than forest reclamation, began in the region around the early 2000s. 
These recent projects in SEA are part of a global restoration effort centering the transformation 
of unproductive and degraded landscapes into functional ecosystems. Ecological restoration 
was originally defined by the Society for Ecological Restoration in 2004 as “the process of assist -
ing the recovery of an ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or destroyed” (Allison and 
Murphy 2017: 1).
Ecological restoration as a practice and concept is not new, originating after World War II 
but gaining prominence in the late 1990s and early 2000s and stemming from the discipline 
of conservation biology and the fields of landscape and restoration ecology (Higgs et al. 2014; 
Martin 2022; Palmer et al. 2016). In the last two decades restoration has become a frontier of 
environmental conservation (Chazdon et al. 2017), the growing ‘restoration agenda’ central to 
efforts making environmental management economically profitable (Elias et al., 2021) Many 
restoration programs and projects around the world are focused on restoring forest ecosystems 
through tree planting and other greening approaches (ibid, 2021), including stream and river 
ecosystems (Lave 2021; Smith et al. 2014), coral reefs (Braverman 2018), and desert and grass -
land ecosystems (Chiquoine et al., 2024).
Recently, as rising temperatures and increased drought wrought by a changing climate have 
further altered wetlands’ biogeochemistry and function (Salimi et al. 2021), greenhouse gas 
emissions from many degraded wetland ecosystems have increased. As such, global attention 
has turned to wetlands’ potential to act as a “nature-based solution” for climate change mit -
igation through their capacity for rehabilitation and thus reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
(Kolka et al. 2016; Siman et al. 2021; Thorslund et al. 2017). In SEA, wetland restoration projects 
include large-scale peat swamp and mangrove restoration in Indonesia, seagrass meadow plant -
ing in the Philippines, and delta rehabilitation projects across Vietnam, Thailand, and Myanmar 
(Dohong et al. 2018; Rifai et al. 2023; Sidik et al. 2023; Tinh et al. 2022). In urban areas, this 
is often under the title of blue or green infrastructures, which consist of natural ecosystems 
implemented to mitigate climate change impacts, such as flooding and elevated air temperatures 
(Ghofrani et al. 2017). Moreover, restoration requires considerable amounts of capital. A recent 
study by Imperial College Business School, for instance, shows that ecosystem restoration across 
SEA requires at least two hundred billion dollars, necessitating the private sector’s investment 
to reach this amount (Holtedahl 2023). Following similar trends toward the financialization of 
forest and biodiversity conservation (Fletcher 2020; Kay 2018), framing wetlands as nature-
based solutions through their restoration enables the restoration process and outcome to bear 
economic value, leading to wetlands’ financialization, such as through blue carbon credits gen -
erated by mangrove restoration.
This critical review surveys recent literature on wetland restoration in SEA, contributing to 
a growing body of critical social science scholarship that examines the practices, processes, and 
politics of restoration (Brock 2023 Clay 2019; Elias et al. 2021). Our review includes literature 
112 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
from the social sciences as well as the natural sciences, engineering, and environmental policy. 
Given the striking recent finding that ecosystem restoration “did not result in faster or more 
complete recovery than simply ending the disturbances ecosystems face” (Jones et al. 2018: 1), 
it is paramount to understand why restoration projects continue to proliferate. Much critical 
restoration scholarship has emphasized restoration projects in the Global North (Breslow 2014; 
Brock 2023; Klein et al. 2022); this review expands the geographical scope of this literature, 
turning toward the Global South to focus on wetland restoration in SEA. Following recent 
scholarship that has theorized restoration as “repair” to think through its relation to capitalism 
(Huff and Brock 2023), race relations (Barra 2021), and its potential for alternative forms of 
environmental relations (Usher 2023), we understand recent wetland restoration projects as 
forms of repair to unpack restoration’s political dimensions. We extend recent work that has 
connected nature-based solutions and infrastructure (Lock 2023), arguing that wetland res -
toration in SEA functions as a form of what we term infrastructural land repair , or the process 
of restoring dynamic ecosystems for specific anthropocentric and economic aims, mediated 
through an amalgam of expertise, technology, and finance.
In what follows, we advance repair as a socio-political process and offer an overview of crit -
ical work that engages nature as infrastructure to highlight the role of maintenance and repair. 
In section two, we summarize the history of restoration in SEA, tracking how earlier forms of 
forest restoration inform recent efforts toward wetland restoration. We then interrogate how 
wetland restoration efforts in SEA produce wetlands as a form of infrastructure to outline a 
political ecology of wetland restoration in SEA, drawing on literatures on the political ecology 
of restoration, infrastructure studies, and the financialization of nature. We find that consider -
ing restoration as infrastructural repair encourages new ways of thinking about land valuation 
and revaluation amid rapid environmental change. Moreover, by examining the political lim -
itations of repair, the increasing financialization of these land repair projects may function as a 
socio-ecological fix. This trend renders degraded wetlands as sites of re-accumulation from their 
initial extraction for capital-intensive agribusiness and then through ecosystem repair itself, or 
what Amber Huff and Andrea Brock (2023) call “accumulation by restoration. ” In reflecting on 
the possible political and economic implications of the growing financialization of wetland res -
toration in SEA, we also identify a gap in the literature on how financial instruments, actors, and 
tools work in SEA wetland restoration. Finally, we suggest that recent scholarship on “reparative 
climate infrastructures” may provide a justice-centric form of financial engagement in future 
SEA restoration projects.
Theorizing Restoration as a Mode of Repair
Across the critical social sciences, scholars have shown how the concept of repair unsettles and 
re-configures, intervenes and re-constructs. In science and technology studies (STS), repair is 
central in drawing attention to maintenance practices that prevent breakdown. Steven Jackson 
(2014), for instance, identifies repair as the fulcrum between an always almost-falling-apart 
world and a world of re-invention and new possibilities. Jackson defines repair as how “order 
and meaning in complex sociotechnical systems are maintained and transformed, human value 
is preserved and extended, and the complicated work of fitting to the varied circumstances of 
organizations, systems, and lives is accomplished” (ibid.: 222). In this sense, repair is distinctly 
temporal or, in the words of Jackson, “an inescapably timely phenomenon, bridging past and 
future in distinctive and sometimes surprising ways. . . . It accounts for the durability of the 
old, but also the appearance of the new” (idem: 223). Central to this definition is how repair 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 113
offers the means to either reconceptualize and re-configure systems or maintain the status quo. 
Paying attention to repair means noticing the often-invisible practices that maintain systems 
but also paying attention to the processes of breakdown and degradation that necessitate repair 
(Ramakrishnan et al. 2021). Central to work on repair in STS is the understanding that practices 
of maintenance and repair are embedded in socio-political worlds that hold distinct visions for 
the future (Denis et al. 2015).
Political ecologists have invoked the concept of repair to understand the tensions and possi -
bilities embedded within imaginaries, objectives, and impacts of restoration: in other words, the 
politics of repair. They see repair as inherently political because it either constructs something 
new or maintains the present (Usher 2023). For some, repair can perpetuate current systems, 
preventing new ways of living with nature (Wakefield 2020). Other work has examined the eco -
nomic dimensions of repair, underscoring what James Fairhead, Melissa Leach, and Ian Scoones 
(2012) call the “growth economy of repair, ” which enables nature to be valued for both its use 
and its potential for repair (Huff and Brock 2023). Sarah Knuth (2019) describes new economies 
of repair in her work on decarbonization through urban retrofitting, showing how retrofitting 
is a green gentrification scheme cast as a market-based solution that reframes environmental 
problems as untapped economic frontiers. Knuth reveals how such retrofitting efforts require 
“not just potentially profitable urban repair today but large-scale urban maintenance into the 
future” (2019: 490), highlighting the uncertainty associated with repair. Huff and Brock (2023) 
have conceptualized restoration as repair to develop their concept of “accumulation by resto -
ration, ” referring to when nature becomes “valued not just for its use but also for its potential for 
repair or restoration” in the shift from a conservationist “mode of production” toward “a growth 
economy of repair” (ibid.: 2113). They note that repair is a discourse that advances a vision of 
ecological improvement, intervening in perceived crises to “neutralize” harm while obscuring 
the latent power dynamics involved in the practice of repair itself.
The dominance of natural capital accounting that privileges economic relations over alter -
native forms of socio-environmental relations is not inevitable (Usher 2023). Recent scholar -
ship has offered a vision of alternative socio-natural relations formed via differing engagements 
with ecological repair, moving beyond techno-managerial anthropocentric visions (Barra 2024; 
Osborne et al. 2021; Webber et al. 2022). As Mark Usher writes, “restoration can therefore 
encourage humans to recognize that worlds can be arranged differently and composed oth -
erwise” (2023:1257). Monica Patrice Barra (2024) also adopts an hopeful vision of repair. By 
engaging Black feminist geographies, Barra develops the concept of restoration through her 
work on coastal restoration in Louisiana, revealing how Black coastal communities “re-route 
hegemonic ideologies of ecological crisis away from a zero-sum game that pits acres of wetlands 
gained or lost against frontline communities, and toward the protection and sustainability of 
Black life and ecologies” (2023: 3). Webber et al. (2022: 937) cite the Black radical and abolition -
ist traditions to conceive of repair as the undoing of institutions that have been eroded through 
colonialism, slavery, and capitalism. Invoking the concept of reparations, the authors link repair 
and reparative framings of justice. In this way, recent work on repair demonstrates how repair as 
a practice that can be used in breakdown to generate new possibilities. Such insights are fruitful 
in attending to ways the financialization of restoration can be reconceived (Lamont et al. 2023), 
becoming closer to what Tracey Osborne et al. describe as “a culture of equity-based earth 
stewardship and a radically transformed relationship to the planet based on care and reciproc -
ity” (Osborne et al. 2021: 6). In their overview of how restoration can become more effective, 
equitable, and transformative, Osborne and colleagues argue that restoration initiatives should 
promote regenerative outcomes by treating not just the symptoms but also the root causes of 
landscape degradation.
114 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Nature as Infrastructure: Nature-Based Solutions and Ecosystem Services
The wetland restoration efforts surveyed in the following section repair degraded landscapes to 
improve ecosystem function like water and carbon cycling, climate regulation, and biodiversity 
conservation (Tomscha et al. 2021) such as in peatland restoration (Bonn et al. 2016). Recent 
scientific work has shown that wetland restoration may lead to increased carbon sequestration 
and reduced methane emissions due to wetlands’ distinctive hydrology (Valach et al. 2021). 
Many SEA wetland restoration projects thus emphasize the climate mitigating services of resto -
ration. Increasingly, this co-beneficial process has been framed by policymakers and restoration 
projects in terms of nature-based solutions or natural-climate solutions (Rifai et al. 2023; Tan 
et al. 2022). Nature-based solutions (NbS) are defined as “working with and enhancing nature 
to help address societal challenges” (Seddon et al. 2020: 85) and expanding on efforts towards 
integrating ecosystem services to adapt to the impacts of climate change (Alexander et al. 2016; 
Colls et al. 2009; Escobedo et al. 2019).). Ecosystem services, meanwhile, refer to “the aspects 
of ecosystems utilized (actively or passively) to produce human well-being” (Fisher et al. 2009: 
645).
Critical social scientists often argue that nature conceptualized this way is “out there, ” sep -
arate from society, upholding the age-old and contentious nature-culture bifurcation and its 
complex and dynamic processes reduced to a specific good or service that can be “put to work” 
for anthropocentric purposes (Besky and Blanchette 2019; Welden 2023). Such a conception 
of nature obscures how humans themselves are a part of ecosystems, shaping and influenc -
ing environmental change. Importantly, this framing of nature as a “service” is evocative of 
exchange-values and is used to justify nature’s valuation, part of a neoliberal toolkit that centers 
market relations in environmental management, turning natural processes into discrete finan -
cial commodities (Bigger et al. 2018; Dempsey 2016; Sullivan 2018). Nature’s “services, ” like car -
bon sequestration, are measured and made commensurable to financial value through complex 
accounting so they can be marketed to investors (Huff 2023; Kolinjivadi et al. 2019; McElwee 
2017). This neat packaging of “services” that can be measured and valued is emblematic of the 
production of nature, facilitating capital penetration into nature itself (Bryant 2018).
Scholars have also reflected on how nature’s “work” is harnessed to deliver specific ecosystem 
services and outcomes for human communities and is used as a natural infrastructure (Besky 
and Blanchette 2019; Carse and Lewis 2017; Hetherington 2018; Ojani, 2022; Wakefield 2020). 
In contrast to technical approaches to infrastructure in ecology and conservation science dis -
cussed later in this section, this scholarship is informed by STS, which embeds infrastructure 
in social, technological, and material contexts (Larkin 2013; Star 1999). As Ashley Carse (2016) 
describes, infrastructure is a plastic term that has multiple definitions and meanings. However, 
for the purpose of this article, we understand infrastructure to mean not just systems or struc -
tures but also the relationships that constitute those structures, which bring them into existence 
or maintain their presence. As Lauren Berlant (2016) says, infrastructure is the lifeworld of 
structure.
This scholarship on nature as infrastructure understands that nature is formed in relation 
with humans, modified through human labor for a particular objective or purpose. It is not just 
an already existing infrastructure (Hawkins and Paxton 2019; Ojani 2022; Wakefield 2020). As 
Carse describes in his work on the Panama Canal, “as infrastructure, nature is irreducible to a 
non-human world already ‘out there’ . It must, in its proponents’ terms, be built, invested in, made 
functional, and managed” (2012: 540). Ultimately, as “out there” nature is expected to provide 
ecosystem services, capitalist values are inscribed into the landscape, becoming infrastructure 
for one system of production, rather than other possibilities. Will Lock (2023) describes how 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 115
engaging NbS follows the framing of the natural world as a form of infrastructure. While not 
every wetland restoration project in SEA treats wetland ecosystems as a “nature-based solution, ” 
we see efforts that harness nature’s processes through the act of restoration as strong examples 
of Sara Nelson and Patrick Bigger’s infrastructural nature , or “the policy approaches, scientific 
practices, discourses, and investment strategies that make ecosystems legible, governable, and 
investable as systems of critical functions that sustain and secure (certain forms of) human life” 
(2022: 88, see also Dempsey 2016; Li 2014; Sullivan 2018). As Lock describes, “infrastructural 
nature can be seen as an ideological underpinning of nature-based solutions as they are emerg -
ing in practice” (2023: 4). Turning the natural world into infrastructural nature imbues it with 
the same predictability and measurable value that is in the built environment.
Such is the case for Southeast Asian wetlands. Infrastructural framings of wetlands within 
the science and policy communities see wetlands as ecosystem services, often framed as pre-  
existing “blue” or “green” infrastructures (Cardoso da Silva and Wheeler 2017). Like other infra -
structures, these become visible only when they are not functioning as expected (Larkin 2013; 
Puig de la Bellacasa 2014). However, envisioning wetlands as infrastructure is also a political 
process. Understanding wetlands as services for human needs amplifies an anthropocentric 
relation to ecosystems. Moreover, as critical work on ecosystem services has shown, “infra -
structuralizing” nature maintains capitalist socio-natural relations, enabling their valuation and 
commodification (Carse 2012; Dempsey and Robertson 2012; Kull et al. 2015). We follow recent 
critical scholars (Nelson and Bigger 2022; Wakefield 2020) in contending that wetlands are not 
simply pre-existing infrastructures but are made into infrastructural nature through the process 
of repairing both the terrestrial and aquatic features of wetlands to perform specific ecosys -
tem services. We expand upon scholarship on green and blue infrastructures in Southeast Asia, 
which has examined the active construction of physical infrastructure in SEA urban wetlands, 
such as the Jakarta Seawall (Colven 2020). By developing Atsuro Morita’s (2016) argument on 
infrastructuring amphibious space beyond construction of “aquatic infrastructures, ” we focus 
on how wetlands themselves are organized into ecosystem services through restoration. Draw -
ing from the literature on nature as infrastructure, we define infrastructural land repair  as the 
process of restoring dynamic ecosystems for ecosystem services, mediated through expertise, 
technology, and finance. In Southeast Asian wetlands, these purposes include climate mitiga -
tion, such as carbon sequestration in peat swamps and methane reduction in mangrove ecosys -
tems, as well as climate adaptation, including water cycling for flood prevention in deltas and 
sea level rise in seagrass ecosystems.
Since the early 2000s, engaging nature as infrastructure has become ubiquitous in ecology 
and conservation science, subverting common conceptions of infrastructure such as roads, 
canals, and electric grids. Natural infrastructure utilizes ecosystems and their components, such 
as wetlands, forests, rivers, dunes, and reefs, as a metaphor to deliver a diverse array of services 
typically provided by constructed or engineered materials or structures (Escobedo et al. 2019). 
This concept has been articulated in the recent proliferation of related scientific terminology 
such as NbS, green, blue, and ecological infrastructures within environmental management 
and policy (Cardoso da Silva and Wheeler 2017). Following suit, wetland ecosystems in South -
east Asian landscapes are often framed as natural, green, or blue infrastructures (Hamel and 
Tan 2022; Rifai et al. 2023; Uy and Tapnio 2021). Green infrastructure refers to the purposeful 
design, restoration, enhancement, or strategic implementation of forested and terrestrial urban 
environments to deliver environmental services, such as managing stormwater, enhancing air 
and water quality, and mitigating urban heat, among other urban services (Cardoso da Silva and 
Wheeler 2017). For example, green infrastructures such as rain gardens or roof gardens are now 
used in urban planning to address stormwater pollution and flood management (Twohig et al. 
116 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
2022). Blue infrastructures function similarly but focus on freshwater and marine ecosystems 
and are designed to manage and utilize water resources (Cardoso da Silva and Wheeler 2017). 
Living oyster reef shorelines are used in coastal management to respond to sea-level rise and 
increasingly powerful storm surges, or wave action that causes coastal erosion (Wakefield 2019). 
By understanding wetland restoration as a form of infrastructural land repair, we describe in 
the following sections how the processes of restoration can maintain the political-economic 
systems that resulted in wetland’s initial degradation.
Restoration in Southeast Asia
In this section, we examine the history of restoration throughout SEA. Restoration projects are 
simultaneously increasing in number and changing geographies, moving from forest ecosys -
tems to include wetlands. We detail this shift and then provide an overview of recent wetland 
restoration projects.
From Reforestation to Landscape Restoration
The practice of environmental restoration has a longstanding history in SEA, initially with a 
focus on the region’s highly biodiverse forest ecosystems. Regarded as the oldest remaining 
tropical ecosystems in the world (MacKinnon et al. 1996), Southeast Asian forests consist of 
mixed deciduous types, including teak and evergreen dipterocarp forests, and extensive areas 
of montane, mangrove, and peat swamp forests (Appanah et al. 2015). Since the 1980s, logging 
for export, state-led agricultural land conversion, plantation development, and forest fires were, 
and continue to be, significant drivers of forest loss across SEA (Imai et al. 2018; Tsujino et al. 
2016). As work in political ecology has demonstrated, these drivers of deforestation are rooted 
in histories of colonialism (Bryant et al. 1993). European scientific forestry practices became 
ubiquitous across the region’s colonial forestry ministries and remained after independence in 
nations including Myanmar (Bryant 1993), Malaysia (Peluso and Vandergeest 2001), Indonesia 
(Peluso 1993), the Philippines (Pagunsan 2023), and even in Thailand, which notably avoided 
colonization (Lohmann 1993). Under colonial economic logic, timber was extracted from for -
ests as a source of state revenue, leading to the expansion of state control into upland and for -
ested areas.
Restoration in SEA has deep roots in colonial forestry. Early restoration in the region began 
in the mid-1800s with scientific forestry in colonial state-led efforts toward forest reclamation, 
or the replanting and reforestation of previously logged or degraded forests (Appanah et al. 
2016). Ruel Pagunsan (2023) describes how post-WWII reforestation efforts by the Bureau of 
Forestry in the Philippines were shaped by colonial science. Shaped by extractive economies, 
early reforestation efforts were predominantly concerned with the ongoing economic potential 
of forest resources (Bryant et al. 1993). Thus, scientists and states emphasized monocultural 
replanting of exotic species with clear market value, such as pine, eucalyptus, or acacia (Lamb 
1994). In Burma for instance, the taungya  system for actively reforesting areas under shifting 
cultivation with teak was first introduced under the British in 1856 (Wohlers 2019). The system 
has since been widely used across SEA (Appanah et al. 2016).
Post-colonial Southeast Asian forest restoration initiatives have taken the form of state, 
non-governmental organization (NGO), or corporate-led reforestation programs or re-greening 
initiatives following traditional forest plantation schemes. The focus on replanting instead of 
full rehabilitation of an original forest ecology (Lamb 1994) was due to the difficulty in quanti -
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 117
fying the extent of forest degradation in contrast to the relatively easy quantification of defor -
estation and subsequent tree replanting. These compensatory plantations were also employed 
across SEA to offset the decline in timber output from natural forests; pulp and timber compa -
nies financed the seeds and inputs (Buergin 2016). In the 1980s the Thai Royal Forestry Depart -
ment addressed deforestation in Northern Thailand from logging for woodchips by establishing 
eucalyptus plantations financed by pulp-and-paper corporations (Puntasen et al. 1992) . This 
reforestation project led to vocal farmer opposition over land tenure and a thirsty ecology of 
non-native eucalyptus forests, which drained the water table and soil moisture levels, jeopardiz -
ing local farming livelihoods (Barney 2004; Lohmann 1993). In Myanmar, the 1991 Wasteland 
Law led to rapid development of rubber plantations, through which reforestation was used as 
a form of agricultural expansion and paved the way toward high-input, capital-intensive agri -
cultural production (Woods 2012). In the 1990s, the Vietnamese government followed suit, 
launching two forest restoration programs: Program 327 and the Five Million Hectares Refor -
estation Programme (5MHRP), which tripled the plantation forest area in Vietnam (McElwee 
2009). In Indonesia, reforestation also has an extensive history. From the 1960s to 2015, 150 
official forest reforestation projects were implemented across four hundred locations through -
out the nation (Appanah et al. 2015). However, despite these projects, deforestation continued, 
and forests did not return to their original ecological composition (Sharma and Y onariza 2021). 
Across the region, many of these initiatives continue today.
Landscape restoration projects in SEA began in earnest in the early 2000s. The World Wide 
Fund for Nature (WWF) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) 
defined Forest landscape restoration (FLR) as “a planned process that aims to regain ecological 
integrity and enhance human well-being in deforested or degraded forest landscapes” (Appanah 
et al. 2016:2). This move toward FLR followed global shifts in forestry management away from 
plantation models toward social forestry (ibid). While reforestation through tree replanting is 
still practiced in SEA, FLR programs continue to grow in Thailand (Sapkota et al. 2021), Indone -
sia (Van Oosten et al. 2014), and the Philippines (Mukul et al. 2016). More recently, restoration 
projects across SEA have centered wetlands, which we examine in the following section.
A Survey of Contemporary Wetland Restoration in Southeast Asia
From the peatlands of Indonesia (Dohong et al. 2018), floodplain systems of the Mekong Delta 
across Vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand (Nguyen et al. 2016), high-altitude headwaters of the 
Ayeyarwady in Myanmar (Gruel and Latrubesse 2021), seagrass ecosystems of the Philippines 
(Rifai et al. 2023), and Inle Lake’s watershed in Myanmar (Pradhan et al. 2015), wetlands across 
SEA are now the focus of a variety of restoration efforts, including large-scale, NGO-driven, 
state-led, and corporately funded initatives. Wetland drainage and degradation in the region 
is still driven by extractive industries, such as logging (Hughes 2017), hydrodam development 
(Cho and Qi 2023), the rapid expansion of oil palm plantations (Dohong et al. 2017, oil and 
gas drilling (de Jong and Nooteboom 2010), agricultural conversion for shrimp aquaculture 
and rice paddies (Gerona-Daga and Salmo 2022), as well as urban development. Degradation 
is further exacerbated by climate change and extreme weather events such as drought, sea-level 
rise, and tropical cyclones (Gopal, 2013). As a result, livelihoods and cultural heritage have 
been lost, water tables contaminated (Cochard 2017), the biodiversity of the region has taken 
a hit (Hughes 2017), and there has been a substantial loss of ecosystem services important for 
climate functions (Gopal 2013). In response, restoration efforts across the region seek to repair, 
and even enhance, these climate functions, making wetlands into NbS. At the 2016 Ramsar 
Convention of Wetlands, the Indo-Burma Ramsar Regional Initiative (encompassing Cambo -
118 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
dia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam) formulated the first regional approach to wetland 
governance (IUCN 2022; Liu et al 2022). This initiative is informed by the expansive wetland 
work across the region. In this section, we offer a survey of these restoration efforts in Southeast 
Asian wetlands.
Peatlands
SEA ’s tropical peatlands, found in low-lying areas of Indonesia and Malaysia, which are home 
to over 40 percent of the world’s tropical peatlands, are rapidly disappearing (Dohong et al. 
2017). Peatlands consist of waterlogged, partially decomposed vegetation, extending up to 20 
meters deep in certain areas. The majority of Indonesia’s peatlands are considered disturbed or 
degraded, directly or indirectly impacted by canal drainage for large-scale agriculture (Page and 
Hooijer 2016; Uda et al. 2017; Yuwati et al. 2021). Following drainage, dry peatlands undergo 
microbial oxidation and become flammable, both processes of which emit enormous amounts 
of carbon dioxide (Page et al. 2022; Turetsky et al. 2015). The Indonesian state began draining 
peatlands in the 1990s for large-scale rice estates. Drainage accelerated in the early 2000s as the 
state gave land concession licenses on peatland to oil palm and pulpwood companies (Gold -
stein 2016). Some of the most severe peat fires in the country’s history occurred in 2015, as El 
Niño-fueled drought left peatland across Sumatra and Kalimantan highly flammable (Kiely et 
al. 2021). In response, then-President Joko Widodo pledged to restore 2.2 million hectares of 
peatland by 2020 by creating a national-level Peatland Restoration Agency ( Badan Restorasi 
Gambut ) to spearhead the task (Goldstein et al. 2020). The BRG was limited, however, to imple -
menting restoration in peatlands that fall within the state’s direct jurisdiction, which excludes 
many peatlands that are in corporate agribusiness concessions.
The core objective of peatland rehabilitation is to prevent fire and oxidation—thereby mit -
igating carbon emissions—through hydrological management by blocking drainage canals, 
introducing new vegetation, and preventing fire (Monteverde et al. 2022, Yuwati et al. 2021). 
Successful rehabilitation in peatlands is challenging because of their complex hydrology, the 
variability of precipitation by season, and the fluid movement of water within swamp layers 
(Sutikno et al. 2020). Repairing drained peatlands’ hydrology requires heavy machinery to dig 
and construct canals, ditches, drains and dams, which reduces surface run-off and increases 
water storage capacity within canals (Ritzema et al. 2014). After rewetting (Dohong et al. 2018, 
Terzano et al. 2022) there is often the planting of seedlings and transplants (Graham et al. 2017). 
Peat rehabilitation requires scientific expertise (Tan et al. 2022) and labor to drive machines, 
plant saplings, and oversee nurseries (Wiesner and Dargusch 2022). It also requires substan -
tial capital investment (Hannson and Dargusch 2018). Some attempts at peatland restoration 
have been supported through the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation 
(REDD+) initiative, which was introduced by the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change in 2007 (idib). REDD+ encouraged wealthy countries to fund developing coun -
tries’ forest conservation and restoration projects as carbon offsets (Sayer et al. 2021). Multi-  
national corporations such as Asia Pulp and Paper (APP) have undertaken peatland restoration 
efforts in their concession areas while other Indonesian companies, such as PT Rimba Makmur 
Utara, have obtained concession licenses for peatland restoration in Sumatra and Kalimantan 
with financing from donors and investors (Barbier and Burgess 2021; Jong 2023; Leo et al. 2024; 
Miller 2022; Sari et al. 2021).
Despite substantial financial and time investment in peatland restoration in Indonesia, the 
government’s ambitious restoration hectare goal has not been met. This failure may be because 
most peat restoration projects do not fundamentally address the broader drivers of degradation 
such as drainage and ongoing agribusiness production on peatlands by corporations (Goldstein 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 119
2020; Wicaksono and Zainal 2022). Recent evidence from Greenpeace SEA has revealed that 
corporate restoration concessions such as APP have breached their restoration targets in their 
concessions, calling into question the efficacy of concession-based peatland restoration (Jong 
2023). Successful efforts have centered community-led approaches, which Dilva Terzano and 
colleagues (2022) have termed the “5-r” approach, embedding community participation across 
all stages of peatland restoration, including rewetting, fire reduction, revegetation, revitalization 
of local livelihoods, and reporting and monitoring. Such an approach is crucial in moving peat -
land restoration past the “business as usual” scenario, where restoration fails to address the root 
cause of degradation (Girkin et al. 2023).
Deltas
SEA ’s deltas provide critical ecosystem services, livelihoods, and resources to millions of people 
particularly in the Mekong Delta (Li et al. 2017). With headwaters in the Tibetan Plateau, the 
Mekong River winds through Southwest China, Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, and Thailand, 
before fanning out in a delta in Southwest Vietnam. Water intensive agricultural practices, like 
paddy farming and shrimp aquaculture in Thailand and Cambodia (Tromboni et al. 2021), the 
future development of hydropower dams in the region (Arias et al. 2014, Y oshida et al. 2020), 
and deforestation across the region (Li et al. 2022) threaten the tributaries of the river basin. 
This compounds water stress on the floodplains of the Mekong Delta, one of the largest deltas 
in the world. Conceptualized as a “hydro-agricultural machine” (Biggs et al. 2009: 216), the 
delta is an agricultural powerhouse due to its rich alluvial soils. For over one thousand years 
the delta has been modified for transportation, and later for the construction of large-scale 
canals and drainage systems for agriculture in the mid-nineteenth century by French colo -
nizers, which the central government expanded after independence (Biggs et al. 2009). Since 
the mid-1970s, state-led irrigation and land reclamation for rice production has dramatically 
altered the delta’s hydrological regime. One of the most populated regions of Vietnam due to 
the success of alluvial rice agriculture, the Mekong’s transformation into a rice bowl has short -
ened the flooding period of the Mekong from 12 months to 4 to 6 months and caused increas -
ing salinity levels (Le et al. 2018; Nguyen et al. 2016). By the early 2000s, only 1.5 percent of 
the Mekong’s wetlands existed in their natural or semi-natural state prior to rice intensification 
(Nguyen et al. 2016).
Delta degradation and climate change exacerbate flooding, sea-level rise, and storm surges 
in the region, causing saltwater intrusion into groundwater systems as well as significant out-  
migration from the delta, which can lead to geopolitical conflict (Beban and Gorman 2015; Xiao 
et al. 2021). In turn, restoration efforts seek to restore ecosystem services for climate functions. 
While most delta projects have been NGO- and state-funded, the large-scale projected future 
expansion of delta restoration will also be corporately financed (Canning et al. 2021; Correa and 
Jansen 2021; World Bank 2020). The private equity firm Mekong Capital, for instance, is raising 
two hundred million dollars for Mekong restoration projects focused on the regeneration of 
forests (Ngui 2023).
Like restoration projects in peatlands, delta restoration establishes pre-disturbance hydro -
logical functions, including constructing dikes and canals to retain monsoon rainwaters, which 
maintain moisture levels in seedling nurseries (Beilfuss and Barzen 1994). Maintaining hydro -
logical balance maintenance is a complex technological system, referring to the hydraulic net -
work of canals, flood embankments, sluice gates, and pumping stations (Staveren et al. 2018). 
Restoration research projects in the delta have examined the construction of bamboo T-Fences 
and dikes for breakwaters (Albers and Schmitt 2015) and structural protection measures against 
erosion used to stimulate hydrodynamics and maintain shoreline integrity, which reduce wave 
120 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
stress and increase sedimentation (ibid.). Delta restoration also includes the revegetation of 
native plant ecosystems (Tinh et al. 2022), which shape the hydrodynamics and sediment trans -
port of the Mekong Delta (Fagherazzi et al. 2017). Beyond the Mekong, other smaller deltas 
in SEA are undergoning vegetative restoration, including in the Red River Delta in Northern 
Vietnam (Long et al. 2021) and in the Mahakam Delta in Indonesia (Powell and Osbeck, 2010).
Mangrove Ecosystems
Over 30 percent of the world’s coastal mangrove ecosystems are in SEA (Friess et al. 2016) with 
20 percent of the global total in Indonesia (Sasmito et al. 2023). Mangrove ecosystems consist 
of mangrove trees, their carbon-rich anoxic soils, and the dynamic flows of brackish water that 
provide nutrients and moisture to a variety of species that inhabit mangroves’ bulbous roots. 
The rate of mangrove degradation in SEA is among the highest in the world. As with other 
forms of wetland conversion, mangrove deforestation drivers include land use change for agri -
cultural development, including rice paddies and oil palm plantations, and aquaculture devel -
opment, such as shrimp and fish farming, as well as logging and timber production, oil and gas 
extraction, and urban development (Richards and Friess 2016). Early revegetation efforts in 
the region included mangrove timber stock replanting in the Philippines in the 1930s (Walters 
2003) and mangrove seedling planting in 1978 in Agent Orange-impacted areas in Vietnam 
(Veettil et al. 2019).
Recently, mangrove restoration is moving from plot-based reforestation (direct planting) 
towards incorporating hydrological rehabilitation and ecological engineering (Gerona-Daga 
and Salmo, 2022; Ellison et al. 2020). While direct planting is still the predominant form of 
mangrove restoration, new mangrove restoration projects are integrating hydrological rehabil -
itation and coastal engineering methods to re-establish hydrological balance. We see this as 
connected to the growing new paradigm of mangrove governance (Sidik et al. 2023), which 
frames Southeast Asian mangrove and seagrass ecosystems as “blue carbon, ” or natural-climate 
solutions that can store atmospherically significant amounts of carbon (Alongi et al. 2016, Friess 
et al. 2022; Macreadie et al. 2021). According to Gerona-Daga and Salmo (2022) Indonesia leads 
in studies on hydrological rehabilitation methods, this can include making physical changes to 
the ecosystem to encourage tidal inundation or change surface elevation (Oh et al. 2017), while 
studies in Vietnamand Malaysia, incorporate coastal engineering such as constructing sea dikes 
and breakwaters or making use of groins, mollusks, and bamboo fences (Albers and Schmitt 
2015;Nguyen et al. 2022; Phong 2022).
In many instances, mangrove restoration has encountered challenges due to governance 
issues, lack of community engagement and inadequate hydrological preparation (Friess et al. 
2016; Mursyid et al. 2021; Sasmito et al. 2023; Suyadi et al. 2023). In the Philippines, large-
scale mangrove plantation schemes using only one species of mangrove tree have failed due 
to the inability to achieve the correct estuarine conditions for the saplings and the lack of 
post-planting management plans (Barnuevo et al. 2017). In Indonesia, issues in scientific 
knowledge transfer to local communities has challenged project implementation and results 
(Dharmawan et al. 2017). Nevertheless, attempts at mangrove restoration continue to expand, 
including Singapore’s OneMillion Trees initiative in the Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve and 
Kranji marshes (Parks 2019). This increase is driven by rising policy interest and scientific evi -
dence for the potential of blue carbon (Gerona-Daga and Salmo 2023; Sidik et al. 2023; Thor -
haug et al. 2020). For example, Indonesia’s mega-restoration project, Mangroves for Coastal 
Resilience, aims to rehabilitate 630,000 hectares of mangroves by 2024 (World Bank 2022). 
Such restoration efforts are bolstered by the financial promise of blue carbon markets (Friess 
et al. 2022).
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 121
Seagrass
The growing popularity of blue carbon has also drawn attention to seagrass restoration in the 
region as a potential nature-based solution to mitigate climate change and repair coastal infra -
structures (Rifai et al. 2023; Stankovic et al. 2021). Seagrass restoration initiatives in SEA are 
more limited than mangrove restoration even though the region has the highest diversity of sea -
grass diversity and habitat types in the world (Fortes 2018; Fortes et al. 2018). The seagrass hab -
itats found in SEA exist within shallow, partially enclosed coastal systems as well as in expansive 
estuaries (John et al. 2023). These areas experience significant daily and seasonal changes, such 
as light availability and salinity due to tidal fluctuations (Fortes et al. 2018). The distribution and 
health of seagrass meadows have suffered across the region due to increasing global tempera -
tures from anthropogenic climate change, eutrophication from dredging, pollution from sew -
age, mine tailings, and thermal effluent, and an uptick in coastal development (Sudo et al. 2021).
Much of the research on seagrass restoration has been in the Philippines, home to the largest 
extent of seagrass in SEA (Fortes 2018). During the early 1980s, the government of the Phil -
ippines sought help from the Food and Agriculture Organization to explore the possibility of 
restoring seagrass in the country (Paling et al. 2009). To achieve this, an international consultant 
was appointed to facilitate a technology transfer initiative, introducing techniques for seagrass 
restoration, and conducting a trial transplantation program, which had limited success (ibid). 
The most effective way to promote seagrass recovery is by addressing the root causes of distur -
bance (Talbot and Wilkinson, 2001). However, this approach can be challenging, particularly 
in cases where limited resources hinder comprehensive environmental management changes. 
As a temporary measure, they suggested that transplanting seagrass and implementing artifi -
cial seagrass projects could offer short-term solutions (ibid). In the early 2000s, the Philippine 
National Seagrass Committee (PNSC) was established to overseeall activities related to sea -
grass and specifically, the UNEP/GEF South China Sea Project’s goal of restoring 80 percent 
of the region’s seagrass cover to the previous 1995 level (Fortes, 2018). More recently, interest 
in seagrass restoration as a nature-based solution is also ramping up elsewhere in the region, 
including in Indonesia (Rifai et al. 2023) and Vietnam (Veettil et al. 2022), due to the framing 
of seagrass ecosystems as blue carbon. This has opened new opportunities for finance and is 
growing private investment and financial interest in seagrass restoration projects (Stankovic et 
al. 2021, Friess et al. 2022, Macreadi et al. 2021).
The Political Ecology of Southeast Asian Wetland Restoration
Conceptualizing restoration as infrastructural land repair reveals that it is a social and political 
process. As wetland’s ecological systems are repaired to a specific baseline (Ureta et al. 2020), 
this re-orders ecosystems services for precise climate configurations (Ramakrishnan et al. 2021). 
Such repair efforts aim to rehabilitate ecosystems to a previous environmental condition, as an 
anticipatory form of environmental governance (Hirsch 2020). However, as the previous section 
chronicles, such efforts continue to meet significant challenges, both in restoring ecosystems 
and in preventing the continuation of the original form of degradation. Thus, the process of wet -
land restoration in SEA often maintains the larger political-economic system that precipitated 
its degradation. Moreover, new efforts towards wetland restoration in SEA produces wetlands 
as NbS, turning the restoration of the very degradation that contributed to the climate crisis in 
the first place into new economic possibility. In this final section, we interrogate infrastructural 
land repair, first through examining repair’s process and then by unpacking repair’s political 
implications.
122 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Infrastructural Land Repair: Experts, Technology and Finance
Infrastructural land repair involves a range of actors including humans (scientists, farmers, 
governments, investors) and nonhumans, such as abiotic (water, climate, and soil) and biotic 
entities (plants and animals). Interactions between them are mediated through experts, tech -
nology, and finance and restore both the terrestrial and aquatic features of wetlands, producing 
wetlands as green and/or blue infrastructures to enhance specific ecosystem services. Here, we 
examine how expertise, technology, and finance maintain the political-economic status quo in 
the face of ecological crisis.
Expertise: Who?
The global governance of wetland restoration involves a range of actors, working across national, 
international, and intranational scales to facilitate the rehabilitation of wetland ecosystems. 
Key international actors include the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), which 
recently declared the international Decade of Ecosystem Restoration, Wetland International, 
IUCN, WWF, Environmental Defense Fund, The Nature Conservancy (TNC), and the World 
Bank, to name a few prominent examples. Inter- and intra-national efforts toward restoration 
are shaped by the Ramsar Convention, an intergovernmental treaty established in 1971 signed 
by 168 nations designating wetlands as crucial sites for biodiversity, conservation, and facilitat -
ing international cooperation toward sustainable wetland use (Stroud et al. 2022). The Ramsar 
Convention marks the only multilateral environment agreement on a singular ecosystem type.
The United States, as a center of restoration ecology (Martin 2022), has been a critical loca -
tion for the expansion of wetland mitigation banking (Lave and Doyle 2021) overseen both at 
state levels, and at the federal level by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), US Fish 
and Wildlife Service (USFWS), the National Park Service, and the US Army Corps of Engi -
neers. The Natural Resources Conservation Service manages the Wetland Mitigation Banking 
Program. Across Europe, the European Union has contributed over 23 million euros to the 
expansion of waterLANDs restoration project, funded through the EU Horizon 2020 Green 
Deal Call 7.1, aimed at enhancing wetland carbon storage and tailoring financial solutions for 
wetland restoration (WaterLANDS 2024). In China, the National Wetland Conservation Pro -
gram, which began in 2003, is the largest wetland rehabilitation program in the world. It is 
largely funded by the Chinese central government and managed by the Office of Wetland Con -
servation and Management of State Forestry Administration (Liu and Ma 2024). In SEA, central 
NGO actors include the World Bank, United Nations Development Program (UNDP), TNC, 
WWF, Wetlands International, the Asia Foundation, The Wildlife Conservation Society, Birdlife 
International, and Conservation International. Most recently, the World Resources Institute, 
established the Southeast Asia Climate and NbS (SCeNe) Coalition at COP28. This coalition 
“aims to democratize access to knowledge, technical assistance, and climate finance so that 
frontline organizations (FOs) across SEA can engage in NbS projects with full awareness and 
consent. ” The main output of SCeNe is their NbS Tool, signaling the rising interest in directing 
carbon investor funds toward FOs in SEA. While Chinese assistance in nature-based solutions 
play a role in SEA (Zhu et al. 2024), we find a clear gap in the literature chronicling the extent 
and specifics of Chinese investment in the financing of SEA ’s wetland restoration.
Wetlands for NbS is influential in international and national policy circles (Hamel and Tan 
2022; Ureta et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022), because of the authority of scientific expertise that 
is facilitated by the capacity of science to “travel” (Shapin 1998). Such expertise is produced by 
formally trained scientists, engineers, or environmental analysts and refers to the authority that 
delineates overall restoration plans and procedures, not the physical labor of restoration itself. 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 123
Wetlands do not pre-exist as infrastructures. They are actively framed as such through scientific 
expertise, which is then upheld and circulated in policy circuits (Goldstein 2016). The physi -
cal act of wetland restoration, however, can require re-engineering the landscape’s hydrology 
which determines the amount and frequency of water available in a landscape (Nugraha et al. 
2022; Tien et al. 2021). Hydrological restoration also draws on ecological engineering to ensure 
wetlands’ capacity to enhance ecosystem services. For example, Noralene Uy and Chris Tapnio 
(2021) invoke studies from ecological engineering to conceptualize the potential for seagrass 
and mangrove restoration as blue/green infrastructure in the Philippines. Moreover, the recent 
interest in seagrass and mangrove ecosystems as NbS (Lima et al. 2023; Rifai et al. 2023; Stan -
kovic et al. 2021) has focused on their carbon sequestration capacity above other ecosystem and 
cultural roles, whereby the ecosystems are primarily understood through their capacity to hold 
atmospheric carbon.
Investigating how expertise is mobilized in wetland restoration raises questions: one, how are 
wetlands conceptualized as degraded (who defines restoration?), and two, how are they man -
aged (restoration by whom?). Ecological restoration is an extension of green environmentalism, 
the conception that Nature can be returned to its original “baseline” through careful human 
management if this process is overseen by rational and objective experts (Lorimer 2017). For 
instance, in Benjamin Thompson’s (2018) work, he describes the structure, specificity, and elab -
orate degrees of expertise governing mangrove restoration in Thailand. Since 2004, mangrove 
management has been carried out by the Department of Marine and Coastal Resources, which 
is divided into over 45 technical “substations, ” each having a Mangrove Management Unit. In 
the case of the Mekong Delta, Jacob Weger (2019) describes how expertise “draws together 
networks of actors via shared interests and interpretations” through translation, and how expert 
knowledge travels across scales of analysis and intervention. Sarah Moser and Emma Avery 
(2021) demonstrate how expertise is mobilized in the new Forest City eco-city development 
project in Malaysia, which was built on reclaimed land and is constituted of four artificial 
islands along the strait of Meleka on top of one of the largest seagrass beds in Malaysian territo -
rial waters. They show how the eco-rhetoric of Chinese property developers maintains a form of 
“green” identity that claims to “bring the symbiotic coexistence between city and nature to a new 
height” (ibid.: 2) despite the questionable ecological impact of constructing a city on such a bio -
diverse ecological habitat. They also demonstrate how this normative and apolitical discursive 
framing may mask the multi-scalar politics of Forest City, instrumentalizing urban greening for 
Chinese economic, territorial, and geopolitical goals.
Restoration as a NbS render wetlands technical (Li 2007). Ecological engineers, scientists, 
and technocrats define ecological baselines, creating their metrics of comparison and facilitat -
ing restoration management. This is a form of “stewardship from above” (Huff and Brock 2023: 
10), which centers simplification, standardization, and technification. Expert scientists translate 
the complexity of wetlands into discrete variables that can be measured, modeled, mapped, and 
managed by transactional units, legible to financial and insurance markets (Goldstein 2020), 
supposedly securing the future by maintaining the present. This renders complex ecological 
functions and individuals into standardizable, legible, and quantifiable units (Nelson and Big -
ger 2022). Benoit Ivars and Jean-Philippe Venot (2019: 1040) describe how expertise can create 
new imaginaries of wetlands, making Myanmar’s Ayeyarwady Delta into a “global wetland, ” for 
example, for worldwide relevance that requires generic research and governance approaches.
Through technical expertise, dynamic wetlands are parceled into their ecosystem services: 
complex processes of gaseous exchange become reduced to carbon cycling, for instance. Such 
expertise can privilege scientific knowledge of an ecosystem over other lay, local, or Indigenous 
conceptions (Braun 1997). Recent critical work is beginning to examine the local knowledge 
124 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
of wetlands (Gorman 2023), but there is a dearth of scholarship on local perceptions of wet -
land restoration in SEA. Such expertise is also shaped by economic ends. As Goldstein (2016) 
describes, peatland scientists’ role in restoring degraded peat swamps in Indonesia delegiti -
mated corporate attempts toward agricultural land development but validated peat restoration 
in service of carbon sequestration for carbon markets, embodying a carbon-ontology  (Krzywo -
szynska and Marchesi 2020) of peat swamps. Experts oversee, and influence, the technologies, 
and the ways that technologies inform wetland restoration.
Technology: How?
An array of technologies shapes wetland restoration, reworking wetlands into green/blue infra -
structure. As infrastructure studies makes clear (Star 1999), infrastructures are never built from 
scratch but rather are installed on and in existing land and ecosystems. Technologies restore 
wetland’s ecological base to perform as infrastructure, digging, draining, and dredging to 
release the wetlands intrinsic ecological functions. These technologies are simultaneously physi -
cal and nonphysical. Physical technologies range from the cranes, trucks, and excavators used to 
encourage tidal inundation, alter surface elevation, and dig canals to the sea dikes, break  waters, 
groins, mollusks, and bamboo fences constructed to encourage tidal inundation or change sur -
face elevation, used to manage the moisture regime (Nugraha et al. 2022). In Morita’s (2016) 
examination of how the Chao Phraya Delta in Thailand was made into aquatic infrastructure, 
he describes irrigation technologies that managed the flow of water in the delta to reduce flood -
ing. Anja Nygren and Anu Lounela (2023: 297) describe how, through the processes of “dredg -
ing, draining, drying, sedimentation and salinization, ” these technologies over-emphasize the 
hydrological components of wetlands. This privileges a water-centric conception of wetland 
ecosystems that obfuscates issues of land tenure and control, exacerbating local environmental 
vulnerabilities.
Nonphysical technologies refer to both the digital technologies and technologies of gover -
nance to restore wetlands into infrastructures. Restoration scientists and policy experts use a 
range of digital technologies—GIS, satellite imagery, remote sensing, and component surveys—
to develop the idea of wetlands as infrastructures, and which can enumerate, monitor, and track 
the ecological services that wetlands provide, such as carbon. In Indonesia’s peatlands, Gold -
stein (2020) shows how satellite imagery and remote sensing creates new volumes of governable 
space. This process is an example of what Tania Li (2014) describes as statistical picturing: using 
technologies, land can be assembled into a new form and valued. The technologies of gover -
nance that restore wetlands into infrastructures include institutional arrangements, legal frame -
works, and political systems that invoke restoration as an NbS solution. These technologies, or 
what Li (ibid.) calls “inscription devices, ” restructure the social relations of wetlands, expanding 
its network of actors and the wetlands’ perceived potential for value.
As Huff and Brock (2023) have noted, restoration necessitates new technologies of inscrip -
tion, such as satellite imagery and remote sensing, to track and quantify repair and thus enable 
financial valuation. Rini Astuti (2020: 284) describes how restoration in Indonesia’s peatlands 
requires new technologies of governance, which produce new spatio-ecological units such as 
“peatland hydrological unit, peatland ecosystem function and peat dome peak. ” Such units 
manipulate dynamic ecosystem processes so they can be legible to capital. Such technologies are 
becoming central to the restoration for mangrove and seagrass ecosystems as well, with the use 
of aerial drone imagery to quantify the potential carbon stocks of coastal ecosystems (Fakhrur -
rozi et al. 2023; Kidangoor 2023). However, the use of such digital technologies is often for pro -
cesses that preclude easy quantification, such as carbon sequestration potentials. As Goldstein 
(2022) has described in the example of peatland restoration, these scientific uncertainties can 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 125
be incompatible with financial uncertainty, creating a feedback loop of data collection that stalls 
the investment and thus success of these restoration projects.
Finance: Why?
In reviewing scientific and critical social science literature on wetland restoration in SEA, we 
find that framing restoration as a NbS, as blue/green infrastructure, or as a bundle of discrete 
ecosystem services, is generating new financial engagement with wetland ecosystems. This offers 
novel ways for wetlands and their ecological processes to be useful to capital. Infrastructural land 
repair  revalues the land, labor, and capital that has been eroded by monetizing the use-value of 
each within repair through the expertise, technologies, and finance that underpin restoration. 
In this way, wetland restoration is undertaken to “to address crises brought about by patterns of 
capital accumulation and uneven development, such as environmental degradation, changes in 
labor markets, and an unwillingness by actors to absorb costs of producing negative environ -
mental externalities” (Cohen and Bakker 2014: 133). Indeed, the growing financialization of 
wetland restoration in SEA demonstrates this. With the increase vision of peatland restoration 
as a NbS (Strack et al. 2022; Tan et al. 2022), peatland restoration efforts in Indonesia have been 
seen as a new possibility for innovative climate finance, in large part due to its climate services 
(Bonn et al. 2016; Sari et al. 2021). The influence of finance within peatland restoration includes 
private investment in peatland restoration via restoration concessions (Buergin 2016; Miller 
2022) as well as REDD+ financing for carbon mitigation (Pham et al. 2021). In mangrove and 
seagrass ecosystems, the blue carbon framework offers the potential for new carbon market -
ing in developing the financial frameworks and mechanisms to implement blue carbon finance 
(Friess et al. 2022; Sidik et al. 2023), with SEA poised to be a global leader in Blue Carbon due to 
its high mitigation potential (Macreadie et al 2021). In 2023, the World Economic Forum (2023) 
signed the first partnership on blue carbon with the Indonesian government, to support efforts 
to scale up blue carbon finance. In the Mekong Delta, efforts toward climate adaptation and 
resilience are capital-intensive, and development projects rely on donor-driven climate finance 
to construct green infrastructures (Chandrasekharan Behr et al. 2020; Thomas 2023).
Such examples of financialization exemplify how restoration in SEA can act as a socio-  
ecological fix under capitalism (Castree and Christophers 2018; Ekers and Prudham 2017), con -
sistent with James McCarthy’s (2015: 2495) definition of a socio-ecological fix as “something that 
directly engages with and resolves, mitigates, or postpones a structural impediment—including 
any environmental one—to sustained capital accumulation. ” Capitalism creates barriers to its 
own future, in this case the degradation of wetlands through extractive industries, and thus, 
market-based solutions enable capital’s own expansion (Buscher and Fletcher 2020). Wetland 
restoration in SEA can thus be a socio-ecological fix for capital, which requires sinking large-
scale, long-term investments into landscapes (Ekers and Prudham 2017) and takes considerable 
time (Bayraktarov et al. 2016). Through the speculative practices (Bodin et al. 2022; Dressler et 
al. 2018) and possibilities of financing ecosystem repair, wetland restoration in SEA may enable 
degraded wetlands to become economically viable once again. While a socio-ecological fix is, by 
definition, capital invested in new locations or industries (Ekers and Prudham 2017), wetland 
restoration in SEA functions not just as a mechanism for accumulation but might also become 
a form of re-accumulation, generating second order “value from ruin” in the same landscapes 
left degraded by first-order capitalist extraction (Dressler et al. 2018; Knuth et al. 2019). Green 
and climate finance in SEA thus uses wetland restoration projects to provide ecosystem services, 
invoking an “economy of repair, ” in which “nature becomes valued not just for its use in produc -
tion or recreation, but also for its repair or restoration” (Huff and Brock 2023: 16). As Huff and 
Brock (2023) warn, this may lead to “accumulation by restoration, ” whereby nature is rendered 
126 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
re-investable through the financialization of its repair (Canning et al. 2021; Knuth et al. 2019). 
However, while the literature we reviewed does outline the increasing role of finance in wetland 
management, there are few empirical examples discussing the specific mechanisms of financial 
accumulation through which wetlands are restored. While conceptual framings, including Huff 
and Brock’s (2023), are helpful in offering a theoretical framework for understanding efforts like 
Blue Carbon as well as other carbon credit schemes engaged in SEA wetland restoration, more 
case-based, empirical work is needed to delineate how and to what ends, exactly, restoration 
enables new forms of capital accumulation in SEA.
The Limits of Repair: Maintaining Disrepair?
The process of infrastructural land repair is clearly political. As a novel socio-ecological fix, it 
upholds existing socio-ecological systems and relations, building the social, political, and eco -
nomic scaffolding for wetland restoration while simultaneously obscuring the political backdrop 
of repair. Infrastructural land repair offers wetlands as a solution to wetland degradation—and 
the current climate crisis more generally—in a way that precludes larger systemic analysis or 
reform. As Erik Swyngedouw (2010: 222) argues, socio-ecological fixes “make sure nothing 
really changes. Stabilizing the climate seems to be a condition for capitalist life as we know it to 
continue. ” This form of repair perpetuates the status quo, upholding and expanding the political-  
economic system that culminated in wetland disrepair in the first place , while  forging new 
inroads for capital accumulation as outlined in the previous section.
Thus, restoration in this sense, could be seen as an example of what Julie Guthman calls the  
limits of repair : maintaining a system amidst continuous change and crisis. She warns this form 
of repair could cause iatrogenic harm, whereby the solution itself exacerbates the very problems 
it is meant to resolve, as “problems arise along how the cures actually work” (2019: 23) This 
raises questions about how this process, through its financial potential, might result in land 
grabs and dispossession (Barbesgaard 2018) or, as we see in some cases in SEA, undermine the 
initial goal of ecosystem restoration itself. Despite ambitious wetland restoration efforts in SEA, 
much restoration still has not yet achieved its goals of either restoring ecosystems or enhancing 
ecosystem services. Restoration could therefore be emblematic of what Stephanie Wakefield 
and Bruce Braun term the katechon : “the permanent management of the present to hold back 
forces of change” (2018: 203). The katechon wards off chaos in a continual loop of crisis and risk 
management. In the katechon, there is no promise of a different future, possibility, or an end 
to this loop. The chaos of the climate crisis is created by the same order the katechon upholds.
However, this does not have to be the case for infrastructural land repair. Noel Castree and 
Brett Christophers (2018) offer a cautiously optimistic reading of ecological fixes and outline 
the potential for finance to rebuild alternative, less extractive systems, for instance. Webber 
et al. (2022) expand on this notion, outlining possible financial contours of reparative climate 
infrastructures. Ultimately, as wetland restoration efforts in SEA continue to proliferate, it is 
clear more critical social science research is needed to examine how it unfolds and to elucidate 
its larger political implications.
Conclusion
In this article, we chronicled the recent trend of wetland restoration in SEA in peatlands, del -
tas, mangrove, and seagrass ecosystems, identifying how restoration is used to ensure specific 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 127
ecosystem services for climate mitigation and adaptation. We suggest that restoration takes the 
form of infrastructural land repair , the process of restoring dynamic ecosystems for specific 
anthropocentric and economic aims, and parcels ecosystems into discrete ecosystem services 
through the expertise, technology, and finance that underpin restoration efforts. We underscore 
that, in general, wetland restoration in SEA maintains the same political-economic systems that 
resulted in wetland degradation in the first place. We also examined how restoration functions 
as a socio-ecological fix, highlighting the need for research that examines the growing world of 
restoration finance to ascertain if restoration by accumulation is already underway within SEA 
wetlands. As the United Nations recently issued a declaration for a global decade of restoration, 
wetland restoration worldwide is poised to expand (UN 2024). SEA is thus a valuable context 
to learn from. While there is much scientific scholarship on wetland restoration in SEA, there is 
less research from critical social scientists, which is needed to examine the social, political, and 
economic implications of such projects.
Following this review, we propose three ways we would like to see this literature move 
forward in the SEA context. First, while there is an abundance of scholarship that critiques 
financial tools and mechanisms theoretically, there remains a substantial need for crit -
ical scholarship that unpacks how financialization unfolds in practice through restoration 
efforts. Second, there is a lacuna in scholarly literature that examines the infrastructural 
labor required to enact restoration, including who is doing the physical repair, where they 
are coming from or located, and their remuneration (Randle 2022; Stokes et al. 2024). This is 
important, as insights into the labor of restoration is vital to understanding how restoration 
revalues land. Third, while much of the critical literature on restoration elucidates how repair 
may perpetuate injustice, we see a space for work on SEA wetlands that theorizes and reviews 
forms of repair that offer more reparative environmental futures (Webber et al. 2022). Indeed, 
repair is theoretically rich due to its double-sidedness (Corwin and Gidwani 2021; Jackson 
2014): in the act of repair there is also the hope for other, more caring socio-natural relations. 
In the US context, there is a growing literature on reparations and reparative forms of res -
toration, the possibilities of constructing “restoration otherwise” from the ruins of climate 
change (Barra 2024; Usher 2023). As wetland restoration continues to scale up across SEA 
and draws increasing attention of the financial sector, there is a clear need for scholarly work 
on and from the region that attends to how restoration can be engaged as a truly reparative 
climate solution.
 ◾ TAMAR LAW  is a PhD candidate in global development at Cornell University. Her research 
examines the political ecology of nature-based solutions to climate change in Indonesia, 
with a focus on blue carbon governance. She co-edited the volume Climate, Science and 
Society: A Primer  (Routledge, 2024). Email: tl432@cornell.edu
 ◾ JENNY GOLDSTEIN  is a geographer and assistant professor of global development at Cor -
nell University. Her research addresses the politics of knowledge and expertise in peatland 
restoration in Indonesia, and intersections of digital technology and environmental gover -
nance. She is co-editor of the book Nature of Data: Environments, Infrastructures, Politics  
(University of Nebraska Press, 2022). Email: goldstein@cornell.edu
128 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
 ◾ REFERENCES
Albers, T., and K. Schmitt. 2015. “Dyke Design, Floodplain Restoration and Mangrove Co-Management 
as Parts of an Area Coastal Protection Strategy for the Mud Coasts of the Mekong Delta, Vietnam. ” 
Wetlands Ecology and Management  23 (6): 991–1004.
Alexander, Sasha, James Aronson, Oliver Whaley, and David Lamb. 2016. “The Relationship between 
Ecological Restoration and the Ecosystem Services Concept. ” Ecology and Society  21 (1): 34. https:// 
www.jstor.org/stable/26270353 .
Allison, Stuart K., and Stephen D. Murphy. 2017. Routledge Handbook of Ecological and Environmental 
Restoration . Routledge London.
Alongi, Daniel M., Daniel Murdiyarso, James W . Fourqurean, John Boone Kauffman, Andreas Huta -
haean, Stephen Crooks, Catherine E. Lovelock, Jennifer Howard, Dorothee Herr, and Miguel Fortes. 
2016. “Indonesia’s Blue Carbon: A Globally Significant and Vulnerable Sink for Seagrass and Man -
grove Carbon. ” Wetlands Ecology and Management  24: 3–13.
Appanah, S., K. Shono, and B. Durst. 2015. “Restoration of Forests and Degraded Lands in Southeast 
Asia 1. ” Unasylva  66 (245). Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: 52.
Appanah, Simmathiri, David Lamb, Patrick Durst, Tint Lwin Thaung, Cesar Sabogal, David Gritten, 
Bernhard Mohns, Julian Atkinson, and Kenichi Shono. 2016. “Forest Landscape Restoration for 
Asia-Pacific Forests: A Synthesis. ” Forest Landscape Restoration for Asia-Pacific Forests  1. https:// 
www.fao.org/3/i5412e/i5412e.pdf#page=11 .
Arias, Mauricio E., Thomas A. Cochrane, Matti Kummu, Hannu Lauri, Gordon W . Holtgrieve, Jorma 
Koponen, and Thanapon Piman. 2014. “Impacts of Hydropower and Climate Change on Drivers of 
Ecological Productivity of Southeast Asia’s Most Important Wetland. ” Ecological Modelling  272 (Jan -
uary): 252–263. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2013.10.015 .
Astuti, Rini. 2020. “Fixing Flammable Forest: The Scalar Politics of Peatland Governance and Restora -
tion in Indonesia. ” Asia Pacific Viewpoint  61 (2): 283–300. doi:10.1111/apv.12267 .
Barbesgaard, Mads. 2018. “Blue Growth: Savior or Ocean Grabbing?” The Journal of Peasant Studies   
45 (1): 130–149. doi:10.1080/03066150.2017.1377186 .
Barbier, Edward B., and Joanne C. Burgess. 2021. “Economics of Peatlands Conservation, Restoration 
and Sustainable Management. ” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY . doi:10.2139/ssrn.4695533 .
Barney, Keith. 2004. “Re‐encountering Resistance: Plantation Activism and Smallholder Production in 
Thailand and Sarawak, Malaysia. ” Asia Pacific Viewpoint  45 (3): 325–339. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8373 
.2004.t01-1-00244.x .
Barnuevo, Abner, Takashi Asaeda, Kelum Sanjaya, Y oshikazu Kanesaka, and Miguel Fortes. 2017. 
“Drawbacks of Mangrove Rehabilitation Schemes: Lessons Learned from the Large-Scale Mangrove 
Plantations. ” Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science  198. Elsevier: 432–437.
Barra, Monica Patrice. 2021. “Good Sediment: Race and Restoration in Coastal Louisiana. ” Annals of the 
American Association of Geographers  111 (1): 266–282. doi:10.1080/24694452.2020.1766411 .
Barra, Monica Patrice. 2024. “Restoration Otherwise: Towards Alternative Coastal Ecologies. ” Environ -
ment and Planning D: Society and Space  42 (1): 147–165. doi:10.1177/02637758221146179 .
Bayraktarov, Elisa, Megan I. Saunders, Sabah Abdullah, Morena Mills, Jutta Beher, Hugh P . Possingham, 
Peter J. Mumby, and Catherine E. Lovelock. 2016. “The Cost and Feasibility of Marine Coastal Res -
toration. ” Ecological Applications  26 (4): 1055–1074. doi:10.1890/15-1077 .
Beban, Alice, and Timothy Gorman. 2015. “Gaining and Maintaining Control: Vietnamese Migrants, 
Cambodian Elites and Strategies of Land Control along the Cambodian Borderlands. ” Land Grab -
bing, Conflict and Agrarian-Environmental Transformations: Perspectives from East and Southeast 
Asia, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand , 5–6.
Beilfuss, Richard D., and Jeb A. Barzen. 1994. “Hydrological Wetland Restoration in the Mekong Delta, 
Vietnam. ” Global Wetlands: Old World and New . Edited by: Mitsch, WJ, Elsevier, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands, 453–468.
Berlant, Lauren. 2016. “The Commons: Infrastructures for Troubling Times*. ” Environment and Plan -
ning D: Society and Space  34 (3): 393–419. doi:10.1177/0263775816645989 .
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 129
Besky, Sarah, and Alex Blanchette. 2019. How Nature Works: Rethinking Labor on a Troubled Planet . 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Bigger, Patrick, Jessica Dempsey, Adeniyi Asiyanbi, Kelly Kay, Rebecca Lave, Becky Mansfield, Tracey 
Osborne, Morgan Robertson, and Gregory L. Simon. 2018. “Reflecting on Neoliberal Natures: An 
Exchange. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  1 (1–2). SAGE Publications: 25–75.
Biggs, David, Fiona Miller, Chu Thai Hoanh, and François Molle. 2009. “The Delta Machine: Water 
Management in the Vietnamese Mekong Delta in Historical and Contemporary Perspectives. ” In 
Contested Waterscapes in the Mekong Region , 203–225. New Y ork: Routledge.
Bodin, Blaise, Valentina Garavaglia, Nathanaël Pingault, Helen Ding, Sarah Wilson, Alexandre Meybeck, 
Vincent Gitz, Sara d’ Andrea, and Christophe Besacier. 2022. “ A Standard Framework for Assessing 
the Costs and Benefits of Restoration: Introducing The Economics of Ecosystem Restoration. ” Resto -
ration Ecology  30 (3): e13515. doi:10.1111/rec.13515 .
Bonn, Aletta, Tim Allott, Martin Evans, Hans Joosten, and Rob Stoneman. 2016. Peatland Restoration 
and Ecosystem Services: Science, Policy and Practice . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Braun, Bruce. 1997. “Buried Epistemologies: The Politics of Nature in (Post)Colonial British Columbia. ” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers  87 (1): 3–31. doi:10.1111/0004-5608.00039 .
Braverman, Irus. 2018. Coral Whisperers: Scientists on the Brink . Oakland: University of California Press.
Breslow, Sara Jo. 2014. “Tribal Science and Farmers’ Resistance: A Political Ecology of Salmon Habitat 
Restoration in the American Northwest. ” Anthropological Quarterly  87 (3): 727–758.
Brock, Andrea. 2023. “Securing Accumulation by Restoration: Exploring Spectacular Corporate Conser -
vation, Coal Mining and Biodiversity Compensation in the German Rhineland. ” Environment and 
Planning E: Nature and Space  6 (4): 2134–2165. doi:10.1177/2514848620924597 .
Bryant, Gareth. 2018. “Nature as Accumulation Strategy? Finance, Nature, and Value in Carbon Mar -
kets. ” Annals of the American Association of Geographers  108 (3): 605–619. doi:10.1080/24694452 
.2017.1375887 .
Bryant, Raymond L. 1993. “Forest Problems in Colonial Burma: Historical Variations on Contemporary 
Themes. ” Global Ecology and Biogeography Letters 3 (4/6): 122–137.
Bryant, Raymond L., Jonathan Rigg, and Philip Stott. 1993. “Introduction: Forest Transformations and 
Political Ecology in Southeast Asia. ” Global Ecology and Biogeography Letters 3 (4/6): 101–111.
Buergin, Reiner. 2016. “Ecosystem Restoration Concessions in Indonesia: Conflicts and Discourses. ” 
Critical Asian Studies  48 (2): 278–301. doi:10.1080/14672715.2016.1164017 .
Buscher, Bram, and Robert Fletcher. 2020. The Conservation Revolution: Radical Ideas for Saving Nature 
beyond the Anthropocene . Brooklyn: Verso Books.
Canning, Adam D., Diane Jarvis, Robert Costanza, Syezlin Hasan, James CR Smart, John Finisdore, 
Catherine E. Lovelock, Suzie Greenhalgh, Helen M. Marr, and Michael W . Beck. 2021. “Financial 
Incentives for Large-Scale Wetland Restoration: Beyond Markets to Common Asset Trusts. ” One 
Earth  4 (7): 937–950.
Cardoso Da Silva, José Maria, and Emily Wheeler. 2017. “Ecosystems as Infrastructure. ” Perspectives in 
Ecology and Conservation  15 (1): 32–35.
Carse, Ashley. 2012. “Nature as Infrastructure: Making and Managing the Panama Canal Watershed. ” 
Social Studies of Science  42 (4): 539–563. doi:10.1177/0306312712440166 .
Carse, Ashley. 2016. “Keyword: Infrastructure: How a Humble French Engineering Term Shaped the 
Modern World. ” In Infrastructures and Social Complexity , ed. Penelope Harvey, Casper Jensen, and 
Atsuro Morita, 45–57. New Y ork: Routledge.
Carse, Ashley, and Joshua A Lewis. 2017. “Toward a Political Ecology of Infrastructure Standards: Or, 
How to Think about Ships, Waterways, Sediment, and Communities Together. ” Environment and 
Planning A: Economy and Space  49 (1): 9–28. doi:10.1177/0308518X16663015 .
Castree, Noel, and Brett Christophers. 2018. “Banking Spatially on the Future: Capital Switching, Infra -
structure, and the Ecological Fix. ” In Futures: Imagining Socioecological Transformation , ed. Bruce 
Willems-Braun, 154–162. New Y ork: Routledge.
Chandrasekharan Behr, Diji, Alwaleed Fareed Alatabani, Ashraf Bakry El-Arini, Farah Imrana Hussain, 
Shanthi Divakaran, Phuong Hoang Ai Nguyen, Nguyet Thi Thuy Hoang, Pham Duc Cuong, Ketut 
130 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Kusama, and Tao-SEAE Wang. 2020. “Mobilizing Financing for Climate Smart Investments in the 
Mekong Delta: An Options Note. ” World Bank Group. https://policycommons.net/artifacts/12527 
42/mobilizing-financing-for-climate-smart-investments-in-the-mekong-delta/1815301/ .
Chazdon, Robin L., Pedro H. S. Brancalion, David Lamb, Lars Laestadius, Miguel Calmon, and Chetan 
Kumar. 2017. “ A Policy‐Driven Knowledge Agenda for Global Forest and Landscape Restoration. ” 
Conservation Letters  10 (1): 125–132. doi:10.1111/conl.12220 .
Chiquoine, Lindsay P ., Scott R. Abella, Charles D. Schelz, Michael F. Medrano, and Nicholas A. Fisichelli.  
2024. “Restoring Historical Grasslands in a Desert National Park: Resilience or Unrecoverable 
States in an Emerging Climate?” Biological Conservation  289 (110387): 1-11. doi:10.1016/j.bioc 
on.2023.110387 .
Cho, Myung Sik, and Jiaguo Qi. 2023. “Characterization of the Impacts of Hydro-Dams on Wetland 
Inundations in Southeast Asia. ” Science of The Total Environment  864: 160941.
Clay, Nathan. 2019. “Fixing the Ecosystem: Conservation, Crisis and Capital in Rwanda’s Gishwati  
Forest. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  2 (1): 23–46. doi:10.1177/251484861982 
6576 .
Cochard, R. 2017. “Coastal Water Pollution and Its Potential Mitigation by Vegetated Wetlands: An 
Overview of Issues in Southeast Asia. ” In Redefining Diversity & Dynamics of Natural Resources 
Management in Asia, Volume 1 , ed. Ganesh P . Shivakoti, Ujjwal Pradhan, and Helmi, 189–230. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cohen, Alice, and Karen Bakker. 2014. “The Eco-Scalar Fix: Rescaling Environmental Governance and 
the Politics of Ecological Boundaries in Alberta, Canada. ” Environment and Planning D: Society and 
Space  32 (1): 128–146. doi:10.1068/d0813 .
Colls, A., Neville Ash, and Ninni Ikkala. 2009. Ecosystem-Based Adaptation: A Natural Response to Cli -
mate Change . Vol. 21. Iucn Gland, Switzerland. https://www.cakex.org/sites/default/files/documents 
/iucn_eba_brochure_0.pdf .
Colven, Emma. 2020. “Thinking beyond Success and Failure: Dutch Water Expertise and Friction in 
Postcolonial Jakarta. ” Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space  38 (6): 961–979. doi:10.1177 
/2399654420911947 .
Corwin, Julia E., and Vinay Gidwani. 2021. “Repair Work as Care: On Maintaining the Planet in the 
Capitalocene. ” Antipode , October, anti.12791. doi:10.1111/anti.12791 .
Correa, Andrade F. de, and L. J. M. Jansen. 2021. “Responsible Land-Based Investments in the Mekong 
Region. ” FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. https://policycommons 
.net/artifacts/1526615/responsible-land-based-investments-in-the-mekong-region/2214854/ .
Davidson, Nick C. 2014. “How Much Wetland Has the World Lost? Long-Term and Recent Trends in 
Global Wetland Area. ” Marine and Freshwater Research  65 (10): 934–941.
de Jong Edwin, and Gerben Nooteboom. 2010. “ Against ‘Green Development Fantasies’: Resource Deg -
radation and the Lack of Community Resistance in the Middle Mahakam Wetlands, East Kaliman -
tan, Indonesia, ” January. Brill. doi:10.1163/156853110X490935 .
Dempsey, Jessica. 2016. Enterprising Nature: Economics, Markets, and Finance in Global Biodiversity Poli -
tics. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Dempsey, Jessica, and Morgan M. Robertson. 2012. “Ecosystem Services: Tensions, Impurities, and 
Points of Engagement within Neoliberalism. ” Progress in Human Geography  36 (6): 758–79. doi:10 
.1177/0309132512437076 .
Denis, Jérôme, Alessandro Mongili, and David Pontille. 2015. “Maintenance & Repair in Science and 
Technology Studies. ” Tecnoscienza – Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies  6 (2): 5–15. 
doi:10.6092/issn.2038-3460/17251 .
Dharmawan, Budi, Michael Böcher, and Max Krott. 2017. “Endangered Mangroves in Segara Anakan, 
Indonesia: Effective and Failed Problem-Solving Policy Advice. ” Environmental Management  60: 
409–421.
Dohong, Alue, Ammar Abdul Aziz, and Paul Dargusch. 2017. “ A Review of the Drivers of Tropical Peat -
land Degradation in South-East Asia. ” Land Use Policy  69 (December): 349–60. doi:10.1016/j.landu 
sepol.2017.09.035 .
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 131
Dohong, Alue, Ammar Abdul Aziz, and Paul Dargusch. 2018. “ A Review of Techniques for Effective 
Tropical Peatland Restoration. ” Wetlands  38: 275–292.
Dressler, Wolfram H., Robert Fletcher, and Michael Fabinyi. 2018. “Value from Ruin? Governing Spec -
ulative Conservation in Ruptured Landscapes. ” TRaNS: Trans-Regional and-National Studies of 
Southeast Asia  6 (1): 73–99.
Ekers, Michael, and Scott Prudham. 2017. “The Metabolism of Socioecological Fixes: Capital Switching, 
Spatial Fixes, and the Production of Nature. ” Annals of the American Association of Geographers   
107 (6): 1370–1388. doi:10.1080/24694452.2017.1309962 .
Elias, Marlène, Deepa Joshi, and Ruth Meinzen-Dick. 2021. “Restoration for Whom, by Whom? A Femi -
nist Political Ecology of Restoration. ” Ecological Restoration  39 (1–2): 3–15.
Ellison, Aaron M., Alexander J. Felson, and Daniel A. Friess. 2020. “Mangrove Rehabilitation and Resto -
ration as Experimental Adaptive Management. ” Frontiers in Marine Science  7: 327.
Escobedo, Francisco J., Vincenzo Giannico, Chi Yung Jim, Giovanni Sanesi, and Raffaele Lafortezza. 
2019. “Urban Forests, Ecosystem Services, Green Infrastructure and Nature-Based Solutions: Nexus 
or Evolving Metaphors?” Urban Forestry & Urban Greening  37: 3–12.
Fagherazzi, Sergio, Karin R. Bryan, and William Nardin. 2017. “Buried Alive or Washed Away: The 
Challenging Life of Mangroves in the Mekong Delta. ” Oceanography  30 (3): 48–59.
Fairhead, James, Melissa Leach, and Ian Scoones. 2012. “Green Grabbing: A New Appropriation of 
Nature?” Journal of Peasant Studies  39 (2): 237–261.
Fakhrurrozi, Fakhrurrozi, Lambok Laurance, Muhammad Nur Rizki Fauzi, Fitrah Ramadhan, Idris 
Idris, Safran Yusri, Paryono Paryono, Wiwid Andriyani Lestariningsih, and Ayu Adhita Damayanti. 
2023. “Estimating Blue Carbon Stock: Mangrove and Seagrass Biomass Assessment in Tunda Island, 
Serang, Banten, Indonesia. ” In BIO Web of Conferences , 70:01009. EDP Sciences. https://www.bioco 
nferences.org/articles/bioconf/abs/2023/15/bioconf_macific2023_01009/bioconf_macific2023_010 
09.html .
Fisher, Brendan, R. Kerry Turner, and Paul Morling. 2009. “Defining and Classifying Ecosystem Services 
for Decision Making. ” Ecological Economics  68 (3): 643–653. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.014 .
Fletcher, Robert. 2020. “Neoliberal Conservation. ” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Anthropology . 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190854584.013.300 .
Fortes, Miguel D., Jillian Lean Sim Ooi, Yi Mei Tan, Anchana Prathep, Japar Sidik Bujang, and Siti Mar -
yam Y aakub. 2018. “Seagrass in Southeast Asia: A Review of Status and Knowledge Gaps, and a 
Road Map for Conservation. ” Botanica Marina  61 (3): 269–288. doi:10.1515/bot-2018-0008 .
Fortes, Miguel D. 2018. “Seagrass Ecosystem Conservation in Southeast Asia Needs to Link Science to 
Policy and Practice. ” Ocean and Coastal Management  159 (June): 51–56. doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman 
.2018.01.028 .
Friess, Daniel A., Benjamin S. Thompson, Ben Brown, A. Aldrie Amir, Clint Cameron, Heather J. Kold -
ewey, Sigit D. Sasmito, and Frida Sidik. 2016. “Policy Challenges and Approaches for the Conserva -
tion of Mangrove Forests in Southeast Asia. ” Conservation Biology  30 (5): 933–49. https://research 
-ebsco-com.proxy.library.cornell.edu/linkprocessor/plink?id=fdd66aa2-79ba-334c-84b9-39826d7d 
2c4b .
Friess, Daniel A., Jen Howard, Mark Huxham, Peter I. Macreadie, and Finnley Ross. 2022. “Capitalizing 
on the Global Financial Interest in Blue Carbon. ” PLoS Climate  1 (8): e0000061.
Gerona-Daga, Maria Elisa B., and Severino G. Salmo. 2022. “ A Systematic Review of Mangrove Resto -
ration Studies in Southeast Asia: Challenges and Opportunities for the United Nation’s Decade on 
Ecosystem Restoration. ” Frontiers in Marine Science  9 (September). doi:10.3389/fmars.2022.987737 . 
Ghofrani, Zahra, Victor Sposito, and Robert Faggian. 2017. “ A Comprehensive Review of Blue-Green 
Infrastructure Concepts. ” International Journal of Environment and Sustainability  6 (March): 15–36. 
doi:10.24102/ijes.v6i1.728 .
Girkin, Nicholas T., Paul J. Burgess, Lydia Cole, Hannah V . Cooper, Euridice Honorio Coronado, Scott J. 
Davidson, Jacqueline Hannam, et al. 2023. “The Three-Peat Challenge: Business as Usual, Respon -
sible Agriculture, and Conservation and Restoration as Management Trajectories in Global Peat -
lands. ” Carbon Management  14 (1): 2275578. doi:10.1080/17583004.2023.2275578 .
132 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Goldstein, Jenny E. 2016. “Knowing the Subterranean: Land Grabbing, Oil Palm, and Divergent Exper -
tise in Indonesia’s Peat Soil. ” Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  48 (4): 754–70. 
doi:10.1177/0308518X15599787 .
Goldstein, Jenny Elaine. 2020. “The Volumetric Political Forest: Territory, Satellite Fire Mapping, and 
Indonesia’s Burning Peatland. ” Antipode  52 (4): 1060–1082. doi:10.1111/anti.12576 .
Goldstein, Jenny E. 2022. “More Data, More Problems? Incompatible Uncertainty in Indonesia’s Climate 
Change Mitigation Projects. ” Geoforum  132: 195–204.
Goldstein, Jenny E., Laura Graham, Sofyan Ansori, Y enni Vetrita, Andri Thomas, Grahame Applegate, 
Andrew Vayda, Bambang H. Saharjo, and Mark A. Cochrane. 2020. “Beyond Slash‐and‐burn: The 
Roles of Human Activities, Altered Hydrology and Fuels in Peat Fires in Central Kalimantan, Indo -
nesia. ” Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography  41 (2): 190–208. doi:10.1111/sjtg.12319 .
Gopal, Brij. 2013. “Future of Wetlands in Tropical and Subtropical Asia, Especially in the Face of Climate 
Change. ” Aquatic Sciences  75: 39–61.
Gorman, Timothy. 2023. “The Art of Not Being Freshened: The Everyday Politics of Infrastructure in the 
Mekong Delta. ” Sustainability  15 (6): 5494.
Graham, Laura L. B., Wim Giesen, and Susan E. Page. 2017. “ A Common‐Sense Approach to Tropical 
Peat Swamp Forest Restoration in Southeast Asia. ” Restoration Ecology  25 (2): 312–21. doi:10.1111 
/rec.12465 .
Gruel, Charles R., and Edgardo M. Latrubesse. 2021. “ A Monitoring System of Sand Mining in Large 
Rivers and Its Application to the Ayeyarwady (Irrawaddy) River, Myanmar. ” Water  13 (17): 2331.
Guthman, Julie. 2019. Wilted: Pathogens, Chemicals, and the Fragile Future of the Strawberry Industry . 
Vol. 6. Oakland: University of California Press.
Hamel, Perrine, and Leanne Tan. 2022. “Blue–Green Infrastructure for Flood and Water Quality Man -
agement in Southeast Asia: Evidence and Knowledge Gaps. ” Environmental Management  69 (4): 
699–718. doi:10.1007/s00267-021-01467-w .
Hansson, Amanda, and Paul Dargusch. 2018. “ An Estimate of the Financial Cost of Peatland Restoration 
in Indonesia. ” Case Studies in the Environment  2 (1): 1–8. doi:10.1525/cse.2017.000695 .
Hawkins, Gay, and Gillian Paxton. 2019. “Infrastructures of Conservation: Provoking New Natures with 
Predator Fencing. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  2 (4): 1009–28. doi:10.1177/2514 
848619866078 .
Hetherington, Kregg. 2018. Infrastructure, Environment, and Life in the Anthropocene . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.
Higgs, Eric, Donald A Falk, Anita Guerrini, Marcus Hall, Jim Harris, Richard J Hobbs, Stephen T Jack -
son, Jeanine M Rhemtulla, and William Throo 2014. “The Changing Role of History in Restoration 
Ecology. ” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment  12 (9): 499–506. doi:10.1890/110267 .
Hirsch, Shana L. 2020. “ Anticipatory Practices: Shifting Baselines and Environmental Imaginaries of 
Ecological Restoration in the Columbia River Basin. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and 
Space  3 (1): 40–57. doi:10.1177/2514848619857523 .
Holtedahl, Pernille. 2023. “Nature Investment as a Response to the Climate Crisis: Opportunities in 
Southeast Asia. ” https://www.singaporegreenfinance.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/Nature- 
Investment-as-a-Response-to-the-Climate-Crisis-Opportunities-in-Southeast-Asia.pdf .
Huff, Amber. 2023. “Frictitious Commodities: Virtuality, Virtue and Value in the Carbon Economy of 
Repair. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  6 (4): 2203–2228. doi:10.1177/25148486211 
015056 .
Huff, Amber, and Andrea Brock. 2023. “Introduction: Accumulation by Restoration and Political Ecolo -
gies of Repair. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  6 (4): 2113–2133. doi:10.1177/25148 
486231168393 .
Hughes, Alice C. 2017. “Understanding the Drivers of Southeast Asian Biodiversity Loss. ” Ecosphere   
8 (1): e01624. doi:10.1002/ecs2.1624 .
Imai, Nobuo, Takuya Furukawa, Riyou Tsujino, Shumpei Kitamura, and Takakazu Yumoto. 2018. 
“Factors Affecting Forest Area Change in Southeast Asia during 1980–2010. ” PLoS One  13 (5): 
e0197391.
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 133
Ivars, Benoit, and Jean-Philippe Venot. 2019. “Grounded and Global: Water Infrastructure Develop-  
ment and Policymaking in the Ayeyarwady Delta, Myanmar. ” Water Alternatives  12 (3): 1038–  
1063.
IUCN, 2022. Indo-Burma Ramsar Regional Initiative (IBRRI). https://iucn.org/our-work/region/asia 
/our-work/water-and-wetlands/indo-burma-ramsar-regional-initiative-ibrri . Accessed June 2023. 
Jackson, Steven. 2014. “Rethinking Repair. ” In Media Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materi -
ality, and Society , ed. Tarleton Gillespie, Pablo J. Boczkowski, and Kirsten A. Foot, 221–239. Cam -
bridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Jensen, Casper Bruun. 2017. “ Amphibious Worlds: Environments, Infrastructures, Ontologies. ” Engaging 
Science, Technology, and Society  3: 224–234.
John, Akbar, Bryan Nelson Raveen, Hassan I. Sheikh, Abu Hena Mustafa Kamal, Balaji Vedharajan, 
Ragavan Pandisamy, Kannan Sivakumar, Anantharaman, and Chandani Appadoo. 2023. “Seagrass 
of Southeast Asia: Challenges, Prospects, and Management Strategies. ” In Climate Change and 
Urban Environment Sustainability , ed. Bhawana Pathak and Rama Shanker Dubey, 279–291. Disas -
ter Resilience and Green Growth. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore. doi:10.1007/978-981-19 
-7618-6_15 .
Jones, Holly, Peter C. Jones, Edward B. Barbier, Ryan C. Blackburn, Jose M. Rey Benayas, Karen D. Holl, 
Michelle McCrackin, Paula Meli, Daniel Montoya, and David Moreno Mateos. 2018. “Restoration 
and Repair of Earth’s Damaged Ecosystems. ” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  
285 (1873): 20172577. doi:10.1098/rspb.2017.2577 .
Jong, Hans Nicholas. 2023. “Report Alleges APP Continues Deforestation 10 Y ears after Pledge to Sto” 
Mongabay Environmental News . October 31. https://news.mongabay.com/2023/10/report-alleges 
-app-continues-deforestation-10-years-after-pledge-to-stop/ .
Kay, Kelly. 2018. “ A Hostile Takeover of Nature? Placing Value in Conservation Finance. ” Antipode   
50 (1): 164–183. doi:10.1111/anti.12335 .
Kidangoor, Abhishyant. 2023. “New Digital Tool Maps Blue Carbon Ecosystems in High Resolution. ” 
Mongabay Environmental News . June 12. https://news.mongabay.com/2023/06/new-digital-tool 
-maps-blue-carbon-ecosystems-in-high-resolution/ .
Kiely, L., D. V . Spracklen, S. R. Arnold, E. Papargyropoulou, L. Conibear, C. Wiedinmyer, Christoph 
Knote, and H. A. Adrianto. 2021. “ Assessing Costs of Indonesian Fires and the Benefits of Restoring 
Peatland. ” Nature Communications  12 (1): 7044.
Klein, Samantha,Hug James Sanghyun Lee, Sofi Courtney, Lisa Morehead-Hillman, Sallie Lau, Bryce 
Lewis-Smith, Daniel Sarna-Wojcicki, and Cleo Woelfle-Hazard. 2022. “Transforming Restoration 
Science: Multiple Knowledges and Community Research Cogeneration in the Klamath and Duwa -
mish Rivers. ” The American Naturalist  200 (1): 156–167. doi:10.1086/720153 .
Knuth, Sarah. 2019. “Cities and Planetary Repair: The Problem with Climate Retrofitting. ” Environment 
and Planning A: Economy and Space  51 (2): 487–504. doi:10.1177/0308518X18793973 .
Knuth, Sarah, Shaina Potts, and Jenny E. Goldstein. 2019. “In Value’s Shadows: Devaluation as Accumu -
lation Frontier. ” Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  51 (2): 461–466. doi:10.1177/030 
8518X18806112 .
Kolinjivadi, Vijay, Gert Van Hecken, Diana Vela Almeida, Jérôme Dupras, and Nicolás Kosoy. 2019. 
“Neoliberal Performatives and the ‘Making’ of Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES). ” Progress in 
Human Geography  43 (1): 3–25. doi:10.1177/0309132517735707 .
Kolka, R. K., D. Murdiyarso, J. B. Kauffman, and R. A. Birdsey. 2016. “Tropical Wetlands, Climate, and 
Land-Use Change: Adaptation and Mitigation Opportunities. ” Wetlands Ecology and Management  
24 (2): 107–112. doi:10.1007/s11273-016-9487-x .
Krzywoszynska, Anna, and Greta Marchesi. 2020. “Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils: Introduc -
tion. ” Environmental Humanities  12 (1). Durham, NC: Duke University Press: 190–204.
Kull, Christian A., Xavier Arnauld de Sartre, and Monica Castro-Larrañaga. 2015. “The Political Ecology 
of Ecosystem Services. ” Geoforum  61 (May): 122–134. doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.03.004 .
Lamb, David. 1994. “Reforestation of Degraded Tropical Forest Lands in the Asia-Pacific Region. ” Jour-
nal of Tropical Forest Science 7 (1): 1–7.
134 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Lamb, David, John Stanturf, and Palle Madsen. 2012. “What Is Forest Landscape Restoration?” In Forest 
Landscape Restoration , ed. John Stanturf, David Lamb, and Palle Madsen, 3–23. World Forests. Dor -
drecht: Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5326-6_1 .
Lamont, Timothy A. C., Jos Barlow, Jan Bebbington, Thomas Cuckston, Rili Djohani, Rachael Garrett, 
Holly Jones, Tries B. Razak, and Nicholas A. J. Graham. 2023. “Hold Big Business to Task on Eco -
system Restoration. ” Science  381 (6662): 1053–1055. doi:10.1126/science.adh2610 .
Larkin, Brian. 2013. “The Politics and Poetics of Infrastructure. ” Annual Review of Anthropology  42 (1): 
327–343. doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-092412-155522 .
Lave, Rebecca, and Martin Doyle. 2021. Streams of Revenue: The Restoration Economy and the Ecosystems 
It Creates . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Le, Thuy Ngan, Arnold K. Bregt, Gerardo E. van Halsema, Petra JGJ Hellegers, and Lam-Dao Nguyen. 
2018. “Interplay between Land-Use Dynamics and Changes in Hydrological Regime in the Viet -
namese Mekong Delta. ” Land Use Policy  73: 269–280.
Leo, Sandy, Muthia F. Hakim, Priyaji A. Pambudi, and Andreas Pramudianto. 2024. “The Role of an 
Ecosystem Restoration Company in Reducing Carbon Emission in the Perspective of the Carbon 
Pricing Scheme in Indonesia. ” In AIP Conference Proceedings . Vol. 3001. AIP Publishing. https://pu 
bs.aiorg/aip/acp/article/3001/1/080033/3266200 .
Li, Tania. 2007. The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and the Practice of Politics . Duke 
University Press. 
Li, Tania Murray. 2014. “What Is Land? Assembling a Resource for Global Investment. ” Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers  39 (4): 589–602. doi:10.1111/tran.12065 .
Li Xing. 2017. “Recent Evolution of the Mekong Delta and the Impacts of Dams. ” Earth-Science Reviews  
175 (December): 1–17. doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.10.008 . 
Li, Yubin, Danica Schaffer-Smith, Soe W . Myint, and Yuanhui Zhu. 2022. “Monitoring Ecological and 
Environmental Stress Patterns over the Past Two Decades in the Mekong River Basin. ” GIScience & 
Remote Sensing  59 (1): 1817–1836. doi:10.1080/15481603.2022.2139387 .
Lima, Do Amaral Camara, Mariana, Thaisa F. Bergamo, Raymond D. Ward, and Chris B. Joyce. 2023. “ A 
Review of Seagrass Ecosystem Services: Providing Nature-Based Solutions for a Changing World. ” 
Hydrobiologia  850 (12–13): 2655–2670. doi:10.1007/s10750-023-05244-0 .
Liu, Ningning, and Zhijun Ma. 2024. “Ecological Restoration of Coastal Wetlands in China: Current Sta -
tus and Suggestions, ” February. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2024.110513 .
Liu, Y ang, Huaiqing Zhang, Zeyu Cui, Yuanqing Zuo, Kexin Lei, Jing Zhang, Tingdong Y ang, and Ping Ji. 
2022. “Precise Wetland Mapping in Southeast Asia for the Ramsar Strategic Plan 2016–24. ” Remote 
Sensing  14 (22): 5730. doi:10.3390/rs14225730 .
Lock, Will. 2023. “Producing Nature-Based Solutions: Infrastructural Nature and Agrarian Change in 
San Martín, Peru. ” The Journal of Peasant Studies  50 (6): 2361–2380. doi:10.1080/03066150.2023.22 
09519 .
Lohmann, Larry. 1993. “Land, Power and Forest Colonization in Thailand. ” Global Ecology and Biogeog -
raphy Letters  3 (4/6): 180–91. doi:10.2307/2997768 .
Long, Chuqi, Zhi-jun Dai, Xiaoyan Zhou, Xuefei Mei, and Cong Mai. 2021. “Mapping Mangrove Forests 
in the Red River Delta, Vietnam. ” Forest Ecology and Management  483 (March): 118910. doi:10.1016 
/j.foreco.2020.118910 .
Lorimer, Jamie. 2017. “Probiotic Environmentalities: Rewilding with Wolves and Worms. ” Theory, Cul -
ture & Society  34 (4): 27–48. doi:10.1177/0263276417695866 .
MacKinnon, Kathy. 1996. The Ecology of Kalimantan . Periplus Editions.
Macreadie, Peter I., Micheli D. Costa, Trisha B. Atwood, Daniel A. Friess, Jeffrey J. Kelleway, Hilary Ken -
nedy, Catherine E. Lovelock, Oscar Serrano, and Carlos M. Duarte. 2021. “Blue Carbon as a Natural 
Climate Solution. ” Nature Reviews Earth & Environment  2 (12): 826–839. doi:10.1038/s43017-021 
-00224-1 .
Martin, Laura J. 2022. Wild by Design: The Rise of Ecological Restoration . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni -
versity Press.
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 135
McCarthy, James. 2015. “ A Socioecological Fix to Capitalist Crisis and Climate Change? The Possibilities 
and Limits of Renewable Energy. ” Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  47 (12): 2485–
2502. doi:10.1177/0308518X15602491 .
McElwee, Pamela. 2009. “Reforesting ‘Bare Hills’ in Vietnam: Social and Environmental Consequences 
of the 5 Million Hectare Reforestation Program. ” AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment  38 
(6): 325–333. doi:10.1579/08-R-520.1 .
McElwee, Pamela. 2017. “The Metrics of Making Ecosystem Services, ” September. doi:10.3167/ares.2017 
.080105 .
Miller, Michelle Ann. 2022. “Market‐Based Commons: Social Agroforestry, Fire Mitigation Strategies, 
and Green Supply Chains in Indonesia’s Peatlands. ” Transactions of the Institute of British Geogra -
phers  47 (1): 77–91. doi:10.1111/tran.12472 .
Miller, Michelle Ann, Prayoto Tonoto, and David Taylor. 2022. “Sustainable Development of Carbon 
Sinks? Lessons from Three Types of Peatland Partnerships in Indonesia. ” Sustainable Development  
30 (1): 241–255. doi:10.1002/sd.2241 .
Monteverde, S., M. G. Healy, D. O’Leary, E. Daly, and O. Callery. 2022. “Management and Rehabilitation 
of Peatlands: The Role of Water Chemistry, Hydrology, Policy, and Emerging Monitoring Methods 
to Ensure Informed Decision Making. ” Ecological Informatics  69 (July): 101638. doi:10.1016/j.ecoinf 
.2022.101638 .
Morita, Atsuro. 2016. “Infrastructuring Amphibious Space: The Interplay of Aquatic and Terrestrial 
Infrastructures in the Chao Phraya Delta in Thailand. ” Science as Culture  25 (1): 117–140. doi:10 
.1080/09505431.2015.1081502 .
Moser, Sarah, and Emma Avery. 2021. “The Multi-Scalar Politics of Urban Greening in Forest City, 
Malaysia. ” Urban Forestry & Urban Greening  60 (May): 127068. doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2021.127068 .
Mukul, Sharif A., John Herbohn, and Jennifer Firn. 2016. “Co‐benefits of Biodiversity and Carbon 
Sequestration from Regenerating Secondary Forests in the Philippine Uplands: Implications for 
Forest Landscape Restoration. ” Biotropica  48 (6): 882–889. doi:10.1111/bt12389 .
Mursyid, Harsanto, Muhammad Haidar Daulay, Andita Aulia Pratama, Dwi Laraswati, Nisa Novita, 
Anjelita Malik, and Ahmad Maryudi. 2021. “Governance Issues Related to the Management and 
Conservation of Mangrove Ecosystems to Support Climate Change Mitigation Actions in Indone -
sia. ” Forest Policy and Economics  133 (December). doi:10.1016/j.forpol.2021.102622 .
Nelson, Sara H, and Patrick Bigger. 2022. “Infrastructural Nature. ” Progress in Human Geography  46 (1): 
86–107. doi:10.1177/0309132521993916 .
Ngui, Y antoultra. 2023. “Vietnam’s Mekong Capital Plans Southeast Asia Climate Fund as Early as 2024 |  
Reuters. ” Reuters , May 30. https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/vietnams-mekong-capital-plans 
-southeast-asia-climate-fund-early-2024-2023-05-30/ .
Nguyen, Hoang, Paul Dargusch, Patrick Moss, and Da Binh Tran. 2016. “ A Review of the Drivers of 200 
Y ears of Wetland Degradation in the Mekong Delta of Vietnam. ” Regional Environmental Change   
16 (8). Springer: 2303–2315.
Nguyen, Nguyet-Minh, Duong Do Van, Duy Tu Le, San Dinh Cong, Nhat Truong Pham, Quyen 
Nguyen, Bang Tran, David Wright, Ahad Hasan Tanim, and Duong Tran Anh. 2022. “Wave Reduc -
tion Efficiency for Three Classes of Breakwaters on the Coastal Mekong Delta. ” Applied Ocean 
Research  129 (December): 103362. doi:10.1016/j.apor.2022.103362 .
NParks. 2019. “NParks Unveils Forest Restoration Action Plan for Nature Areas. ” National Parks Board . 
January 25. https://www.nparks.gov.sg/news/2019/1/nparks-unveils-forest-restoration-action-plan 
-for-nature-areas .
Nugraha, L. M., B. Putra, B. A. Marpaung, M. Nugraheni, and C. Agus. 2022. “The Role of Moisture 
Regime and Hydro-Topography on Tropical Wetland Ecosystem Management. ” IOP Conference 
Series: Earth and Environmental Science  1109 (1). IOP Publishing: 012086. doi:10.1088/1755-1315 
/1109/1/012086 .
Nygren, Anja, and Anu Lounela. 2023. “Remaking of Wetlands and Coping with Vulnerabilities in Mex -
ico and Indonesia. ” Water Alternatives  16 (1): 295–320.
136 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Oh, R. R. Y ., D. A. Friess, and B. M. Brown. 2017. “The Role of Surface Elevation in the Rehabilitation of 
Abandoned Aquaculture Ponds to Mangrove Forests, Sulawesi, Indonesia. ” Ecological Engineering  
100 (March): 325–334. doi:10.1016/j.ecoleng.2016.12.021 .
Ojani, Chakad. 2023. “Experimenting with Fog: Environmental Infrastructures, Infrastructuring Envi -
ronments, and the Infrastructure of Infrastructure. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  
6 (1): 24–41. doi:10.1177/25148486221101458 .
Osborne, Tracey, Samara Brock, Robin Chazdon, Susan Chomba, Eva Garen, Victoria Gutierrez, 
Rebecca Lave, Manon Lefevre, and Juanita Sundberg. 2021. “The Political Ecology Playbook for 
Ecosystem Restoration: Principles for Effective, Equitable, and Transformative Landscapes. ” Global 
Environmental Change  70 (September): 102320. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102320 .
Page, S. E., and A. Hooijer. 2016. “In the Line of Fire: The Peatlands of Southeast Asia. ” Philosophical Trans -
actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  371 (1696): 20150176. doi:10.1098/rstb.2015 .0176 .
Page, Susan, Shailendra Mishra, Fahmuddin Agus, Gusti Anshari, Greta Dargie, Stephanie Evers, Jyrki 
Jauhiainen, et al. 2022. “ Anthropogenic Impacts on Lowland Tropical Peatland Biogeochemistry. ” 
Nature Reviews Earth & Environment  3 (7). Nature Publishing Group: 426–443. doi:10.1038/s43017 
-022-00289-6 .
Pagunsan, Ruel V . 2023. “Greening with Exotics: Mount Makiling and Reforestation Discourses in the 
Twentieth-Century Philippines. ” Philippine Studies  71 (1): 17–36. doi:10.3316/informit.9986656924 
96402 .
Paling, Mark Fonseca, Marieke Katwijk, and Mike van Keulen. 2009. “Seagrass Restoration. ” In Coastal 
Wetlands: An Integrated Ecosystems Approach , ed. Gerardo Perillo, Eric Wolanski, Donald R. 
Cahoon, and Charles S, Hopkinson, 687–713. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier.
Palmer, Margaret A., Joy B. Zedler, and Donald A. Falk. 2016. “Ecological Theory and Restoration Ecol -
ogy. ” In Foundations of Restoration Ecology , ed. Margaret A. Palmer, Joy B. Zedler, and Donald A. 
Falk, 3–26. Washington, DC: Island Press/Center for Resource Economics. doi:10.5822/978-1-610 
91-698-1_1 .
Peluso, Nancy Lee. 1993. “Coercing Conservation?: The Politics of State Resource Control. ” Global Envi -
ronmental Change  3 (2): 199–217.
Peluso, Nancy Lee, and Peter Vandergeest. 2001. “Genealogies of the Political Forest and Customary 
Rights in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand. ” The Journal of Asian Studies  60 (3): 761–812. doi:10.23 
07/2700109 .
Pham, Thuy Thu, Moira Moeliono, Jennie Yuwono, Bimo Dwisatrio, and Patrícia Gallo. 2021. 
“REDD+ Finance in Brazil, Indonesia and Vietnam: Stakeholder Perspectives between 2009-2019. ” 
Global Environmental Change  70 (September): 102330. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102330 .
Phong, Nguyen Tan. 2022. “Offshore Structures, Sea Mud Accumulation and Mangrove Regeneration: 
Insights from the Vietnamese Mekong Delta, Vietnam. ” Ocean & Coastal Management  225 (June): 
106243. doi:10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2022.106243 .
Powell, Neil, and Maria Osbeck. 2010. “ Approaches for Understanding and Embedding Stakeholder 
Realities in Mangrove Rehabilitation Processes in Southeast Asia: Lessons Learnt from Mahakam 
Delta, East Kalimantan. ” Sustainable Development  18 (5): 260–70. doi:10.1002/sd.477 . 
Pradhan, N., H. Habib, M. Venkatappa, T. Ebbers, R. Duboz, and O. Shipin. 2015. “Framework Tool for 
a Rapid Cumulative Effects Assessment: Case of a Prominent Wetland in Myanmar. ” Environmental 
Monitoring and Assessment  187 (6): 341. doi:10.1007/s10661-015-4508-4 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2014. “Encountering Bioinfrastructure: Ecological Struggles and the 
Sciences of Soil. ” Social Epistemology  28 (1): 26–40. doi:10.1080/02691728.2013.862879 .
Puntasen, Apichai, Somboon Siriprachai, and Chaiyuth Punyasavatsut. 1992. “Political Economy of 
Eucalyptus: Business, Bureaucracy and the Thai Government. ” Journal of Contemporary Asia , Janu -
ary. doi:10.1080/00472339280000151 .
Ramakrishnan, Kavita, Kathleen O’Reilly, and Jessica Budds. 2021. “The Temporal Fragility of Infra -
structure: Theorizing Decay, Maintenance, and Repair. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and 
Space  4 (3): 674–695. doi:10.1177/2514848620979712 .
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 137
Randle, Sayd. 2022. “Ecosystem Duties, Green Infrastructure, and Environmental Injustice in Los  
Angeles. ” American Anthropologist  124 (1): 77–89. doi:10.1111/aman.13650 .
Richards, Daniel R., and Daniel A. Friess. 2016. “Rates and Drivers of Mangrove Deforestation in  
Southeast Asia, 2000–2012. ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  113 (2): 344–349. 
doi:10.10 73/pnas.1510272113 .
Rifai, Husen, Jay Mar D. Quevedo, Kevin Muhamad Lukman, Calyvn F. A. Sondak, Johan Risandi, Udhi 
Eko Hernawan, Yuta Uchiyama, Rohani Ambo-Rappe, and Ryo Kohsaka. 2023. “Potential of Sea -
grass Habitat Restorations as Nature-Based Solutions: Practical and Scientific Implications in Indo -
nesia. ” Ambio  52 (3): 546–555. doi:10.1007/s13280-022-01811-2 .
Ritzema, Henk, Suwido Limin, Kitso Kusin, Jyrki Jauhiainen, and Henk Wösten. 2014. “Canal Blocking 
Strategies for Hydrological Restoration of Degraded Tropical Peatlands in Central Kalimantan, 
Indonesia. ” CATENA  114 (March): 11–20. doi:10.1016/j.catena.2013.10.009 .
Salimi, Shokoufeh, Suhad A. A. A. N. Almuktar, and Miklas Scholz. 2021. “Impact of Climate Change on 
Wetland Ecosystems: A Critical Review of Experimental Wetlands. ” Journal of Environmental Man -
agement  286 (May): 112160. doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2021.112160 .
Sapkota, Lok Mani, Lina Jihadah, Mayumi Sato, Martin Greijmans, Kanchana Wiset, Ngamnet Aek -
tasaeng, Atcharaporn Daisai, and David Gritten. 2021. “Translating Global Commitments into 
Action for Successful Forest Landscape Restoration: Lessons from Ing Watershed in Northern Thai -
l a n d .”  Land Use Policy  104 (May): 104063. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.104063 .
Sari, Agus, Alue Dohong, and Budi Wardhana. 2021. “Innovative Financing for Peatland Restoration in 
Indonesia. ” In Climate Change Research, Policy and Actions in Indonesia: Science, Adaptation and 
Mitigation , edited by Riyanti Djalante, Joni Jupesta, and Edvin Aldrian, 247–264. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-55536-8_12 .
Sayer, Jeffrey, Agni Klintuni Boedhihartono, James Douglas Langston, Chris Margules, Rebecca Anne 
Riggs, and Dwi Amalia Sari. 2021. “Governance Challenges to Landscape Restoration in Indonesia. ” 
Land Use Policy  104 (May): 104857. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104857 .
Sasmito, Sigit D., Mohammad Basyuni, Age Kridalaksana, Meli F. Saragi-Sasmito, Catherine E. Lovelock, 
and Daniel Murdiyarso. 2023. “Challenges and Opportunities for Achieving Sustainable Devel -
opment Goals through Restoration of Indonesia’s Mangroves. ”  Nature Ecology & Evolution  7 (1): 
62–70. doi:10.1038/s41559-022-01926-5 . 
Seddon, Nathalie, Alexandre Chausson, Pam Berry, Cécile A. J. Girardin, Alison Smith, and Beth Turner. 
2020. “Understanding the Value and Limits of Nature-Based Solutions to Climate Change and 
Other Global Challenges. ” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  375 
(1794): 20190120. doi:10.1098/rstb.2019.0120 .
Shapin, Steven. 1998. “Placing the View from Nowhere: Historical and Sociological Problems in the 
Location of Science. ” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers  23 (1): 5–12. doi:10.1111 
/j.0020-2754.1998.00005.x .
Sharma, Shubhechchha and Y onariza. 2021. “Chapter 7—Evaluating Forest Reforestation Policies in 
Southeast Asia: A Case Study from Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand. ” In Natural Resource Gov -
ernance in Asia , ed. Raza Ullah, Shubhechchha Sharma, Makoto Inoue, Sobia Asghar, and Ganesh 
Shivakoti, 79–97. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-85729-1.00004-9 .
Sidik, Frida, Anissa Lawrence, Tonny Wagey, Franky Zamzani, and Catherine E. Lovelock. 2023. “Blue 
Carbon: A New Paradigm of Mangrove Conservation and Management in Indonesia. ” Marine Pol -
icy 147 (January): 105388. doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2022.105388 .
Siman, Kelly, Daniel A. Friess, Mark Huxham, Suzanne McGowan, Julia Drewer, Lian Pin Koh, Yiwen 
Zeng, et al. 2021. “Nature-Based Solutions for Climate Change Mitigation: Challenges and Oppor -
tunities for the ASEAN Region, ” October. https://napier-repository.worktribe.com/output/2814839 .
Smith, Benjamin, Nicholas J. Clifford, and Jenny Mant. 2014. “The Changing Nature of River Restora -
tion. ” WIREs Water  1 (3): 249–261. doi:10.1002/wat2.1021 .
Stankovic, Milica, Rohani Ambo-Rappe, Filipo Carly, Floredel Dangan-Galon, Miguel D. Fortes, 
Mohammad Shawkat Hossain, Wawan Kiswara, et al. 2021. “Quantification of Blue Carbon in Sea -
138 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
grass Ecosystems of Southeast Asia and Their Potential for Climate Change Mitigation. ” Science of 
The Total Environment  783 (August): 146858. doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146858 .
Star, Susan Leigh, 1999. “The Ethnography of Infrastructure. ” American Behavioral Scientist  43 (3): 377–
391. doi:10.1177/00027649921955326 .
Staveren, Martijn F. van, Jan M. van Tatenhove, and Jeroen F. Warner. 2018. “The Tenth Dragon: Con -
trolled Seasonal Flooding in Long-Term Policy Plans for the Vietnamese Mekong Delta. ” Journal of 
Environmental Policy & Planning  20 (3): 267–281. doi:10.1080/1523908X.2017.1348287 .
Stokes, Kathleen, and Mary Lawhon. 2024. “What Counts as Infrastructural Labour? Community Action 
as Waste Work in South Africa. ” Area Development and Policy  9 (1): 24–44. doi:10.1080/23792949 
.2022.2145321 .
Strack, Maria, Scott J. Davidson, Takashi Hirano, and Christian Dunn. 2022. “The Potential of Peatlands 
as Nature-Based Climate Solutions. ” Current Climate Change Reports  8 (3): 71–82. doi:10.1007/s406 
41-022-00183-9 .
Stroud, David A., Nick C. Davidson, C. Max Finlayson, and Royal C. Gardner. 2022. “Development of 
the Text of the Ramsar Convention: 1965–1971. ” Marine and Freshwater Research  73 (10). CSIRO 
PUBLISHING: 1107–1126. doi:10.1071/MF21312 .
Sudo, Kenji, T. E. Angela L. Quiros, Anchana Prathep, Cao Van Luong, Hsing-Juh Lin, Japar Sidik 
Bujang, Jillian Lean Sim Ooi, et al. 2021. “Distribution, Temporal Change, and Conservation Status 
of Tropical Seagrass Beds in Southeast Asia: 2000–2020. ” Frontiers in Marine Science  8 (July). Fron -
tiers. doi:10.3389/fmars.2021.637722 .
Sullivan, Sian. 2018. “Making Nature Investable: From Legibility to Leverageability in Fabricating 
‘Nature’ as ‘Natural-Capital. ’” Science & Technology Studies  31 (3): 47–76. doi:10.23987/sts.58040 .
Sutikno, S., R. Rinaldi, E. Saputra, M. Kusairi, B. H. Saharjo, and E. I. Putra. 2020. “Water Management 
for Hydrological Restoration and Fire Prevention in Tropical Peatland. ” IOP Conference Series: 
Materials Science and Engineering  933 (1). IOP Publishing: 012053. doi:10.1088/1757-899X/933 
/1/012053 .
Suyadi, Doni Nurdiansah, Jeverson Renyaan, Betalini Widhi Hapsari, Eka Martha Della Rahayu, Arwan 
Sugiharto, and Y aya Ihya Ulumuddin. 2023. “Better Approaches Are Required for Successful Man -
grove Restoration and Rehabilitation Program. ” AIP Conference Proceedings  2606 (1): 050001. 
doi:10.1063/5.0118836 .
Swyngedouw, Erik. 2010. “ Apocalypse Forever?” Theory, Culture & Society  27 (2–3): 213–232. doi:10.11 
77/0263276409358728 .
Talbot, Frank, and Clive Wilkinson. 2001. Coral Reefs, Mangroves and Seagrasses: A Sourcebook for Man -
agers . Cape Cleveland: Australian Institute of Marine Science.
Tan, Z. D., L. R. Carrasco, S. Sutikno, and D. Taylor. 2022. “Peatland Restoration as an Affordable 
Nature-Based Climate Solution with Fire Reduction and Conservation Co-Benefits in Indonesia. ” 
Environmental Research Letters  17 (6): 064028. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/ac6f6e .
Terzano, Dilva, Fabio Attorre, Faizal Parish, Patrick Moss, Fabrizio Bresciani, Roshan Cooke, and Paul 
Dargusch. 2022. “Community-Led Peatland Restoration in Southeast Asia: 5Rs Approach. ” Restora -
tion Ecology  30 (8): e13642. doi:10.1111/rec.13642 .
Thomas, Kimberley Anh. 2023. “Compelled to Compete: Rendering Climate Change Vulnerability 
Investable. ” Development and Change  54 (2): 223–250. doi:10.1111/dech.12756 .
Thompson, Benjamin S. 2018. “The Political Ecology of Mangrove Forest Restoration in Thailand:  
Institutional Arrangements and Power Dynamics. ” Land Use Policy  78 (November): 503–514. 
doi:10.10 16/j.landusepol.2018.07.016 .
Thorhaug, A., John Barry Gallagher, W . Kiswara, Anchana Prathep, Xiaoping Huang, Tzuen-Kiat Y ap, 
Sue Dorward, and Graeme Berlyn. 2020. “Coastal and Estuarine Blue Carbon Stocks in the Greater 
Southeast Asia Region: Seagrasses and Mangroves per Nation and Sum of Total. ” Marine Pollution 
Bulletin  160 (November): 111168. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2020.111168 .
Tien, H.V ., N. Tuan Anh, N. Tan Phong, and M.L. Minh Nhat. 2021. “Ecological Engineering and Res -
toration of Eroded Muddy Coasts in South East Asia: Knowledge Gaps and Recommendations. ” 
Sustainability (Switzerland)  13 (3): 1–10. doi:10.3390/su13031248 .
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 139
Tinh, Pham Hong, Richard A. MacKenzie, Tran Dang Hung, Truong Van Vinh, Hoang Thi Ha, Mai 
Huong Lam, Nguyen Thi Hong Hanh, Nguyen Xuan Tung, Pham Minh Hai, and Bui Thanh Huyen. 
2022. “Mangrove Restoration in Vietnamese Mekong Delta during 2015-2020: Achievements and 
Challenges. ” Frontiers in Marine Science  9 (December). doi:10.3389/fmars.2022.1043943 .
Thorslund, Josefin, Jerker Jarsjo, Fernando Jaramillo, James W . Jawitz, Stefano Manzoni, Nandita B. Basu, 
Sergey R. Chalov, et al. 2017. “Wetlands as Large-Scale Nature-Based Solutions: Status and Chal -
lenges for Research, Engineering and Management. ” Ecological Engineering,  Ecological Engineering 
of Sustainable Landscapes  108 (November): 489–497. doi:10.1016/j.ecoleng.2017.07.012 .
Tomscha, Stephanie A, Shannon Bentley, Elsie Platzer, Bethanna Jackson, Mairead de Roiste, Stephen 
Hartley, Kevin Norton, and Julie R. Deslippe. 2021. “Multiple Methods Confirm Wetland Resto -
ration Improves Ecosystem Services. ” Ecosystems and People  17 (1): 25–40. doi:10.1080/26395916 
.2020.1863266.
Tromboni , Flavia, Thomas E. Dilts, Sarah E. Null, Sapana Lohani, Peng Bun Ngor, Savoeurn Soum, Zeb 
Hogan, and Sudeep Chandra. 2021. “Changing Land Use and Population Density Are Degrading 
Water Quality in the Lower Mekong Basin. ” Water  13 (14): 1948. doi:10.3390/w13141948 .
Tsujino, Riyou, Takakazu Yumoto, Shumpei Kitamura, Ibrahim Djamaluddin, and Dedy Darnaedi. 2016. 
“History of Forest Loss and Degradation in Indonesia. ” Land Use Policy  57 (November): 335–347. 
doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.05.034 .
Turetsky, Merritt R., Brian Benscoter, Susan Page, Guillermo Rein, Guido R. van der Werf, and Adam 
Watts. 2015. “Global Vulnerability of Peatlands to Fire and Carbon Loss. ” Nature Geoscience  8 (1): 
11–14. doi:10.1038/ngeo2325 .
Twohig, Cian, Ylenia Casali, and Nazli Y onca Aydin. 2022. “Can Green Roofs Help with Stormwater 
Floods? A Geospatial Planning Approach. ” Urban Forestry & Urban Greening  76 (October): 127724. 
doi:10.1016/j.ufug.2022.127724 .
Uda, Saritha Kittie, Lars Hein, and Elham Sumarga. 2017. “Towards Sustainable Management of Indone -
sian Tropical Peatlands. ”  Wetlands Ecology and Management  25 (6 pp. 683–701): 701–683. doi:10.10 
07/s11273-017-9544-0 . 
UN. 2024. “ About the UN Decade. ” UN Decade on Restoration . http://www.decadeonrestoration.org 
/about-un-decade  (accessed 20 June 2023).
Ureta, Sebastián, Thomas Lekan, and W Graf von Hardenberg. 2020. “Baselining Nature: An Introduc -
tion. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  3 (1): 3–19. doi:10.1177/2514848619898092 .
Usher, Mark. 2023. “Restoration as World-Making and Repair: A Pragmatist Agenda. ” Environment and 
Planning E: Nature and Space  6 (2): 1252–1277. doi:10.1177/25148486221107221 .
Uy, Noralene, and Chris Tapnio. 2021. “Turning Blue, Green and Gray: Opportunities for Blue-Green 
Infrastructure in the Philippines. ” In Ecosystem-Based Disaster and Climate Resilience: Integration 
of Blue-Green Infrastructure in Sustainable Development , ed. Mahua Mukherjee and Rajib Shaw, 
161–184. Singapore: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-981-16-4815-1_7 .
Valach, Alex C., Kuno Kasak, Kyle S. Hemes, Tyler L. Anthony, Iryna Dronova, Sophie Taddeo, 
Whendee L. Silver, Daphne Szutu, Joseph Verfaillie, and Dennis D. Baldocchi. 2021. “Productive 
Wetlands Restored for Carbon Sequestration Quickly Become Net CO2 Sinks with Site-Level Fac -
tors Driving Uptake Variability. ” PLOS ONE  16 (3). Public Library of Science: e0248398. doi:10.1371 
/journal.pone.0248398 .
Van Oosten, Cora, Petrus Gunarso, Irene Koesoetjahjo, and Freerk Wiersum. 2014. “Governing Forest 
Landscape Restoration: Cases from Indonesia. ” Forests  5 (6). Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing 
Institute: 1143–1162. doi:10.3390/f5061143 .
Veettil, Bijeesh Kozhikkodan, Raymond D. Ward, Ngo Xuan Quang, Ngo Thi Thu Trang, and Tran Hoai  
Giang. 2019. “Mangroves of Vietnam: Historical Development, Current State of Research and Future 
Threats. ” Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science  218 (March): 212–236. doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2018 .12.021 .
Veettil, Bijeesh Kozhikkodan, Raymond D. Ward, Dong Doan Van, Ngo Xuan Quang, and Pham Ngoc 
Hoai. 2022. “Seagrass Ecosystems along the Vietnamese Coastline: Current State of Research and 
Future Perspectives. ” Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science  277 (October): 108085. doi:10.1016/j.ecss 
.2022.108085 .
140 ◾ Tamar Law and Jenny Goldstein
Wakefield, Stephanie. 2020. “Making Nature into Infrastructure: The Construction of Oysters as a Risk 
Management Solution in New Y ork City. ” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  3 (3): 
761–785. doi:10.1177/2514848619887461 .
Wakefield, Stephanie, and Bruce Braun. 2018. “Oystertecture: Infrastructure, Profanation, and the 
Sacred Figure of the Human. ” In Infrastructure, Environment, and Life in the Anthropocene , ed. 
Kregg Hetherington, 193–215. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Walters, Bradley B. 2003. “People and Mangroves in the Philippines: Fifty Y ears of Coastal Environmen -
tal Change. ” Environmental Conservation  30 (3): 293–303. doi:10.1017/S0376892903000298 .
Waltham, Nathan J., Michael Elliott, Shing Yip Lee, Catherine Lovelock, Carlos M. Duarte, Christina 
Buelow, Charles Simenstad, et al. 2020. “UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration 2021–2030: What 
Chance for Success in Restoring Coastal Ecosystems?” Frontiers in Marine Science  7 (February). 
Frontiers. doi:10.3389/fmars.2020.00071 .
Wang, Xiahui, Jinnan Wang, Bo Wang, Benjamin Burkhard, Lulu Che, Chao Dai, and Lijie Zheng. 2022. 
“The Nature-Based Ecological Engineering Paradigm: Symbiosis, Coupling, and Coordination. ” 
Engineering  19 (December): 14–21. doi:10.1016/j.eng.2022.07.004 .
WaterLANDS. 2024. “WaterLANDS: Water-Based Solutions for Carbon Storage, People and Wilder -
ness. ” https://waterlands.eu/project-overview/  (accessed 24 February 2024).
Webber, Sophie, Sara Nelson, Nate Millington, Gareth Bryant, and Patrick Bigger. 2022. “Financing 
Reparative Climate Infrastructures: Capital Switching, Repair, and Decommodification. ” Antipode  
54 (3): 934–958. doi:10.1111/anti.12806 .
Weger, Jacob. 2019. “The Vietnamization of Delta Management: The Mekong Delta Plan and Politics of 
Translation in Vietnam. ” Environmental Science & Policy  100 (October): 183–188. doi:10.1016/j.env 
sci.2019.07.011 .
Welden, E. A. 2023. “Conceptualising Multispecies Collaboration: Work, Animal Labour, and Nature-
Based Solutions. ” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers  48 (3): 541–555. doi:10.1111 
/tran.12593 .
Wicaksono, Agung and Zainal. 2022. “Peatlands Restoration Policies in Indonesia: Success or Failure?” 
IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science  995 (1): 012068. doi:10.1088/1755-1315 
/995/1/012068 .
Wiesner, Benjamin John, and Paul Dargusch. 2022. “The Social License to Restore—Perspectives on 
Community Involvement in Indonesian Peatland Restoration. ”  Land  11 (7). doi:10.3390/land110 
71038 . 
Wohlers, David C. 2019. “Prome, Burma—How a Village in Colonial Burma Became the Global Epi -
center of Scientific Forestry and Impacted the Founding of the United States Forest Service. ” Journal 
of Forestry  117 (5): 515–524. doi:10.1093/jofore/fvz045 .
Woods, Kevin. 2012. “The Political Ecology of Rubber Production in Myanmar: An Overview. ” Global 
Witness. http://www.burmalibrary.org/docs20/The_Political_Ecology_of_Rubber_Production_in 
_Myanmar.pdf .
World Bank. 2022. “New Project Will Support Large-Scale Mangrove Conservation and Restoration in 
Indonesia. ” World Bank . https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2022/06/07/new-proje 
ct-will-support-large-scale-mangrove-conservation-and-restoration-in-indonesia  (accessed 7 June 
2024).
World Economic Forum. 2023. “World Economic Forum Signs Partnership with Indonesia on Blue Car -
bon to Support National Climate Goals. ” World Economic Forum . https://www.weforum.org/press 
/2023/01/world-economic-forum-signs-partnership-with-indonesia-on-blue-carbon-to-support-na 
tional-climate-goals/  (accessed 19 January 2024).
Xiao, Han, Yin Tang, Haiming Li, Lu Zhang, Thanh Ngo-Duc, Deliang Chen, and Qiuhong Tang. 2021. 
“Saltwater Intrusion into Groundwater Systems in the Mekong Delta and Links to Global Change. ” 
Advances in Climate Change Research  12 (3): 342–352. doi:10.1016/j.accre.2021.04.005 .
Y ong, Ding Li, Jing Ying Kee, Pyae Phyo Aung, Anuj Jain, Chin Aik Y eap, Nyat Jun Au, Ayuwat Jear -
wattanakanok, et al. 2022. “Conserving Migratory Waterbirds and the Coastal Zone: The Future of 
Amphibious Land Repair  ◾ 141
South-East Asia’s Intertidal Wetlands. ”  Oryx  56 (2 pp.176–183): 183–176. doi:10.1017/S0030605320 
001374 .
Y oshida, Yuichiro, Han Soo Lee, Bui Huy Trung, Hoang-Dung Tran, Mahrjan Keshlav Lall, Kifayatullah 
Kakar, and Tran Dang Xuan. 2020. “Impacts of Mainstream Hydropower Dams on Fisheries and 
Agriculture in Lower Mekong Basin. ” SUSTAINABILITY  12 (6): 2408. doi:10.3390/su12062408 .
Yuwati, Tri Wira, Dony Rachmanadi, Pratiwi, Maman Turjaman, Y onky Indrajaya, Hunggul Yudono 
Setio Hadi Nugroho, Muhammad Abdul Qirom et al. 2021 “Restoration of degraded tropical peat -
land in Indonesia: A review. ” Land  10 (11). doi:10.3390/land10111170 .
Zhu, Annah Lake, Niklas Weins, Juliet Lu, Tyler Harlan, Jin Qian, and Fabiana Barbi Seleguim. 2024. 
“China’s Nature-Based Solutions in the Global South: Evidence from Asia, Africa, and Latin Amer -
ica. ” Global Environmental Change  86 (May): 102842. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2024.102842 .
