Vol.:(0123456789)Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics (2022) 35:2
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-021-09876-x
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot 
Without a Monocultural Mindset?
Lenora Ditzler1  · Clemens Driessen2
Accepted: 19 December 2021 / Published online: 22 January 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Robots are widely expected—and pushed—to transform open-field agriculture, but 
these visions remain wedded to optimizing monocultural farming systems. Mean-
while there is little pull for automation from ecology-based, diversified farming 
realms. Noting this gap, we here explore the potential for robots to foster an agro-
ecological approach to crop production. The research was situated in The Nether -
lands within the case of pixel cropping, a nascent farming method in which multiple 
food and service crops are planted together in diverse assemblages employing agro-
ecological practices such as intercropping and biological pest control. Around this 
case we engaged with a variety of specialists in discussion groups, workshops, and 
design challenges to explore the potential of field robots to meet the multifaceted 
demands of highly diverse agroecological cropping systems. This generated a spec-
trum of imaginations for how automated tools might—or might not—be appropri-
ately used, ranging from fully automated visions, to collaborative scenarios, to fully 
analogue prototypes. We found that automating agroecological cropping systems 
requires finding ways to imbue the ethos of agroecology into designed tools, thereby 
seeking to overcome tensions between production aims and other forms of social 
and ecological care. We conclude that a rethinking of automation is necessary for 
agroecological contexts: not as a blueprint for replacing humans, but making room 
for analogue and hybrid forms of agricultural work. These findings highlight a need 
for design processes which include a diversity of actors, involve iterative design 
cycles, and incorporate feedback between designers, practitioners, tools, and crop-
ping systems.
Keywords Open-field agriculture · Mechanization · Pixel cropping · Crop 
diversification · Co-bot
 * Lenora Ditzler 
 lenora1.ditzler@wur.nl
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 2 of 31
Introduction
A drive towards automation of both physical and cognitive work processes fuels 
increasingly ubiquitous applications of robots,1 for example in manufacturing, 
mobility, entertainment, health care, security, and food processing. In open-field 
farming2 too, robotization is being presented as inevitable (Blackmore et al., 2005; 
Harris, 2018). Commercial entities and research institutions are funneling tremen-
dous resources into the development, testing, and production of robotic equipment 
for open-field settings, although these tools remain largely in research and develop-
ment environments and have yet to gain traction among farmers the way applica-
tions in other agricultural realms have, such as automated milking systems (Bechar 
& Vigneault, 2016; Duckett et al., 2018). Nonetheless, in the wake of the COVID-19 
pandemic it has been projected that investments into automated open-field farming 
technology will only accelerate (van der Boon, 2020).
Reading popular media coverage of advances in open-field agricultural automa-
tion gives a particular view of the way crop husbandry is being conceived, reveal-
ing the dominant monocultural approach—cultivating a sole crop in a given area—
underpinning these developments. Recent headlines like those in The Guardian 
announce a particular direction for automation: “The rise of the robot farmer: We’ll 
have space bots with lasers, killing plants” (Harris, 2018); or the latest, “Killer farm 
robot dispatches weeds with electric bolts” (Carrington, 2021). The dualisms evi-
dent in these titles (crop/weed, nature/(agri)culture) assume a particular approach to 
farming that is both precipitated and perpetuated by narrowly delimited measures of 
success.
The dominant narratives promoting robots in open-field agriculture anticipate that 
they will optimize the efficiency of agricultural tasks and inputs, thereby decreasing 
the need for human labor and the environmental impacts of monocultural, indus-
trial agriculture in mechanized contexts (Bechar & Vigneault, 2016; Duncan et al., 
2021). The potential for robots to increase the sustainability of industrial-scale crop-
ping serves as a loud selling point (Duckett et al., 2018), as it is widely acknowl-
edged that industrial monocultures contribute heavily to global environmental deg-
radation and that alternatives are urgently needed (Campbell et al., 2017). Yet the 
expected gains in sustainability afforded by robotization are most often credited to 
the increase in precision with which they will apply agrochemicals or contain soil 
damage, and not to their capacity to facilitate agricultural practices that do not rely 
on environmentally problematic methods in the first place (Kuch et al., 2020; Miles, 
2019).
Crop diversification has long been employed in farming systems as way to 
enhance ecological controls and spread risk and is gaining increasing attention in 
1 We tentatively define robots as “perceptive programmable machines”, following Bechar and Vigneault 
(2017).
2 We use the term ‘open-field farming’ to refer to cropping systems in which plants (arable and vegeta-
ble crops) are grown outdoors in soil, as opposed to in controlled growth environments such as green-
houses.
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 3 of 31 2
research and policy agendas as scientific findings point to its potential to mitigate 
the negative ecological impacts of monocultural production (Beillouin et al., 2021; 
Tamburini et  al., 2020). Agroecological farming systems, which are grounded in 
ecological processes and knowledge and utilize various forms of crop diversifica-
tion as a foundational practice (Francis et al., 2003), have been shown to provide 
agronomically, ecologically, and socially viable alternatives to the industrial mon-
oculture model (Boeraeve et  al., 2020; Juventia et  al., 2021; van der Ploeg et  al., 
2019). Despite the fact that some form of mechanization (and possibly automation) 
will be necessary if diversified and agroecological approaches are to be translated 
and amplified in the industrialized contexts where they are most needed, technology 
makers have not yet focused intently on automation in such systems.
Following a well-documented trajectory of innovation in agriculture throughout 
which machines and farming systems have co-evolved (Magrini et al., 2019; Sassen-
rath et al., 2008), the majority of robots being developed for open-field arable and 
vegetable contexts are designed to function in monocultures and to fortify mutually 
reinforcing concerns of these systems: reducing labor inputs, increasing efficiency, 
and perfecting the uniformity of crop stands (Fountas et  al., 2020). Key features 
of robots that could make them uniquely suited for applications in diversified set-
tings—their potential to be light weight, modular or multifunctional, highly mobile, 
autonomous, and teachable—are not used to embrace heterogeneity, but are more 
often called in to further homogenize already monocultural production environments 
(Grieve et al., 2019). In addition to a lack of suitable tools being developed, there 
appears to be little pull from the agroecological, diversified farming realm to design 
automated farming machinery (Bellon Maurel & Huyghe, 2017), even though farm-
ers who are interested in diversifying their cropping systems have cited a lack of 
appropriate tools as a substantial barrier (Morel et al., 2020). The question of what 
automation and robots for diversified agroecological farming could look like, be, or 
do remains largely unexplored.
In this paper we interrogate the push towards automation in monocultures, the 
lack of pull from the agroecological farming arena, and the associated critical 
debates on the agronomic potential as well as political ecologies that robots may 
imply, by exploring the potential for automating agroecology. We work with three 
guiding questions which address the concerns of automation from complementary 
angles:
• How could robots be made to embody the practices, interactions, and concomi-
tant forms of care of farming agroecologically?
• What kind of (automated) machines would be considered suitable for the socio-
political embedding of agroecological farming?
• How should the design processes needed to induce a change of sociotechnical 
practices towards amplified forms of diversified agriculture (which may include 
automation) be envisioned?
We explore these questions by first briefly reviewing the contextual background 
that led us—a farming systems scientist researching the potential of crop diversity 
experimentally and a cultural geographer curious whether robotization could foster 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 4 of 31
ecological farming practices—to this inquiry. We then look at the guiding questions 
through the lens of an experimental effort at pixel cropping in The Netherlands, a 
nascent and complex intercropping method which offers a rich opportunity to under -
stand the ways in which automation in novel agroecological, diversified cropping 
systems might differ from that in established industrial monocultures. Within the 
Dutch case, we held a series of interactive happenings which engaged practition-
ers from various disciplines around the challenge of how to make a pixel cropping 
robot. We integrated methods and learnings from the agricultural systems design 
literature and invited a range of systems actors in an effort to generate a diversity of 
approaches and responses to the same site-specific challenge. We analyze the ideas 
and challenges for automation that pixel cropping generated among participants in 
these happenings. We then explore the broader implications of the pixel cropping 
case, identifying key questions and possible ways forward for thinking about auto-
mation which could address the agronomic, ecological, socio-political, and design 
challenges of diversified, agroecological, open-field farming more generally.
Historical and Conceptual Background
Robots Pushed into Monocultural Fields
Agricultural innovation has for the last century been generally characterized by a 
trend towards bigger, heavier machines (Keller et al., 2019). This trend is evident in 
certain directions being pursued for automation in open field farming, manifested in 
tools such as driverless tractors and tractor-mounted ‘smart’ systems and sensors. 
These tools often explicitly aim to reduce or eliminate the need for human opera-
tors, an objective related to both social concerns and the agronomic co-evolution of 
monocultures and machines. In agriculture, technological innovation is often accel-
erated by societal transformations which reduce the availability of farm workers and 
increase the need for labor efficiency (e.g. war, the abolition of slavery, changes in 
immigration policy, pandemics), resulting in advances in mechanization which bring 
particular political ecologies into being that foster large scale monocultures with 
concomitant environmental impacts and social transformations (Rasmussen, 1982; 
Vandermeer, 1986). When sole machines replace teams of human workers, the time 
required to perform cultivation tasks on a per hectare basis is dramatically reduced,3 
allowing farmers to cultivate larger tracts of land by transforming “walking tasks” 
into “driving work” (Schmitz & Moss, 2015). Farmers who invest in expensive and 
large machines often then face a need to specialize and upscale in order to maximize 
resource use efficiency, compete in economies of scale,4 and make their investments 
3 For instance, the time required to cultivate a maize crop (from soil preparation to harvest) mechani-
cally is approximately 6–10 h per hectare (WUR, 2009), compared to an estimate of more than 2000 h 
per hectare when done by hand in a less mechanized context (Ditzler et al., 2019).
4 The same pattern has been projected to hold for small-scale autonomous field equipment, particularly 
in places where safety regulations favor larger farm operations (Lowenberg-DeBoer et al., 2021).
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 5 of 31 2
worthwhile (Scott, 1999). This feedback process thus produces a particular socio-
political dynamic of modernization, combining chemical and other inputs with capi-
tal requirements and dependence on large agribusiness conglomerates, while rural 
and migrant communities disappear due to reduced or only seasonal, transient labor 
needs (Carolan, 2019; Friedmann, 1999; Rotz et al., 2019; Schmitz & Moss, 2015).
A key factor in the drive towards large machines, automated or not, is the need 
to maximize the uniformity of a crop stand. Harvesting maize with a combine, for 
example, is only effective if all the plants in the crop stand are the same height, 
produce ears of the same shape, and reach maturity at the same time. Additionally, 
the more of the same type of plant there are to harvest in a given area, the higher the 
potential productivity per unit of land or labor. As such, plant breeding programs 
and seed suppliers, in combination with chemical inputs, have focused heavily on 
growth characteristics (e.g., height, crowding tolerance) that are relevant for opti-
mizing monocultural, machine-managed cropping systems (Bourke et  al., 2021; 
Kloppenburg, 2005). Together, these factors create a mutually reinforcing feedback 
loop whereby cropping systems are engineered to accommodate large machines and 
large machines are designed to manage engineered cropping systems (Scott, 1999; 
Miles, 2019; Lowenberg‐DeBoer et al., 2021).
The interlinked drivers of efficiency and uniformity lead towards the final chal-
lenge of total automation: how to do arable farming without needing human workers 
in the field. In addition to large driverless tractors, this challenge is being pursued 
through the development of small autonomous robots5 (Relf-Eckstein et al., 2019). 
These go against the bigger—heavier mechanization trend, but most often still 
assume a monocultural approach to crop husbandry despite their potential to deter -
mine a different relationship between farming systems and machines. Open-field 
robotic applications come predominantly out of the precision agriculture program, 
which focuses on the use of technology and data to enhance resource use efficiency 
and maximize production through targeted, plant-level care within monocultural sys-
tems (Lowenberg-DeBoer & Erickson, 2019). Here, the robotization of agricultural 
tasks is touted as a solution to problems of within-field variability, imprecise and 
overabundant agro-chemical application, soil compaction, and the high cost and low 
availability of farm labor (Blackmore et al., 2005; Kuch et al., 2020; Murray, 2018). 
Applications often involve (multiple) autonomous ground units receiving and pro-
cessing information from various forms of sensors (Fountas et al., 2020). Through 
abundant data collection, it is expected that these robots will help farmers achieve a 
greater measure of uniformity in their cropping systems by identifying, diagnosing, 
and treating plant-level heterogeneities in the field environment in a resource-effi-
cient manner (Pedersen et al., 2006). Widespread adoption of this autonomous farm-
ing equipment would mean the shifting of manual labor demands off human farm 
laborers and onto robots, potentially aggravating the often racialized and gendered 
marginalization of agricultural laborers in some contexts (Marinoudi et  al., 2019; 
Rotz et al., 2019; Sparrow & Howard, 2020). With advances in artificial intelligence 
5 For an overview (not necessarily complete) of open-field farming robots in development and on the 
market at the time of writing, see: https:// misset. com/ field- robots/ field- robots/.
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 6 of 31
(AI), the cognitive human demand may also eventually be made optional, calling 
into question what it means to be a (‘good’) farmer (Burton, 2004; Driessen & Heu-
tinck, 2014).
Agroecological Pull?
When considered as a potential systems innovation for accelerating sustainability 
transitions in agriculture, the lack of attention given to tools that enable agrobiodi-
versity demonstrates a lock-in within the monocultural system. The dominant socio-
technical regime is robust, favoring developments that fit within a monoculture 
approach and positioning diversified cropping systems in a niche outside the bound-
aries of the prevailing innovation landscape (Geels, 2002; Morel et  al., 2020). In 
part, this lock-in is influenced by the fact that heterogenous field designs pose many 
more agronomic and technical challenges than monocultures: it is simply more dif-
ficult to mechanize or automate the management of a polyculture compared to a sole 
crop (Fountas et al., 2020). Additionally, an apparent lack of consensus as to what 
role automation should play in the transition towards a more sustainable agriculture 
may be impeding advances in automation for diversified cropping systems (Bellon 
Maurel & Huyghe, 2017; Herrero et al., 2021; Shepon et al., 2018).
Within agroecology, there is an emphasis on social  empowerment, equity, and 
sovereignty (Altieri & Toledo, 2011), in addition to a strong agronomic tradition of 
crop diversification (Wezel et al., 2014). However, there is little academic focus on 
the question of how to make physical tools for agroecological practices (cf. Salem-
bier et al., 2020). Even in a recent comprehensive overview of the research needed 
to apply agroecology specifically in large-scale farming contexts, written particu-
larly from an agronomic perspective, mechanization challenges were not addressed 
(Tittonell et al., 2020). Although often correlated justly with specialization, upscal-
ing, capital intensity, and other tropes of the monocultural paradigm (van der Ploeg, 
2021), there appears to be no fundamental reason why automated tools could not be 
designed to progress agroecological aims. In fact, research has shown that farmers 
themselves are not necessarily the ones worried about the incompatibility of tech-
nology and ‘alternative’ farming methods (van Hulst et al., 2020). That said, recent 
syntheses also show that adoption of ‘smart’ farming technologies is lower among 
‘unconventional’ farmers than among ‘conventional’ (i.e. intensive, high-input) 
farmers (Bronson, 2019).
Some see the lack of attention put on automation as a barrier to the amplification 
of agroecology (e.g. Bellon Maurel & Huyghe, 2017), believing that where labor is 
a limiting factor, automation offers the possibility of implementing agroecological 
practices in new contexts and at broader scales. In painting a picture of an auto-
mated ecological farming utopia, Daum (2021) imagines that fleets of robots work -
ing 24/7 will enable farmers to adopt agroecological farming methods where high 
labor demands would otherwise be a constraint. For others, particularly in small-
scale systems and less mechanized contexts, the manual labor demands of ‘doing’ 
agroecology are rather regarded as opportunities to foster meaningful livelihoods 
and community involvement, connecting humans both to the land and to each other 
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 7 of 31 2
(Nicholls & Altieri, 2018; Timmermann & Félix, 2015). From this perspective, a 
fear is that tools such as driverless tractors or autonomous robots may undermine the 
intrinsic value of being a farmer, displace workers, or lock farmers into disadvanta-
geous power asymmetries (Carolan, 2019).
A hesitant stance towards technology fits into a long history of critiques question-
ing the societal effects of mechanization in agriculture (Fitzgerald, 1991; Vander -
meer, 1986), and contemporary critical perspectives on the potential social and ethi-
cal concerns raised by automated farming technologies are abundant (e.g. Klerkx & 
Rose, 2020; Rose & Chilvers, 2018; Ryan et al., 2021; Sparrow & Howard, 2020; 
van der Burg et al., 2019). Emerging key issues relate to data ownership, deskilling, 
exclusionary power dynamics, and shifting farmer identities (Klerkx et al., 2019). In 
conversation with these assessments are abundant calls for participatory and reflex-
ive design processes in the development of responsible innovations for sustainable 
farming (e.g., Berthet et al., 2016; Cerf et al., 2012; Eastwood et al., 2019; Elzen & 
Bos, 2019; Jakku & Thorburn, 2010; Lacombe et al., 2018; Pissonnier et al., 2019; 
Prost, 2021; Rossing et  al., 2021). Such ‘user-centered’ design methods are often 
seen as a way to incorporate socio-political concerns into design specifications, and 
frequently take a systems perspective at the farm, value chain, or regional scale. 
Within design discussions, however, the challenge of translating the unique agro-
nomic, ecological, and social demands of diversified cropping systems into designs 
for agricultural implements (let alone automated machines) is often peripheral and 
secondary to the design of the farming system itself (see e.g. Prost et al., 2017; cf. 
Salembier et al., 2020). On the other side there is an abundance of literature describ-
ing advances in open-field agricultural robotics (e.g. Bechar & Vigneault, 2017; 
Fountas et al., 2020; Kootstra et al., 2021; Mahmud et al., 2020; Oberti & Shapiro, 
2016), but studies combining design processes geared towards diversified agricul-
ture settings with automated tool specifications are noticeably lacking (Rose et al., 
2021).
The Prospect of Pixel Cropping
Pixel cropping (sometimes referred to as pixel farming) occupies a unique space of 
being both grounded in agroecology and dependent on technology. It is an open-
field farming method in which many different food and service crops are planted 
together in diverse assemblages made up of small (0.25–2.25  m2) crop patches (‘pix-
els’) arranged in a grid (Fig.  1) (Ditzler & van Apeldoorn, 2018). It employs mul-
tiple agroecological techniques that increase temporal, spatial, and genetic in-field 
diversity (rotation, intercropping, crop mixtures), conserve soil (continuous cover, 
green manures), and facilitate natural pest control (habitat and resource contiguity 
and continuity). Pixel cropping as we describe it here was developed recently in The 
Netherlands following a ‘Cartesian’ orthogonal logic (Ditzler, 2020), although it 
draws heavily on the principles of established agroecological methods that leverage 
diversity, including companion planting and indigenous intercropping practices such 
as the milpa or Three Sisters (Lopez-Ridaura et al., 2021; Rodríguez-Robayo et al., 
2020).
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 8 of 31
Although a pixel plot is organized in a grid (for ease of management and sci-
entific study) which resembles the pixelated field maps used to collect and present 
data in precision agriculture, the concepts underlying pixel cropping are not about 
precision. Rather, the method aims to maximize the structural diversity of the arable 
field, and in doing so create a production system that functions as a healthy ecosys-
tem. Algorithmic inputs may be utilized in the design of a pixel field (e.g., following 
rules for which crop—neighbor combinations to encourage or avoid, or the outputs 
of detailed soil mapping), so in this way pixel cropping does not exclude the digitali-
zation underpinning precision agriculture, but homogenization is not an aim. After 
a pixel plot is sown, what develops may appear wild and unruly compared to con-
ventional agriculture. The high-resolution of individual pixels creates an assemblage 
of ecological interactions, generating multiple dimensions of habitat, resource, and 
functional diversity which occasion emergent properties beyond production—what 
Tsing (2015, p. 23–24) refers to as the “multiple temporal rhythms” and “patterns 
of unintentional coordination”—that can be understood as agro-ecosystem services.
There is strong scientific evidence that high resolution in-field diversity and 
small field sizes will indeed produce good yields and abundant ecosystem ser -
vices (Fahrig et al., 2015; Sirami et al., 2019; van Oort et al., 2020), so pixel crop-
ping is anticipated to be a promising approach for addressing emerging production 
and environmental sustainability aims such as those outlined in recent Dutch and 
European policy (EC, 2020; Schouten, 2019). However, pixel cropping is not yet 
employed outside of a limited research-oriented context, so the broader scope of the 
method for meeting these aims—as well as its profitability and global applicabil-
ity—have not yet been explored. At the time of writing only three pixel cropping 
trials were known to the authors, all in The Netherlands. In part, pixel cropping’s 
limited uptake has to do with the management demands posed by its planned and 
Fig. 1  A pixel cropping plot at the Wageningen University field trial on the Droevendaal Organic 
Experimental and Training Farm, NL in which six crops are planted in 0.5 m × 0.5 m pixels in plots of 
9 m × 12 m (a); and a subset of the 2020 pixel field planting plan at the Lochem, NL trial in which 30 
crops are planted in 1.5 m × 1.5 m pixels in a 1 ha field (each color represents a different crop) (b)
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 9 of 31 2
emergent complexity. Labor presents a major challenge in mainstreaming or upscal-
ing the method, particularly in places where intensively mechanized farming is the 
norm, as in The Netherlands. Due to the small size of individual crop patches and 
the heterogeneity of the overall field layout, conventional machines cannot be used 
to conduct tasks such as sowing, weeding, or harvesting, meaning that currently all 
labor must be done by hand. There is consensus among those who have worked in 
pixel cropping trials that implementing the system at viable scales will require some 
form of mechanization, and potentially automation. However, no technologies that 
could work in such high-resolution and large-scale intercropping systems are yet on 
the market. The lack of established tools, in combination with its future-oriented 
outlook, positions pixel cropping as a unique case for imagining non-monocultural 
possibilities for automation without the influence of an already saturated solution 
space and within a still exploratory phase of experimentation.
Empirical Approach
The discussion groups, workshops, and design challenges that this paper is based 
on are embedded in the Ph.D. research project of the first author. The project was 
approved by the governing graduate school at the start of the Ph.D., and in design-
ing and conducting the research for this paper we followed the Netherlands Code of 
Conduct for Research Integrity as formalized by our institutional Social Sciences 
Ethics Committee. The committee provides a checklist which researchers should use 
to determine if their research requires an ex-ante ethics review; according to these 
guidelines, we determined that our study met the ethical criteria and therefore did 
not necessitate review by the ethics committee.
The research was conducted between 2018 and 2021 in and around an existing 
pixel cropping field trial at the Droevendaal Organic Experimental and Training 
Farm located on the Wageningen University & Research (WUR) campus in Wage-
ningen, and at an on-farm pixel cropping trial in Lochem, both in The Netherlands. 
Both trials are embedded within ongoing, long-term agroecological studies moni-
tored by WUR  researchers. The trial in Wageningen started in 2018 and consists 
of two experimental pixel cropping plots (each 9 m × 12 m) managed for scientific 
purposes (Fig.  1a) (see Juventia et al., (2021) for details of the experimental design). 
The Lochem trial was initiated in spring 2020 and is conducted on a working organic 
farm where the resident farmer uses the 1 ha pixel field (Fig.  1b) for both research 
and commercial purposes.
Centered around these two trials we explored how a diversity of practition-
ers from different disciplines might approach the same site-specific challenge. 
Drawing on methods commonly employed in agroecological research (action 
research (Lieblein et al., 2012), Kolb’s learning cycle (Kolb, 1984), the DEED 
cycle (Giller et al., 2011)), we designed a series of interactive happenings which 
progressed in topic and depth over the research period, moving from broadly 
positioning the question of automation within the frame of general agroecologi-
cal concerns towards envisioning specific applications for robotics in the Dutch 
pixel cropping context. In view of the explorative character of this study, we 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 10 of 31
approached the research design and analysis as an iterative process (Locke et al., 
2020) in which we adapted the set-up and focus of the happenings and composi-
tion of the participants involved by drawing on observations that emerged in the 
process.
At the Wageningen site, we employed various interactive formats (a group dis-
cussion, a World Café-style workshop, a design challenge, and a consultancy pro-
ject) to engage students, researchers, and practitioners from a range of fields in 
place-based efforts to explore the potential for robots to facilitate pixel cropping 
(Table  1). Most of the participants were employees and students from relevant 
departments of WUR, representing a range of nationalities and disciplinary back -
grounds. The workshop participants also included professional designers, farm-
ers, and independent agro-tech developers from outside the university, and the 
design challenge involved students from the Design Academy Eindhoven (DAE), 
again with international backgrounds. Both authors took extensive notes during 
the Wageningen meetings on the ideas that were put forward in the discussions as 
they occurred, in the larger gatherings with the help of a research assistant. We 
also archived the written and drawn outputs that were produced by participants.
In parallel to these orchestrated happenings, we also followed the progress of 
the self-identified agroecological farmer’s first season of doing pixel cropping at 
the Lochem site. The farmer was collaborating with a robotics developer to test a 
prototype weeding robot, and we paid particular attention to the farmer’s experi-
ences with the robot and his widening effort to make pixel cropping work beyond 
the functioning of the robot. We conducted multiple unstructured interviews with 
the farmer before the growing season, and one semi-structured interview each 
during and after the growing season. The first author also visited the farm on sev -
eral occasions, once to watch a demonstration of the robot testing its functions. 
We recorded the semi-structured interviews with the farmer, took notes during 
unstructured interviews and after field visits, and made images during field visits.
After each happening, interview, and field visit, we reviewed the archived 
material and inventoried the emergent themes in relation to our three guiding 
questions ("Introduction" section), which we coded as work , community, and 
design. We then used these data as input for guiding the next happening, with the 
aim to broaden the imaginations being represented while maintaining a relevant 
focus. For example: the themes we inventoried from the discussion group were 
used to select the range of participants and write the prompts for the World Café 
workshop; the outcomes of the World Café workshop led us to develop a design 
challenge with students not already involved with agricultural robotics; our obser -
vations of the farmer’s unanticipated challenges with the robot led us to reorient 
our focus around the broader context of his efforts at making the pixel farm work 
in practice; and our discussions with the farmer led us to ensure that an oppor -
tunity to talk with and observe someone doing pixel cropping labor was part of 
the student projects. Throughout this iterative process of interaction, coding, 
and analysis, we sought to identify variation between and within the groups that 
responded to or diverged from common discourses and assumptions (also ours) 
of what agricultural robots can or should do. To ensure that we stayed up to date 
with these discourses, we periodically attended agricultural robotics conferences, 
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 11 of 31 2Table 1  Overview of research happenings conducted from 2018 to 2020 in the context of the Wageningen University pixel cropping field trials in The Netherlands, pre-
sented in chronological order
Setting Participants Format Guiding questions
Group discussion 5 agroecology-focused farming systems 
researchers working at WUR Participants were posed with two open-
ended questions and asked to freely dis-
cuss. Conversation topics were annotated 
on flipcharts1. What is agroecology and how do farmers 
implement it?
2. What would a farming robot need to do 
to be in line with these principles and 
practices?
World Café workshop 20 robotics experts, ecologists, agronomists, 
farmers, and designers (both from WUR 
and from outside the organization)Participants were given a tour of the Wage-
ningen pixel cropping field experiment 
and presented with a list of issues and 
desires for a diversified farming systems 
robot synthesized from the previous dis-
cussion group. They then rotated through 
mixed groups where in each session they 
were asked to imagine different elements 
of appropriate forms of automation for the 
pixel cropping context, culminating in a 
design session where the elements were 
integrated and presented in drawings1. What are the ecological, agronomic, and 
social requirements of a pixel farming 
robot?
2. How could/should these functions be 
integrated into an actualized design?
Challenge-based design course 20a second-year bachelor design students 
from DAEStudents were asked to respond to the idea 
of robots as an approach to dealing with 
the manual labor challenges of pixel 
cropping. They were first given a general 
introduction to the principles of pixel 
cropping and a tour of the Wageningen 
field experiment, where they interviewed 
the field staff responsible for conducting 
daily crop management tasks. They then 
worked independently on their design 
projects for 8 weeks. Prototypes were 
presented in a studio critique setting1. How can the manual labor challenges of 
pixel cropping be solved?
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 12 of 31
a The course began with 20 students split into three teams. Only one team (6 students) followed the pixel cropping labor challenge through to the end; it is that team whose 
work we report on in the resultsTable 1  (continued)
Setting Participants Format Guiding questions
Consultancy project 6 WUR MSc students A team was commissioned to explore the 
outlook and design of robots for pixel 
cropping. Students were asked to identify 
the agronomic, ecological, and labor 
needs of pixel cropping and to design a 
prototype pixel cropping robot based on 
their findings. The team’s designs were 
presented in an oral presentation and 
written report1. What are the agronomic and ecological 
demands of pixel cropping?
2. What is the state of the art in agricultural 
technology to mechanize these demands?
3. What are the most promising options for 
integrating these functions?
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 13 of 31 2
demonstrations, field days, and promotional events within and outside WUR; we 
did not collect data during these activities, but they were pivotal in helping us 
gain a broader view on developments in agricultural robotics in both research and 
commercial realms.
Results: How to Make a Pixel Cropping Robot?
Agroecology As an Ethos
Our inquiry began by seeking to position the specific question of automating pixel 
cropping within the broader framing of diversified agriculture via agroecology, ask -
ing a group of agroecology-focused farming systems researchers to define agroecol-
ogy. During this discussion, the participants focused primarily on the conceptual 
aspects of agroecology, rather than the science or practice components that have 
been defined by other scholars (see Wezel et al., 2009). Several used language to 
describe agroecology as a stance towards farming that believes nature should be 
worked with rather than against. One participant explained, farming agroecologi-
cally means using a localized approach in which you start with “what the ecosystem 
offers” and seek to “understand the function of each inhabitant of the ecosystem” 
and then design farming interventions based on nature’s “template,” rather than the 
other way around. Another participant, who was from Southeast Asia, described 
expressions of agroecology in her community as being linked to a religious edict 
prohibiting the harm of nature. Participants returned often to the theme of connect-
edness, in reference to agroecology being about embracing and intensifying con-
nections—e.g., between plants and earthworms, between farmers and their soils, 
or between farms and communities. How participants envisioned such relation-
ships was also characterized by a localized contextualization; despite their different 
cultural and geographical backgrounds, all participants referred to agroecology as 
being necessarily adapted to local circumstances and belief systems, resulting in dif-
ferent connections to be emphasized in different contexts.
The way the participants envisaged agroecology appeared to imply that to prac-
tice agroecology is to invest in the connections, both ecological and social, that root 
farming and food systems in local ecologies and cultures. Interestingly, we witnessed 
no discussion about how these values and approaches could or should be imple-
mented in practice when participants defined agroecology. The group in fact did not 
talk about work at all, never addressing what it looks like to physically execute agro-
ecological practices. More generally, discussions of the importance of farming in 
a way that is attuned to ecologies and the temporalities of soils and other aspects 
of agroecosystems do not necessarily link to the challenges of everyday embodied 
practice. In these discussions the various aspects of an approach such as agroecol-
ogy can be better understood as describing an ethos,6 within which knowledge is a 
6 We use the term ethos following van Dooren and Rose (2016) to mean not only a particular way of 
defining the elements, objects, and subjects the world is made up of, but also as a mood, an aesthetic, a 
way of narrating, and a collectively shared attitude.
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 14 of 31
key theme, but reference to forms of mechanization (let alone automation) are not 
often made (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015; Sanderson Bellamy & Ioris, 2017). The 
implications of this first discussion group suggest that an agroecological approach 
to automation should consider the ecological relationships and cultures motivating 
the material practice as equally as relevant as technical specifications, generating the 
question of how to inscribe an ethos in agricultural machinery.
Neighbors, Ducks, or Robots?
In the second part of the conversation with the farming systems researchers, we cen-
tered the question of possible synergies or tensions between automation and the pre-
viously described aims of agroecology. Here we noted an important difference in 
the focus of the discussion: when we asked about automation, participants brought 
up broader issues around the work of doing agroecology, which we could map onto 
longer-standing debates about the political ecologies of agricultural mechanization 
as discussed in the "Robots Pushed into Monocultural Fields" section. One partici-
pant (a farmer himself) reflected that during a tactile task like manual weeding, a 
farmer is “not just weeding” but also observing the crop, the soil, and the environ-
ment, the manual labor thus affording something more than could be gained if he did 
the task with a machine. On the other hand, he noted, “after three hectares, [hand] 
weeding is not so ‘Zen’ anymore.” This tension between the desirable sensory—and 
even meditative—experience and the drudgery of doing farm labor was echoed in a 
subsequent discussion about the potential advantage of automation as a tool to open 
up time, in which participants simultaneously championed the embodied knowledge 
that a farmer can accrue through physical labor and acknowledged that eliminating 
such labor might free the mind to explore opportunities for system “redesign” (Mey -
nard et al., 2012).
When we asked participants specifically what a robot would need to do to fit into 
their definition of agroecology, they focused on the role the robot might assume in 
a farming community, which differed between their working contexts and the social 
norms and investment capacities available there. The participant from Southeast 
Asia explained that in her community many people need work, and she would rather 
hire a neighbor to weed her field than employ a robot. Conversely, a participant 
from a Nordic country noted that he would rather avoid talking to his neighbors and 
therefore would welcome a robot. When asked about tasks that may not be suited 
to human hands, such as controlling pests in a rice paddy, the Southeast Asian par -
ticipant replied that robots were still not needed because “we have ducks for that.” 
The question of whether a robot would be regarded in particular contexts as either 
desirable (reducing the drudgery of labor, affording time for system redesign) or 
undesirable (displacing valued neighbors or ducks) could be seen as a contempo-
rary iteration of discussions around the definition of progress in agriculture, flagging 
the continued relevance of long-standing calls to consider the localized social, cul-
tural, political, economic, and ecological conditions that surround proposed techno-
logical change as well as the non-economic reasons farmers may have for pursuing 
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 15 of 31 2
particular technologies (Fitzgerald, 1991; Harwood, 2013; Sparrow & Howard, 
2020; Vandermeer, 1986).
What Should be Automated?
After framing the concepts and issues underpinning the general question of automa-
tion in agroecological farming systems, we moved into the happenings targeted spe-
cifically at pixel cropping (the World Café workshop at Wageningen, the challenge-
based design course with students from the design school, and the consultancy 
project with WUR students). Although different, the entry points of both the World 
Café workshop participants and the two student groups seemed to reveal an underly -
ing assumption that all needs of the cropping system—whether cultivated or associ-
ated—should be considered as demands that the hypothetical robot might be asked 
to control. As such, the approaches revealed the range of technical and conceptual 
considerations that would need to be accounted for in order to achieve full automa-
tion of a pixel cropping system.
The participants in the World Café workshop were most familiar with the ecolog-
ical concepts behind pixel cropping and the agronomic practices employed in it, and 
began with a broad, holistic approach focusing on factors central to understanding 
and maintaining agroecological cycles and feedbacks at the foundation of the pixel 
cropping logic (defining system boundaries, identifying performance indicators, 
optimizing ecological interactions). Here participants emphasized that automating 
a pixel field requires a whole-system approach and a complete understanding of all 
the complex interactions involved. Both student groups were new to pixel cropping 
(the design school students had generally no experience with agriculture at all) and 
sought to first understand more concretely what the method entailed in practice, and 
then created inventories describing the production cycle of all crops in the Wagen-
ingen experiment trial and the cultivation tasks required at each phase that a robot 
would need to assume control of.
Picking, Shaking, Cutting, De‑leafing: Defining Functions
The three happenings followed similar trajectories in their next steps, moving from 
defining system boundaries and demands into discussions of how automated tools 
could technically meet those demands. Participants approached the task of defining 
tool functions from two general angles: starting with the command center in a top-
down approach, and from individual tasks from the bottom up. These appeared as 
complementary and equally necessary elements of the pixel cropping robot design 
process.
In the World Café workshop, several groups discussed the decision-making 
functionalities underpinning the actuation of robotic equipment. Here, participants 
explored the possibilities to use AI, modelling, and various forms of sensing to 
enable autonomous decision making, leading into questions of what role the farmer 
would have in relation to AI-driven systems and how much autonomy should be 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 16 of 31
afforded to robotic tools. A farmer in one of these design groups (the same farmer 
managing the Lochem trial) expressed that no matter how many sensors robots 
might be equipped with, he would prefer to make the ultimate decisions him-
self about what functions a tool performs, stating that “the farmer is the sensor.” 
Robotics engineers in the same group related to the farmers’ preference as a need to 
build into the robot “the power to overrule”—that is, the option for a human opera-
tor to override the machine’s autonomy at any moment. In the agricultural robot-
ics literature this functionality is often referenced in regards to safety, cited as nec-
essary for situations where the robot might be in danger of harming a person or 
itself (Vasconez et  al., 2019). However, in the workshop, the connotations of the 
“power to overrule” took a different slant in the context of the previously defined 
system demand for holistic knowledge of agroecological interactions, of which it 
was acknowledged that the farmer would need or want to contribute to.
Other groups at the World Café workshop, as well as the student  consultancy 
team, took a more grounded approach to matching technical possibilities with the 
system demands previously identified. For example, one workshop group discuss-
ing the challenge of harvesting crops in pixel plots diagramed four possible ways a 
crop could be mechanically harvested (Fig.  2). Similarly, the consultancy team cre-
ated morphological charts, a method employed in the Reflexive Interactive Design 
methodology (Elzen & Bos, 2019), to systematically identify tools that could exe-
cute each cultivation task (Fig.  3). Interestingly, the consultancy team decided at Fig. 2  Picking, shaking, 
cutting, de-leafing: multiple 
ways to achieve the same task, 
illustrated by participants in the 
pixel cropping robotics design 
workshop in Wageningen, 2019
Fig. 3  Morphological chart created by a WUR student consultancy team for addressing the mechanical 
weeding function of a pixel cropping robot, 2020
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 17 of 31 2
this stage that automating the whole production cycle was too elaborate to solve 
with a single tool and chose instead to focus only on seeding and weeding cere-
als, the tasks they identified as the most labor-intensive at the pixel cropping field 
trial. The design school team came to a very similar conclusion, determining that 
addressing the whole production cycle with a single tool was unrealistic. Having 
conducted an extensive interview with the Wageningen pixel cropping field techni-
cian and carefully observing her movements as she performed various tasks in the 
field, the design students identified seeding cereals as the most arduous of the field 
operations and decided to focus on specifying the requirements for a tool that could 
alleviate this particular drudgery. 
Integration: High‑Tech, Low‑Tech?
The World Café workshop participants and student teams moved next towards the 
ideation phase in which functions were integrated into comprehensive designs. In 
each setting, we asked for visual renderings of the imagined tools. At the workshop, 
participants used flipcharts to sketch out their ideas while drawing on the lists of 
functions and solutions developed in earlier phases of the World Café. A striking 
outcome of this session was that nearly all integrated designs appeared highly simi-
lar in form: most drew robots composed of a gantry frame carrying tools over a field 
using Cartesian navigation (Fig.  4). Among these designs there was some variation 
between groups in how they addressed the different functions of the robot, for exam-
ple whether the tool rolled independently on wheels or was mounted on fixed rails, 
but all were described as incorporating multiple functions to automate production 
from seeding to harvest.
Fig. 4  A variety of drawings produced by participants at the pixel cropping robotics workshop at Wagen-
ingen in 2019, all approaching automation through similar forms
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 18 of 31
Students in the consultancy team tackled the integration phase by selecting 
options from their morphological charts and combining them to create two robot 
design sketches. For one version, which they called the “high-tech” model, they 
selected the most state-of-the-art options for each function (Fig.  5a). The consul-
tancy team’s second model was designed to be more economically feasible; for this 
model they selected tools already commonly in use (e.g., a diesel engine instead 
of solar power, a hoe weeder instead of electrothermal weeding arms). The two 
models were presented as representative of a spectrum of options book-ended by 
a lower-tech but currently feasible and economically accessible tool versus a more 
comprehensive tool with less established and more expensive technology but greater 
autonomy. The design school team took an entirely different direction, abandoning 
the idea of a robot altogether and instead designing analogue hand-tools. Drawing 
on their interview with the field technician and their observations of her movements, 
the design school students came to the conclusion that a simple hand-tool that could 
be used immediately would have a greater impact on lessening her burden of manual 
labor than aspirational robotic equipment. They developed a simple, two-part seed-
ing tool and fabricated working prototypes; the tools were light weight, required no 
power source, had few moving parts, were simple to operate, and were ergonomi-
cally designed so a farmer could use them while standing (Fig. 5b).
Shifting Priorities on the Farm
At the Lochem site we observed various stages of developing a pilot commercial 
pixel farm, speaking with the farmer at key moments in the planning, execution, and 
reflection of the first growing season, including practical trials with a pixel cropping 
robot prototype. Throughout this process we witnessed several pivotal moments dur -
ing which the farmer shifted or re-formulated his approach as new challenges and 
unexpected outcomes presented themselves.
At the start of the season, the farmer’s plan was to use a small tractor to manage 
the soil preparation, sowing, and planting in the pixel plot. On a visit to the farm 
Fig. 5  Mock-up for the “high-tech” robot model designed to seed and weed cereals in pixel plots, created 
by the WUR student consultancy project team, 2020 (a); prototypes for a two-piece analogue seeding 
tool developed by DAE students for sowing cereals in 50 cm × 50 cm pixels (b) (Objects and images in 
panel b made by Mick Thörig and Floris Meijer, 2019)
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 19 of 31 2
during the growing season, we observed emerging management challenges related 
to these mechanization ambitions. After marking out the pixel field with the trac-
tor, the farmer had become concerned about soil compaction and changed plans: 
“We started to do it with a planting machine but you had to drive through a [whole] 
row for maybe one or two pixels…and I didn’t want to go drive the tractor all the 
way through the land every time.” Abandoning the tractor meant doing the planting 
manually: “…we had to do it by hand. Every single pixel. And there was about 4000 
in the hectare. I’d say a month at least it took us to get all the plants in.” The farmer 
deemed this an unacceptable time and labor burden and indicated he would not do it 
this way again in the future, later reflecting, “it was a hard time.”
The farmer also intended to use a robot prototype to weed the field having 
arranged for a robotics developer to use his field as a testing site in exchange for 
weeding services. Yet the robot was not fully functional at the time when weeding 
became necessary, so the farmer and his team started hand weeding. Following a 
period of particularly hot and dry weather the farmer observed that the seedlings 
in the weeded pixels fared worse than those in the un-weeded pixels: “We cleaned 
a few pixels during the warm days, but the crops, those ones died. Too warm, the 
ground dried out.” Following this observation, he decided to discontinue the hand-
weeding efforts. No further weeding was done during the growing season, except for 
small test areas when the robot eventually arrived.
We next visited the Lochem farm to watch one of the robot trials, during which 
we saw the farmer walking behind the robot as it weeded a row of pixels (Fig.  6). 
In part he appeared to be observing how the machine operated, but he was also 
cleaning up after the robot. The robot was imprecise and missed weeds periodi-
cally, which the farmer then pulled himself. This form of monitoring the robot, or 
even collaborating with it, was a middle ground we had not seen explored in the 
Fig. 6  The Lochem farmer walks behind a prototype weeding robot and pulls out the weeds it missed, 
summer 2020
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 20 of 31
other design projects and discussions. In an interview a few weeks after the robot’s 
weeding demonstration, the farmer reflected that developing the weeding function 
of the robot prototype was in his opinion no longer a priority stating, “I’m slightly 
changed now, the way I see crops are growing now, I’m not too bothered with weeds 
anymore.” The farmer expressed that he felt the assistance of the robot should be 
instead directed towards alleviating the more essential and time-consuming task of 
planting crops in the field.
During a mid-season interview we discussed the broader implications of automa-
tion. Asking whether the farmer saw the robot as a threat to his livelihood or to his 
approach as a self-identified agroecological farmer, he replied that he would wel-
come a tool that would help to alleviate the monotonous farming tasks that required 
a lot of time but little intellectual input. With the freed up time, the farmer reasoned, 
he would be able to devote more energy to walking through his fields, an activity 
which he both enjoys and which helps him to learn about his farming system and 
make more informed management decisions: “I’d rather be in the fields and look 
at crops and decide what to do instead of sitting on the tractor…looking at plants, 
touching plants, taking out a plant and looking at the roots…I walk through the 
field now and I’m really happy.” In this way, we understood that the automation of 
mundane tasks would allow him to deepen his connection to his farm and the natu-
ral ecosystem within which it is embedded and would not occasion a change in his 
identity as an agroecological farmer. This rationale echoed closely what some of the 
farming systems researchers had discussed previously regarding a desire to both fos-
ter connection and to open up time for thinking, which the Lochem farmer indicated 
could both be enhanced—not diminished—by the assistance of automation.
After the growing season had concluded, we again met with the farmer to discuss 
his reflections on the trial. During this conversation we focused on his shifting per -
spectives regarding the value of weeding and the tasks he would like to see a robot 
take over. Here, he stuck to his conviction that weeding was no longer necessary and 
emphasized his desire to instead have a planting robot. Additionally, the farmer had 
conducted a post-season survey with customers who had rented pixels in a commu-
nity supported agriculture (CSA) scheme during the 2020 season. Many of the CSA 
members had indicated that they wished they had had more opportunities to interact 
with the pixel farm and participate in cultivation activities. Thus, in addition to ask -
ing the robot developers to focus on planting and sowing, the farmer had decided to 
try hosting a series of open days at the start of the next growing season during which 
the CSA members could plant their own pixels. The farmer anticipated that the labor 
reduction afforded by the combined efforts of the CSA members and the new robot 
functions would make the field preparation manageable enough to engage in a sec-
ond pixel cropping trial season.
Discussion: Beyond the Dream of Total Automation
Through a series of exploratory research inquiries, we asked people from differ -
ent backgrounds to imagine automated tools for pixel cropping, using pixel crop-
ping as a particular translation of agroecology and a stand in for a broader range 
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 21 of 31 2
of diversified alternatives to monocultures in industrialized contexts. While we had 
previously identified the predominating approaches towards automation in open-
field farming systems—each leading to reinforcement of a monocultural paradigm, 
with total replacement of humans by machines as a central goal—what arose in 
these happenings was a wider range of possible approaches and imagined relations 
between humans and robots. The spectrum of possible directions in which to take 
robotics that came out for pixel cropping highlighted different aspects of a set of 
interconnected dialogues: on the ideals and practices of agroecology, the socio-
political concerns of mechanization, and how to approach design processes for sus-
tainable agricultural transitions. Each of these suggest different ways of understand-
ing and imagining automation for agroecological farming systems.
Can an Ethos be Automated?
In the robotics engineering literature, the operational management of farming sys-
tems is described as an iterative loop which involves an actor (farmer or machine) 
receiving information, processing that information, deciding how to take responsive 
action, and then actuating the task. It has been considered that there are four levels 
to which parts of this loop can be automated, book-ended by full human labor and 
total automation (van Mourik et  al., 2021). What we saw come out of the World 
Café workshop, and to some extent also the consultancy project, were robot designs 
that largely conformed to the mainstream aspiration of total automation as well as 
the homogeneity of form generally adhered to in robotic equipment coming out of 
precision farming programs. In both settings, participants envisioned tools which 
were meant to fully replace human hands in the execution of a predefined list of 
tasks, providing evidence that the dream of total automation exists not only in the 
monocultural paradigm, but also in the minds of those confronted with a polycul-
ture. Despite staying within a limited range of robot forms, a key deviation from 
dominant automation narratives was evident in how participants in our happenings 
imagined the information processing and decision making stages within the opera-
tional management loop.
Through our happenings we learned that to create a fully automated pixel 
cropping robot implies not only the development of a wider range of plant rec-
ognition and actuation functions (e.g., sowing, weeding, and harvesting multi-
ple different crops7), but also programming into a robot the ethos of agroeco-
logical farming which draws on a multiplicity of ways of knowing soils, plants, 
and other (un)invited flora and fauna, their functions, and interactions (Tittonell 
et al., 2020). Bringing agroecological ways of knowing and responding to plants 
7 Existing research projects have channeled entire multi-year grants towards the development of tools 
that can identify and remove a single species of weed from between a single species of crop planted in 
monocultural and row-based field layouts (e.g., Nieuwenhuizen et al., 2010). To move towards a system 
in which a robot could encounter any plant, growing anywhere, and then determine based on its iden-
tity whether or how to engage with it, would require advanced applications of visioning, sensing, and 
machine learning not yet achieved.
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 22 of 31
into the robotic imagination opens space for new thinking about how crops are 
related to and interacted with in the field—whether by humans or by machines, 
or newly imagined combinations of the two—that has not yet entered the main-
stream monoculture paradigm. In monocultures, where crops are approached as 
passive objects awaiting manipulation, receiving information, processing it, and 
deciding how to act is a mono-linear process which leads to a straight-forward 
management action. In a diversified cropping system like a pixel farm, which lev -
erages ecological controls rather than external inputs, distinctions inherent in the 
linear input—output and binary crop/weed monocultural approach become blurry 
and often irrelevant. The system itself becomes an active participant in the farm-
ing activity as interactions such as those between crops and insects emerge and 
self-regulate (Tsing, 2015). As such, the stages of the operational management 
loop become much more complex, the decision making fuzzier, and the range of 
possible actions more extensive. To accommodate this fuzziness, design might 
need to be conceived not as leading to a particular robotic device with function-
alities which match tasks predefined in an operational management loop, but as 
part of a process that reconfigures and rethinks relations while maintaining an 
ongoing openness to adapt and learn from these relations.
Following Escobar (2018, p. x), we can think of design as ontological: bringing 
about particular ways of being, doing, and knowing. Fully automating agroecologi-
cal practices would imply that robotics developers would have to make choices about 
what the essential interactions are within the system (e.g., pest—natural enemy) that 
should be optimized or facilitated, and then translate this knowledge into articulated 
actions supported by the technology. If the final phase of automation is to be under -
stood as human-free, the robot would have to be equipped with the ability to learn 
and make these decisions in real time, a prospect which triggers new questions about 
what ontologies robots should be taught to adopt (Legun & Burch, 2021), and the 
ethical implications of these choices (Ryan et al., 2021; van der Burg et al., 2019).
In a fully automated scenario, success presumes that the human manager only 
relates to the robot and the data it generates and not to the farm field directly, call-
ing into question what trajectories for farming knowledge and farmer identities such 
tools may perpetuate or precipitate (Carolan, 2020; Rotz et al., 2019). A recent news 
story explained that farmers who had acquired a weeding robot could drop the robot 
off at the field and then happily sit back and watch television while the machine did 
the work for them (Radersma, 2020). As this story suggests, the type of tacit, sensu-
ous knowledge a farmer gains by spending time in the field risks being replaced by 
data-mediated knowledge when farming operations are automated (Carolan, 2020; 
Kuch et  al., 2020). We heard this concern raised by participants in the agroecol-
ogy discussion group. Yet, the Lochem farmer later provided an alternative and 
more nuanced view in which the desirable sensory experience of farming could be 
separated from the drudgery of doing monotonous tasks. This distinction offers an 
interesting new way to think about the space automation might occupy—and open 
up—in the agroecological farm operations management cycle that would not fur -
ther disconnect a farmer from their fields but instead afford the time to engage other 
forms of knowledge and care (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015; Smith & Fressoli, 2021). 
Being a farmer who uses robots could mean a shift in how farmers self-identify or 
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 23 of 31 2
are identified by peers (Burton, 2004), but the Lochem farmer’s story suggests it 
does not have to mean a shift from being a tractor driver to being a computer con-
troller (or TV watcher). Engaging in the forms of robot-enabled care the Lochem 
farmer described could also become associated with what it means to be a ‘good’ 
agroecological farmer in a post-productivist paradigm (Burton, 2004).
Working with Robots, or Going Without
The outcomes of our pixel cropping inquiry suggest that there may be room for 
achieving novel aims within the bounds of dominant automation narratives. We 
saw evidence that the types of relations between farmers, ecologies, and commu-
nities that “technoscientific futurity” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015) might occasion 
could be beneficial and not necessarily contrary to agroecological care, as unfolded 
in Lochem. There, we saw the farmer envision a type of agroecological connection 
that is both enabled by automation and that allows for cultivating an ethos—one that 
values production but at the same time allows for other ways of relating to crops, 
soils, ecologies, and the wider community. This vision transcends the opposition 
highlighted by other scholars in which care oriented around vital practices and expe-
riences is considered to be in danger of being “discounted, or crushed, by the pro-
ductionist ethos” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015, p. 708). Additionally, centering crop 
husbandry as an act of managing ecological relations provides a profoundly different 
way of thinking about farming—and enabling technologies—within large-scale pro-
duction environments (Sukkel, 2020). These outcomes recall other work suggesting 
that maintaining some of the tested tropes of monocultural farming may provide a 
conceptual and operational bridge for farmers reassembling their systems towards 
sustainability goals (e.g. strip cropping, Ditzler et al. 2021) or technology transitions 
(e.g. "robot-ready" apple orchards, Legun & Burch, 2021).
We also observed the limits imposed by monocultural thinking and saw evidence 
that a loosening of definitions may be needed in the case of automating agroecology. 
First, broadening the notion of automation could allow room for blended models 
of engagement that may be more locally appropriate than full robotic control (and 
potentially more accommodating to safety regulations, see Lowenberg‐DeBoer et al. 
(2021)). When the Lochem farmer walked behind the weeding robot picking out 
weeds it had missed, he demonstrated a human—robot collaboration, what could be 
viewed as a ‘co-bot’ scenario, that goes beyond the “supervised control” described 
by van Mourik et  al. (2021). This type of collaboration has given rise to a num-
ber of debates regarding the role of technologies as replacers or collaborators for 
humans (Ryan et al., 2021), and philosophical questions of who is adapting to or 
assisting who (Bissell, 2021). Smith and Fressoli (2021) provide a useful conceptual 
framework for thinking about “post-automation,” where encouraging a plurality of 
engagements with technology could provide an alternative to an essentialized future 
for automation. Human—robot collaboration however, is not well explored in the 
agricultural robotics literature (Vasconez et al., 2019). Rather, the farmer’s position 
is more commonly envisaged as described by Lowenberg‐DeBoer et  al. (2021, p. 
11) as sitting “in a vehicle at the edge of the field working on a computer”. Second, 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 24 of 31
expanding the view of what is considered a “radical redesign” (Altieri et al., 2017; 
Hill & MacRae, 1996; Pissonnier et  al., 2019) could provide necessary room for 
using familiar or ‘old’ tools in new ways (Stuiver, 2006; van der Veen, 2010). In dif-
ferent contexts the radical option might emerge in an unpopulated middle ground: 
as an opportunity to engage more deeply with community (as on the Lochem farm), 
as a change of practices mid-season (as the Lochem farmer did with weeding), as 
embracing the ‘low-tech’ (as the design school students did), or as commons-based 
peer production (Smith & Fressoli, 2021) exemplified in projects like the French 
collective L’ Atelier Paysan (Salembier et al., 2020), the “Slow Tools” movement in 
the United States, and the international open-source exchange platform Farm Hack.
The variety of appropriate ways in which we saw automation could be used 
for agroecological aims reflects the locally embedded nature of agroecology, and 
its emphasis on diversity—not only of crops but also of system actors. In our hap-
penings, we witnessed a range of tool designs emerge from the same context but 
devised by different types of practitioners, highlighting the potential for the structure 
and content of design processes to steer outcomes towards different visions for auto-
mation. A diversity of design processes and designers is therefore likely essential to 
address the multifaceted design needs of automated farming futures, needs which 
will vary in relation to the context-specific political ecologies that automation may 
precipitate. Locally-adapted and diverse design processes could help to avoid that 
the limited values and norms of homogeneous designers dictate a perpetuation of 
business-as-usual (Bronson, 2019; Escobar, 2018), that valued human or non-human 
actors are displaced (Schmitz & Moss, 2015), or that one-way technology devel-
opment fuels a trajectory towards a robot-managed mega-monoculture dystopia 
(Daum, 2021).
Our findings also suggest that an iterative and reflexive design—test—learn—
redesign process, as is commonly used in farming systems design and innovation 
approaches (e.g. Rossing et al., 2021) is relevant not just for the design of produc-
tion systems, farms, or landscapes, but also for the farming implements themselves 
(Rose et al., 2021). On the Lochem farm, the prospect of using a robot to facilitate 
pixel cropping had initially led the farmer to experiment with a novel and risky form 
of farming, yet as the season progressed, we observed that the interplay between the 
not yet fully realized robot and emerging complexity of the cropping system in turn 
led to surprising lessons about not needing certain presumed robotic functions. This 
example highlights the importance of making room for what Meynard et al. (2017) 
and Salembier et al. (2020) have called “coupled innovations”, in which the design 
process is shifted from aiming to achieve a singular end goal (how to automate sys-
tem x?) and rather towards a feedback process driven by the underlying ethos of the 
desired system (how to facilitate the processes and outcomes we want?) for which 
the right implement may or may not be a robot, or might involve combinations of 
humans, manual tools, and forms of automation.
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 25 of 31 2
Conclusions
This paper raises questions on how to realize automation within agroecological 
cropping systems, given that the predominating directions for automation playing 
out in the open-field agricultural sphere are aimed not at amplifying diversified 
cropping systems but at enabling the industrial monocultural paradigm to persist 
in the face of shifting societal demands and economic logics. Through the case 
of pixel cropping, we explored what might come out when various actors consid-
ered automation and designed tools specifically for an agroecological paradigm 
in which complexity is embraced, ecological cycles are fostered, and the bounda-
ries between binaries such as crop/weed and labor/fulfillment are blurred. What 
emerged was a diversity of approaches and imaginations for automation, which 
ranged from full automation, to collaborative modes, to fully analogue tools. 
From these examples we learn that automating agroecology will require the same 
situated and diverse range of approaches and actors that is at the foundation of the 
agroecology ethos, and therefore a rethinking of what automation might mean in 
different contexts.
Drawing on the findings of the pixel cropping case, we propose to engage with 
the notion of automation for agroecology as a dynamic range of context-depend-
ent options and directions, rather than an all-or-nothing binary. We posit that this 
will be more realistic regarding technical feasibility, more accommodating to the 
ethos of agroecology, and more malleable to the diversity of socio-political con-
texts within which new farming technologies will land. In the design of (partially) 
automated tools, expanding the notion of automation would require envisioning 
design not as a linear development through which an object is created following a 
preconceived blueprint of tasks to be relieved from human hands. Rather, design 
could be conceived as a place-based, iterative, and dynamic feedback process 
involving designers, researchers, farmers and farm workers, non-human system 
residents, and other locally relevant groups, thereby creating space for (radical) 
middle ways to emerge. For researchers and designers, we posit that such a pro-
cess should start with seeking to understand both the ecological and human char -
acteristics of the agroecological system being designed for, rather than starting 
with monocultural assumptions and seeking to fit them onto diverse cropping sys-
tems. Integrating the diverse knowledges and embodied practices of agroecologi-
cal farmers and farm workers will be key for re-orienting automation away from 
the constraints of monocultures, and potentially towards more technically achiev -
able applications that can respond to dynamic conditions and incorporate ongo-
ing learning processes. For practitioners and researchers of agroecology wary of 
automation, a more expansive view of what automation could mean in different 
circumstances might allow new labor solutions to emerge, in conjunction with 
new roles and experiences for practitioners and their communities, potentially 
creating opportunities for wider uptake of agroecological modes of crop care.
Acknowledgements The authors wish to  thank: Dirk van Apeldoorn, Walter Rossing, Rogier Schulte, 
Olivia Elsenpeter, Titouan Le Noc, and Esther Hofkamp for pixel cropping inspiration, insights, and man-
agement; Stella Juventia for assistance during the workshops; the Lochem farmers; the participants of 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 26 of 31
the student challenges, discussion group, and workshop; the coordinators of the Public Private program 
and the Studio Collaborative Solutions at Design Academy Eindhoven, Stijn Roodnat, Nacho Carbonell, 
and  Pui Kei Tam; Rem Koolhaas, Samir Bantal, and Sebastian Bernardy for engaging in fruitful dia-
logues with us; Alexandra Rijke and Edward Huijbens; and the two anonymous reviewers whose con-
structive feedback guided us in greatly improving this paper.
Funding The Ph.D. research of the first author, which includes the pixel cropping field trial at Wagenin-
gen University, has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program under Grant Agreement No. 727482 (DiverIMPACTS).
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Altieri, M. A., Nicholls, C. I., & Montalba, R. (2017). Technological approaches to sustainable agri-
culture at a crossroads: An agroecological perspective. Sustainability, 9, 349.
Altieri, M. A., & Toledo, V. M. (2011). The agroecological revolution in Latin America: Rescuing 
nature, ensuring food sovereignty and empowering peasants. The Journal of Peasant Studies,  
38, 587–612.
Bechar, A., & Vigneault, C. (2016). Agricultural robots for field operations: Concepts and components. 
Biosystems Engineering, 149, 94–111.
Bechar, A., & Vigneault, C. (2017). Agricultural robots for field operations. Part 2: Operations and sys-
tems. Biosystems Engineering, 153, 110–128.
Beillouin, D., Ben-Ari, T., Malézieux, E., Seufert, V., & Makowski, D. (2021). Positive but variable 
effects of crop diversification on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Global Change Biology, 27, 
4697–4710.
Bellon Maurel, V., & Huyghe, C. (2017). Putting agricultural equipment and digital technologies at the 
cutting edge of agroecology. OCL, 24, D307.
Berthet, E. T. A., Barnaud, C., Girard, N., Labatut, J., & Martin, G. (2016). How to foster agroecological 
innovations? A comparison of participatory design methods. Journal of Environmental Planning 
and Management, 59, 280–301.
Bissell, D. (2021). Encountering automation: Redefining bodies through stories of technological change. 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 39, 366–384.
Blackmore, S., Stout, B., Wang, M., Runov, B. (2005). Robotic agriculture–the future of agricultural 
mechanisation. In Proceedings of the 5th European conference on precision agriculture (pp. 
621–628).
Boeraeve, F., Dendoncker, N., Cornélis, J.-T., Degrune, F., & Dufrêne, M. (2020). Contribution of agro-
ecological farming systems to the delivery of ecosystem services. Journal of Environmental Man-
agement, 260.
Bourke, P. M., Evers, J. B., Bijma, P., van Apeldoorn, D. F., Smulders, M. J. M., Kuyper, T. W., Mom-
mer, L., & Bonnema, G. (2021). Breeding beyond monoculture: Putting the “Intercrop” into crops. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 12.
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 27 of 31 2
Bronson, K. (2019). Looking through a responsible innovation lens at uneven engagements with digital 
farming. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences, 90–91.
Burton, R. J. F. (2004). Seeing through the ‘good farmer’s’ eyes: Towards developing an understanding of 
the social symbolic value of ‘productivist’ behaviour. Sociologia Ruralis, 44, 195–215.
Campbell, B. M., Beare, D. J., Bennett, E. M., Hall-Spencer, J. M., Ingram, J. S., Jaramillo, F., Ortiz, R., 
Ramankutty, N., Sayer, J. A., & Shindell, D. (2017). Agriculture production as a major driver of 
the Earth system exceeding planetary boundaries. Ecology and Society, 22.
Carolan, M. (2019). Automated agrifood futures: Robotics, labor and the distributive politics of digital 
agriculture. The Journal of Peasant Studies, 47, 184–207.
Carolan, M. (2020). Acting like an algorithm: Digital farming platforms and the trajectories they (need 
not) lock-in. Agriculture and Human Values, 37, 1041–1053.
Carrington, D. (2021). The Guardian.
Cerf, M., Jeuffroy, M.-H., Prost, L., & Meynard, J.-M. (2012). Participatory design of agricultural deci-
sion support tools: Taking account of the use situations. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 
32, 899–910.
Daum, T. (2021). Farm robots: Ecological utopia or dystopia? Trends in Ecology &amp; Evolution, 36, 
774–777.
Ditzler, L. (2020). Pixel Farming.  In AMO, Koolhaas, R. (Eds.),  Countryside, A Report. Guggenheim/
Taschen, Köln.
Ditzler, L., Komarek, A. M., Chiang, T.-W., Alvarez, S., Chatterjee, S. A., Timler, C., Raneri, J. E., Car -
mona, N. E., Kennedy, G., & Groot, J. C. J. (2019). A model to examine farm household trade-offs 
and synergies with an application to smallholders in Vietnam. Agricultural Systems, 173, 49–63.
Ditzler, L., & van Apeldoorn, D. (2018). Factsheet: long-term diversity experiment at WUR’s Droev -
endaal Organic Experimental Farm. Farming Systems Ecology Group. Wageningen.
Ditzler, L., van Apeldoorn, D.F., Schulte, R.P.O., Tittonell, P., & Rossing, W.A.H. (2021). Redefining the 
field to mobilize three-dimensional diversity and ecosystem services on the arable farm. European 
Journal of Agronomy 122
Driessen, C., & Heutinck, L. F. M. (2014). Cows desiring to be milked? Milking robots and the co-evo-
lution of ethics and technology on Dutch dairy farms. Agriculture and Human Values, 32, 3–20.
Duckett, T., Pearson, S., Blackmore, S., Grieve, B., Chen, W.-H., Cielniak, G., Cleaversmith, J., Dai, J., 
Davis, S., Fox, C. (2018). Agricultural robotics: The future of robotic agriculture. UK-RAS White 
papers.
Duncan, E., Glaros, A., Ross, D. Z., & Nost, E. (2021). New but for whom? Discourses of innovation in 
precision agriculture. Agriculture and Human Values, 38, 1181–1199.
Eastwood, C., Klerkx, L., Ayre, M., & Dela Rue, B. (2019). Managing socio-ethical challenges in the 
development of smart farming: From a fragmented to a comprehensive approach for responsible 
research and innovation. Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics, 32, 741–768.
EC. (2020). Farm to Fork strategy. For a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food system. Euro-
pean Commission.
Elzen, B., & Bos, B. (2019). The RIO approach: Design and anchoring of sustainable animal husbandry 
systems. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 145, 141–152.
Escobar, A. (2018). Designs for the pluriverse: Radical interdependence, autonomy, and the making of 
worlds. Duke University Press.
Fahrig, L., Girard, J., Duro, D., Pasher, J., Smith, A., Javorek, S., King, D., Lindsay, K. F., Mitchell, S., 
& Tischendorf, L. (2015). Farmlands with smaller crop fields have higher within-field biodiversity. 
Agriculture, Ecosystems &amp; Environment, 200, 219–234.
Fitzgerald, D. (1991). Beyond tractors: The history of technology in American agriculture. Technology 
and Culture, 32, 114–126.
Fountas, S., Mylonas, N., Malounas, I., Rodias, E., Hellmann Santos, C., & Pekkeriet, E. (2020). Agricul-
tural robotics for field operations. Sensors, 20, 2672.
Francis, C., Lieblein, G., Gliessman, S., Breland, T. A., Creamer, N., Harwood, R., Salomonsson, L., 
Helenius, J., Rickerl, D., Salvador, R., Wiedenhoeft, M., Simmons, S., Allen, P., Altieri, M., Flora, 
C., & Poincelot, R. (2003). Agroecology: The ecology of food systems. Journal of Sustainable 
Agriculture, 22, 99–118.
Friedmann, H. (1999). Circles of growing and eating: The political ecology of food and agriculture. In R. 
Crew (Ed.), Food in global history (pp. 33–57). Westview Press.
Geels, F. W. (2002). Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes: A multi-level 
perspective and a case-study. Research Policy, 31, 1257–1274.
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 28 of 31
Giller, K. E., Tittonell, P., Rufino, M. C., van Wijk, M. T., Zingore, S., Mapfumo, P., Adjei-Nsiah, S., 
Herrero, M., Chikowo, R., Corbeels, M., Rowe, E. C., Baijukya, F., Mwijage, A., Smith, J., Yeboah, 
E., van der Burg, W. J., Sanogo, O. M., Misiko, M., de Ridder, N., … Vanlauwe, B. (2011). Com-
municating complexity: Integrated assessment of trade-offs concerning soil fertility management 
within African farming systems to support innovation and development. Agricultural Systems, 104, 
191–203.
Grieve, B. D., Duckett, T., Collison, M., Boyd, L., West, J., Yin, H., Arvin, F., & Pearson, S. (2019). The 
challenges posed by global broadacre crops in delivering smart agri-robotic solutions: A funda-
mental rethink is required. Global Food Security, 23, 116–124.
Harris, J. (2018). ’We’ll have space bots with lasers, killing plants’: The rise of the robot farmer. The 
Guardian.
Harwood, J. (2013). Has the Green Revolution been a cumulative learning process? Third World Quar -
terly,  34, 397–404.
Herrero, M., Thornton, P. K., Mason-D’Croz, D., Palmer, J., Bodirsky, B. L., Pradhan, P., Barrett, C. B., 
Benton, T. G., Hall, A., Pikaar, I., Bogard, J. R., Bonnett, G. D., Bryan, B. A., Campbell, B. M., 
Christensen, S., Clark, M., Fanzo, J., Godde, C. M., Jarvis, A., … Rockström, J. (2021). Articulat-
ing the effect of food systems innovation on the Sustainable Development Goals. The Lancet Plan-
etary Health, 5, e50–e62.
Hill, S. B., & MacRae, R. J. (1996). Conceptual framework for the transition from conventional to sus-
tainable agriculture. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 7, 81–87.
Jakku, E., & Thorburn, P. J. (2010). A conceptual framework for guiding the participatory development 
of agricultural decision support systems. Agricultural Systems, 103, 675–682.
Juventia, S. D., Rossing, W. A. H., Ditzler, L., & van Apeldoorn, D. F. (2021). Spatial and genetic crop 
diversity support ecosystem service delivery: A case of yield and biocontrol in Dutch organic cab-
bage production. Field Crops Research, 261.
Keller, T., Sandin, M., Colombi, T., Horn, R., & Or, D. (2019). Historical increase in agricultural machin-
ery weights enhanced soil stress levels and adversely affected soil functioning. Soil and Tillage 
Research, 194.
Klerkx, L., Jakku, E., & Labarthe, P. (2019). A review of social science on digital agriculture, smart 
farming and agriculture 4.0: New contributions and a future research agenda. NJAS - Wageningen 
Journal of Life Sciences, 90–91, 100315.
Klerkx, L., & Rose, D. (2020). Dealing with the game-changing technologies of Agriculture 4.0: How do 
we manage diversity and responsibility in food system transition pathways? Global Food Security, 
24, 100347.
Kloppenburg, J. R. (2005). First the seed: The political economy of plant biotechnology. University of 
Wisconsin Press.
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. Pren-
tice Hall.
Kootstra, G., Wang, X., Blok, P. M., Hemming, J., & van Henten, E. (2021). Selective harvesting robot-
ics: Current research, trends, and future directions. Current Robotics Reports, 2, 95–104.
Kuch, D., Kearnes, M., & Gulson, K. (2020). The promise of precision: Datafication in medicine, agri-
culture and education. Policy Studies, 41, 527–546.
Lacombe, C., Couix, N., & Hazard, L. (2018). Designing agroecological farming systems with farmers: 
A review. Agricultural Systems, 165, 208–220.
Legun, K., & Burch, K. (2021). Robot-ready: How apple producers are assembling in anticipation of new 
AI robotics. Journal of Rural Studies, 82, 380–390.
Lieblein, G., Breland, T. A., Francis, C., & Østergaard, E. (2012). Agroecology education: Action-ori-
ented learning and research. The Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension, 18, 27–40.
Locke, K., Feldman, M., & Golden-Biddle, K. (2020). Coding practices and iterativity: Beyond templates 
for analyzing qualitative data. Organizational Research Methods (pp. 1–23).
Lopez-Ridaura, S., Barba-Escoto, L., Reyna-Ramirez, C. A., Sum, C., Palacios-Rojas, N., & Gerard, B. 
(2021). Maize intercropping in the milpa system. Diversity, extent and importance for nutritional 
security in the Western Highlands of Guatemala. Scientific Reports, 11, 3696.
Lowenberg‐DeBoer, J., Behrendt, K., Ehlers, M. H., Dillon, C., Gabriel, A., Huang, I. Y., Kumwenda, I., 
Mark, T., Meyer‐Aurich, A., Milics, G., Olagunju, K. O., Pedersen, S. M., Shockley, J., & Rose, D. 
(2021). Lessons to be learned in adoption of autonomous equipment for field crops. Applied Eco-
nomic Perspectives and Policy (pp. 1–7).
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 29 of 31 2
Lowenberg-DeBoer, J., & Erickson, B. (2019). Setting the record straight on precision agriculture adop-
tion. Agronomy Journal, 111, 1552–1569.
Magrini, M.-B., Béfort, N., & Nieddu, M. (2019). Technological lock-in and pathways for crop diversi-
fication in the bio-economy. In Lemaire, G., De Faccio Carvalho, P.C., Kronberg, S., Recous, S. 
(Eds.), Agroecosystem Diversity: Reconciling Contemporary Agriculture and Environmental Qual-
ity (pp. 375–388). Academic Press.
Mahmud, M. S. A., Abidin, M. S. Z., Emmanuel, A. A., & Hasan, H. S. (2020). Robotics and automa-
tion in agriculture: Present and future applications. Applications of Modelling and Simulation, 4, 
130–140.
Marinoudi, V., Sørensen, C. G., Pearson, S., & Bochtis, D. (2019). Robotics and labour in agriculture. A 
context consideration. Biosystems Engineering, 184, 111–121.
Meynard, J.-M., Dedieu, B., & Bos, A. P. (2012). Re-design and co-design of farming systems. An over -
view of methods and practices. In I. Darnhofer, D. Gibbon, & B. Dedieu (Eds.), Farming systems 
research into the 21st century: The new dynamic (pp. 405–429). Springer.
Meynard, J.-M., Jeuffroy, M.-H., Le Bail, M., Lefèvre, A., Magrini, M.-B., & Michon, C. (2017). Design-
ing coupled innovations for the sustainability transition of agrifood systems. Agricultural Systems, 
157, 330–339.
Miles, C. (2019). The combine will tell the truth: On precision agriculture and algorithmic rationality. 
Big Data &amp; Society, 6, 1.
Morel, K., Revoyron, E., San Cristobal, M., & Baret, P. V. (2020). Innovating within or outside dominant 
food systems? Different challenges for contrasting crop diversification strategies in Europe. PLOS 
ONE, 15, e0229910.
Murray, N. (2018). Agriculture wars. Viewpoint Magazine, viewpointmag.com.
Nicholls, C. I., & Altieri, M. A. (2018). Pathways for the amplification of agroecology. Agroecology and 
Sustainable Food Systems, 42, 1170–1193.
Nieuwenhuizen, A. T., Hofstee, J. W., & van Henten, E. J. (2010). Performance evaluation of an auto-
mated detection and control system for volunteer potatoes in sugar beet fields. Biosystems Engi-
neering, 107, 46–53.
Oberti, R., & Shapiro, A. (2016). Advances in robotic agriculture for crops. Biosystems Engineering, 146, 
1–2.
Pedersen, S. M., Fountas, S., Have, H., & Blackmore, B. S. (2006). Agricultural robots—System analysis 
and economic feasibility. Precision Agriculture, 7, 295–308.
Pissonnier, S., Dufils, A., & Le Gal, P.-Y. (2019). A methodology for redesigning agroecological radical 
production systems at the farm level. Agricultural Systems, 173, 161–171.
Prost, L. (2021). Revitalizing agricultural sciences with design sciences. Agricultural Systems, 193.
Prost, L., Berthet, E. T. A., Cerf, M., Jeuffroy, M.-H., Labatut, J., & Meynard, J.-M. (2017). Innovative 
design for agriculture in the move towards sustainability: Scientific challenges. Research in Engi-
neering Design, 28, 119–129.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. 
Social Studies of Science, 45, 691–716.
Radersma, S. (2020). Gronings bedrijf laat zelfstandig werkende robot akkers bewerken. RTV Noord.
Rasmussen, W. D. (1982). The mechanization of agriculture. Scientific American, 247, 76–89.
Relf-Eckstein, J. E., Ballantyne, A. T., & Phillips, P. W. B. (2019). Farming Reimagined: A case study 
of autonomous farm equipment and creating an innovation opportunity space for broadacre smart 
farming. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences, 90–91.
Rodríguez-Robayo, K. J., Méndez-López, M. E., Molina-Villegas, A., & Juárez, L. (2020). What do we 
talk about when we talk about milpa? A conceptual approach to the significance, topics of research 
and impact of the Mayan Milpa system. Journal of Rural Studies, 77, 47–54.
Rose, D. C., & Chilvers, J. (2018). Agriculture 4.0: Broadening responsible innovation in an era of smart 
farming. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 2, 1–7.
Rose, D. C., Lyon, J., de Boon, A., Hanheide, M., & Pearson, S. (2021). Responsible development of 
autonomous robotics in agriculture. Nature Food, 2, 306–309.
Rossing, W. A. H., Albicette, M. M., Aguerre, V., Leoni, C., Ruggia, A., & Dogliotti, S. (2021). Craft-
ing actionable knowledge on ecological intensification: Lessons from co-innovation approaches in 
Uruguay and Europe. Agricultural Systems, 190.
Rotz, S., Gravely, E., Mosby, I., Duncan, E., Finnis, E., Horgan, M., LeBlanc, J., Martin, R., Neufeld, H. 
T., Nixon, A., Pant, L., Shalla, V., & Fraser, E. (2019). Automated pastures and the digital divide: 
 L. Ditzler, C. Driessen 
1 3 2 Page 30 of 31
How agricultural technologies are shaping labour and rural communities. Journal of Rural Studies, 
68, 112–122.
Ryan, M., van der Burg, S., & Bogaardt, M.-J. (2021). Identifying key ethical debates for autonomous 
robots in agri-food: A research agenda. AI and Ethics.
Salembier, C., Segrestin, B., Sinoir, N., Templier, J., Weil, B., & Meynard, J.-M. (2020). Design of equip-
ment for agroecology: Coupled innovation processes led by farmer-designers. Agricultural Sys-
tems, 183.
Sanderson Bellamy, A., & Ioris, A. A. R. (2017). Addressing the knowledge gaps in agroecology and 
identifying guiding principles for transforming conventional agri-food systems. Sustainability, 9, 
330.
Sassenrath, G. F., Heilman, P., Luschei, E., Bennett, G. L., Fitzgerald, G., Klesius, P., Tracy, W., Wil-
liford, J. R., & Zimba, P. V. (2008). Technology, complexity and change in agricultural production 
systems. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, 23, 285–295.
Schmitz, A., & Moss, C. B. (2015). Mechanized agriculture: Machine adoption, farm size, and labor dis-
placement. AgBioforum, 18, 278–296.
Schouten, C. (2019). Realisatieplan Visie LNV: Op weg met nieuw perspectief. Den Haag.
Scott, J. C. (1999). Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed. 
Yale University Press.
Shepon, A., Henriksson, P. J. G., & Wu, T. (2018). Conceptualizing a sustainable food system in an auto-
mated world: Toward a “Eudaimonian” future. Frontiers in Nutrition, 5.
Sirami, C., Gross, N., Baillod, A. B., Bertrand, C., Carrié, R., Hass, A., Henckel, L., Miguet, P., Vuillot, 
C., Alignier, A., Girard, J., Batáry, P., Clough, Y., Violle, C., Giralt, D., Bota, G., Badenhausser, 
I., Lefebvre, G., Gauffre, B., … Fahrig, L. (2019). Increasing crop heterogeneity enhances mul-
titrophic diversity across agricultural regions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
116, 16442–16447.
Smith, A., & Fressoli, M. (2021). Post-automation. Futures, 132, 102778.
Sparrow, R., & Howard, M. (2020). Robots in agriculture: Prospects, impacts, ethics, and policy. Preci-
sion Agriculture 22, 818–833.
Stuiver, M. (2006). Highlighting the retro side of innovation and its potential for regime change in agri-
culture. In M. Terry & M. Jonathan Jonathan (Eds.), Between the local and the global (pp. 147–
173). Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Sukkel, W. (2020). Agro-ecology &amp; technology: Developments in agriculturel of the 21st century. 
BIOFACH.
Tamburini, G., Bommarco, R., Wanger, T. C., Kremen, C., van der Heijden, M. G. A., Liebman, M., & 
Hallin, S. (2020). Agricultural diversification promotes multiple ecosystem services without com-
promising yield. Science Advances, 6, eaba1715.
Timmermann, C., & Félix, G. F. (2015). Agroecology as a vehicle for contributive justice. Agriculture 
and Human Values, 32, 523–538.
Tittonell, P., Piñeiro, G., Garibaldi, L. A., Dogliotti, S., Olff, H., & Jobbagy, E. G. (2020). Agroecology 
in large scale farming—A research agenda. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems, 4.
Tsing, A. L. (2015). The mushroom at the end of the world. Princeton University Press.
van der Boon, V. (2020). Corona jaagt robotisering van de landbouw aan. Het Financieele Dagblad, 
FD.nl.
van der Burg, S., Bogaardt, M.-J., & Wolfert, S. (2019). Ethics of smart farming: Current questions and 
directions for responsible innovation towards the future. NJAS - Wageningen Journal of Life Sci-
ences, 90–91.
van der Ploeg, J. D. (2021). The political economy of agroecology. The Journal of Peasant Studies, 48, 
274–297.
van der Ploeg, J. D., Barjolle, D., Bruil, J., Brunori, G., Costa Madureira, L. M., Dessein, J., Drąg, Z., 
Fink-Kessler, A., Gasselin, P., Gonzalez de Molina, M., Gorlach, K., Jürgens, K., Kinsella, J., Kir -
wan, J., Knickel, K., Lucas, V., Marsden, T., Maye, D., Migliorini, P., … Wezel, A. (2019). The 
economic potential of agroecology: Empirical evidence from Europe. Journal of Rural Studies, 71, 
46–61.
van der Veen, M. (2010). Agricultural innovation: Invention and adoption or change and adaptation? 
World Archaeology, 42, 1–12.
van Dooren, T., & Rose, D. B. (2016). Lively ethography: Storying animist worlds. Environmental 
Humanities, 8, 77–94.
1 3Automating Agroecology: How to Design a Farming Robot Without…Page 31 of 31 2
van Hulst, F., Ellis, R., Prager, K., & Msika, J. (2020). Using co-constructed mental models to understand 
stakeholder perspectives on agro-ecology. International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability, 18, 
172–195.
van Mourik, S., van der Tol, R., Linker, R., Reyes-Lastiri, D., Kootstra, G., Koerkamp, P. G., & van 
Henten, E. J. (2021). Introductory overview: Systems and control methods for operational manage-
ment support in agricultural production systems. Environmental Modelling & Software, 139.
van Oort, P. A. J., Gou, F., Stomph, T. J., & van der Werf, W. (2020). Effects of strip width on yields in 
relay-strip intercropping: A simulation study. European Journal of Agronomy, 112.
Vandermeer, J. H. (1986). Mechanized agriculture and social welfare: The tomato harvester in Ohio. 
Agriculture and Human Values, 3, 21–25.
Vasconez, J. P., Kantor, G. A., & Auat Cheein, F. A. (2019). Human–robot interaction in agriculture: A 
survey and current challenges. Biosystems Engineering, 179, 35–48.
Wezel, A., Bellon, S., Doré, T., Francis, C., Vallod, D., & David, C. (2009). Agroecology as a science, a 
movement and a practice. A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 29, 503–515.
Wezel, A., Casagrande, M., Celette, F., Vian, J.-F., Ferrer, A., & Peigné, J. (2014). Agroecological prac-
tices for sustainable agriculture. A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 34, 1–20.
WUR. (2009). KWIN-AGV 2009. Wageningen University & Research.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Lenora Ditzler1  · Clemens Driessen2
 Clemens Driessen 
 clemens.driessen@wur.nl
1 Farming Systems Ecology Group, Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 430, 
6700 AK Wageningen, The Netherlands
2 Cultural Geography Group, Wageningen University and Research, Droevendaalsesteeg 3, 
6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands
