Vol.:(0123456789)Cultural Studies of Science Education (2021) 16:85–107
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-020-09994-4
1 3
ORIGINAL PAPER
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking 
with life history(ies), bodies and stickiness
Sarah El Halwany1  · Larry Bencze1  · Nurul Hassan1 · Kristen Schaffer1 · 
Minja Milanovic1 · Majd Zouda1
Received: 10 February 2020 / Accepted: 10 August 2020 / Published online: 10 November 2020 
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020
Abstract
In life history methodologies, ‘human’ lives appear to take primacy over other lives. 
Within science education literature, life history methods often are approached as reflec-
tive tools to make meaning out of teachers’ pedagogical practices and commitments. In 
the present research, we tinker with life history research, to follow its performative work 
in (re-)producing what counts as life, nature, science and science education. Thinking with 
life history(ies), bodies and stickiness, we analyze a college instructor’s (Nurul) life with 
others. Nurul is committed to a science pedagogical approach (‘STEPWISE’) centered 
on STSE education for social and environmental justice. This paper relays what was (re-)
produced when Nurul’s life narrative, and our own encounters with life history method-
ologies were plugged into one another. Analytically, we discuss stickiness of humanist and 
meaning-making practices in life history methodologies and how this might have enabled/
complicated our analyses of Nurul’s life history. We invite further analyses into produc-
tive aspects of life history(ies) and how they might gesture to pedagogical possibilities for 
being/living differently within nature, science and science education.
Keywords Life history · Affective economies · Stickiness · Nature · Embodiment · STSE 
education
There is an urgent need to supplement the familiar repertoire of humanist methods 
that rely on generating talk and text with experimental practices that amplify other 
sensory, bodily and affective registers and extend the company and modality of what 
constitutes a research subject (Whatmore 2006, pp. 606–607).
The impetus of this inquiry is to “amplify sensory, bodily and affective registers” in life his-
tory methodologies that are known to privilege talk and human interpretation (Cary 1999). 
Lead Editor: L. Avraamidou.
 * Sarah El Halwany 
 sarah.elhalwany@mail.utoronto.ca
 Larry Bencze 
 larry.bencze@utoronto.ca
1 Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University of Toronto, 252 Bloor Street West, Toronto, 
ON, Canada
86 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
When engaging life history methodologies, our attention may turn to the ‘human’ whose 
life is told, complicating efforts to “extend the company and modality of what constitutes a 
research subject,” and in a way limiting opportunities for storying life history(ies) otherwise.
Our research embodies such methodological and theoretical dilemmas, noting “sticki-
ness” (Ahmed 2004) of humanist and meaning-making practices in representations of 
lives. We, initially, sought to explore life history of ‘Nurul,’ a college instructor and third 
author, as reflective of his commitments to a pedagogical approach centered on critical and 
activist STSE education, STEPWISE (Bencze 2017). Nurul gave meanings to his practices 
by evoking his past experiences with nature. Our research subject, at that time, appeared to 
be distinctively, ‘Nurul.’ As for nature, it was reduced to a series of meanings that enabled 
Nurul to justify his practices. A sense of dissatisfaction grew out of those initial encounters 
with Nurul’s life history as well as some of the assumptions that seemed to ground our 
engagement with life history as a methodology.
This paper relays what was (re-)produced when Nurul’s life narrative and our own 
encounters with life history methodologies were “plugged into” (Jackson and Mazzei 
2013) one another. At the outset, then, is recognition of our inabilities to detach ourselves 
as researchers from our object of study; we could only re-tell Nurul’s life through our own 
and collective embodied lives.
While storying one’s life experiences is likely to be imbued with strong emotions (e.g., 
emotional ties to nature), limited research examines how life history not only reflects emo-
tional experiences but may “produce new affective and embodied connections” (Zembylas 
2007a, p. 19, emphasis in original). We are keen on exploring productive aspects of life 
history(ies) and how they might gesture to pedagogical possibilities for being/living differ -
ently within nature, science and science education.
This paper is organized into major parts. First, we dive into various dilemmas and how 
they troubled our initial analysis, pushing us into “thinking with” (Jackson and Mazzei 
2012) life histor(ies), bodies and stickiness. “Thinking with” can possibly help us to “stut-
ter, slow, or stop with regard to taken-for-granted and received meanings and matters” 
(Higgins, Wallace, and Bazzul 2019, p. 160). Throughout this paper, we remain particu-
larly attuned to affective economies (Ahmed 2004) of life history research and how they 
might stick us-Nurul to particular ways of thinking–being–relating to data, lives, nature, 
science and science education. Simultaneously, we attempt to perform some blockages in 
those affective economies by revisiting earlier analysis and storying Nurul’s life with oth-
ers differently. This paper, then, stories those onto-epistemic movements toward and away 
from being–living with nature, science, science education and premises of life history 
research, propelled by an overarching wondering into what it might mean to become alive 
in one’s pedagogy and one’s research.
Thinking with life history(ies)
Thinking with life history(ies) is an invitation to think with lives, with what exists and 
could exist; yet, at times, made lifeless. For some time, those ontologies of existence have 
been contained in human lives. In defining life history approaches, Ardra Cole and Gary 
Knowles (2001, p. 11) write: “In as much as it is humanly possible, life history inquiry is 
about gaining insights into the broader human condition by coming to know and under -
stand the experiences of other humans” (emphasis added). Stressing a similar point, Cary 
(1999) suggests that narrative forms of research have been generally grounded in humanist 
87
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
epistemological assumptions that authorize meaning making of humans as reflective 
of social, cultural and political realities. Rubby Dhunpath (2000, p. 544) writes: “I want 
to suggest boldly, therefore, that the life history approach is probably the only authentic 
means of understanding how motives and practices reflect the intimate intersection of insti-
tutional and individual experience in the postmodern world.” While we do acknowledge 
that lives told are ‘molded’ in larger social, cultural, political contexts (e.g., Chinn 2002), 
we remain skeptical about life history research’s claims for authenticity in reflecting reali-
ties. Biographical and phenomenological accounts of one’s own history, not only efface 
other (hi)stories, but they idealize voice and authenticity (Lather, Jackson and Mazzei 
2009), giving illusions of an all-knowing, rational and consistent subject, able to give a full 
account of their life.
As collaborators on this work, we often hear ourselves speaking of Nurul’s life his-
tory in terms suggesting that ‘his’ life is all that mattered. Consequently, we wondered 
how ‘human’ life history may usurp rights of other ‘non-humans’ others to come to life. 
Humans have often associated life with animacy, even though current science acknowl-
edges that so-called non-humans belong to realm of the living. However, it seems that any -
thing that remain imperceptible to humans as movement—within human-centric temporal 
periods of interaction—turns to an inanimate, almost lifeless object, without consideration 
for its own temporal scale (Chaudhury 2019). In her efforts to “make time for soil,” Maria 
Puig de la Bellacasa (2015), a feminist scholar within fields of Science and Technology 
Studies (STS), remarks how human-centric timescales and their ensuing interests in pro-
ductivity of soils marginalize other forms of temporalities that enable different forms of 
soil care. Human-centric timescales grounded in technoscientific inventions maintain soil 
as a resource rather than a vibrant living community. She argues that “what soil is thought 
to be affects the ways in which we care for it, and vice versa” (p. 692). Borrowing similar 
terms, one might say that what life is thought to be affects ways we care for it, and vice 
versa. Springgay and Truman (2017) give us a way of musing about rocks not as “immuta-
ble or passive” but “agential and vital” (p. 852) to center movement matter as existing in all 
things. This line of work stresses values of attending to different temporalities in a more-
than-human world, as we forge different “ethico-political” (de la Bellacasa 2011) attune-
ments to what is animate–inanimate, living–nonliving.
Another significant point to our discussion in this section is that while life history meth-
odologies often suggest a reflective stance on one’s life, they often fall short of recogniz-
ing how such reflective accounts come to perform one’s life with others. Etienne Wenger’s 
knowledge duality theory and his proposed dialectics between world and sign (see also 
Roth 2001) may be useful to our argument here. The life history as it is lived in the moment 
and as it is unraveled in the moment could be equated to the world (or the ‘real’), whereas 
the narrator’s/researcher’s re-telling one’s life experiences could be the sign (a represen-
tation of what is ‘real,’ what was once lived). Understandably, the sign is never lost in 
the real, nor the real/material is ever absent in the sign (Lemke 2015). Phenomenologi-
cally speaking, we recognize that meaning-making practices are always already embodied/
material because of our in being with the world and with our participants (Hwang and 
Roth 2011). Similarly, our material engagement with the world seems to be always already 
dependent on our shared sign systems and how we take up or not shared meanings (Tan and 
Barton 2008). Having said that, reflective accounts in life history methodologies appear 
restricted to translations from the world to the sign, privileging meaning-making practices, 
with perhaps less attention to the opposite translation, whereby the sign comes to equally 
perform (and not merely reflect) the (material) world. Thinking with life history(ies) offers 
us a way of attending to materiality of (more-than-human) lives.
88 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Narrative forms of research have often attended to how recounting can take many 
forms depending on audience, expectations, contexts that frame telling (see, for example, 
Maclean 1988). Those are not just mere background elements that influence telling/reflec-
tions phenomenologically speaking, but their entanglements with acts of storying produce 
worlds, realities and subjects. When Nurul recounted his life history in relation to his expe-
riences with nature, at times, nature appeared like a brute entity, brought to life through 
human (meaning making) practices. This reflective tendency to think about nature, rather 
than with nature (Wallace, Higgins and Bazzul 2018), could help maintain a view of nature 
as a resource that comes to life ‘only’ through human meaning-making practices, perhaps 
re-inscribing a hierarchical distinction between what is nature and what is human.
Thinking with bodies
The title of this section is likely to carry double connotations: (1) Thinking is never imma-
terial, it is always linked to a body; we need a body to think with and (2) Thinking with 
bodies is an invitation to extend how we come to relate to bodies (beyond the bounded 
human body, see Alsop 2011). While it is generally recognized that thinking (simplistically 
understood as a cognitive function of the brain) needs a body, we remain cautious not to 
espouse this first meaning as it seems to operate from a long-standing Cartesian tradition, 
plaguing science education, whereby mind and body, are maintained as separate (Alsop 
2005). Instead, we locate our discussion in the second meaning.
In further clarifying our understandings of body and embodiment, we can’t avoid 
addressing how the body has been theorized in relation to two broader constructs: emo-
tions/affect (and their associated bodily connections) and cognition. Some have perceived 
the body as biological and/or social or as needing to transcend biological and social dichot-
omies (Lupton 1998).
Fields of neurophysiology and psychology often explained emotions in terms of physi-
ological bodily arousal. In that instance, the body serves as an object, a container of bio-
logical and physiological changes, as per studies of facial expressions to determine emo-
tional states (Ekman 1993). Others argued that bodily and physiological responses precede 
(rather than coincide with) emotions. In other words, humans feel a bodily sensation, eval-
uate it cognitively and assign to it an emotion label (Folkman and Lazarus 1988). In those 
instances, the body is defined as a mere vehicle for emotions, reactive and biological.
Studies in semiotics (Kress 2009) and embodied cognition (Colombetti 2013) have rec-
ognized irreducibility of reasoning to disembodied thought. According to existential phe-
nomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty, embodiment is inextricably connected to percep-
tion; our bodies give meanings to our lived experiences. “The ‘flesh of the body’ is made 
of the same flesh of the world, and this is precisely why we experience the world” (cited 
in Zembylas 2007a, p. 21). The “flesh of the body” corresponds to a view of the body as a 
“sentient and sensible being” (Merleau-Ponty cited in Crossley 1995); as that which “sees 
and can be seen, hears and can be heard, touches and can be touched” (p. 46). For Merleau-
Ponty, the reciprocity by which the body encounters the world delineates the body as a site 
of knowledge and perception (Crossley 1995).
Postmodern understandings of the body suggest that the body does not only perceive 
the world as part of an integral self but performs and is performed by the world (Zembylas 
2007a). The body is performative in that it acts not only as a site of knowledge (or perception) 
but also as a site of becoming (Micciche 2007). Jackson and Mazzei (2012) argued that some 
89
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
post-structuralist accounts didn’t fully engage materiality of bodies, which, in some instances, 
remained subsumed under discourses and discursive practices. Consequently, new materialists 
and post-qualitative researchers sought to give matter a voice (Mazzei and Jackson 2017) and 
advanced a view of performativity to encompass all that is bodied (beyond human–non-human 
dichotomies) (Manning 2014). Gilles Deleuze (1988) builds on seventeenth century philoso-
pher Baruch Spinoza’s view of the body as that which “affects and is affected.” The body is 
no longer defined by its form, organs and functions but by “the affects of which it is capable” 
(p. 124). Bodies and meanings “intra-act” (Barad 2003), in the sense that they are ontologi-
cally equivalent; one does not precede the other; they come into being with one another. Thus, 
the body is not a container for human emotions (in psychological accounts), nor least a basis 
of human perception (in phenomenological accounts), nor is it merely a discursive product 
(in some post-structuralist/socio-constructivist accounts). Rather, bodies are performative, 
constantly delineated through encounters with other bodies, as products of affects’ circulation 
(Massumi 2015). For Latour (2005, p. 205), “to have a body is to learn to be affected, meaning 
‘effectuated,’ moved, put into motion by other entities, humans or non-humans.”
Erin Manning (2014, p. 163) argues: “There is never a body as such: what we know are 
edgings and contourings, forces and intensities: a body is its movement.” Ingold (2011) argues 
that lives do not unfold in places, but “through, around, to and from them, from and to places 
elsewhere” (p. 148). He coins the term wayfaring to describe “the embodied experience of the 
wayfarer” (p. 148), “threading his [sic] way through the world rather than routing it across it 
from point to point” (p. 151). He moves on to distinguish between space and place, occupying 
and inhabiting, transporting and wayfaring whereby the first term in each of those pairs pre-
supposes a demarcation between inside/outside, in comparison with the second term, which 
recognizes ontological co-constitution of selves, places, objects and discourses (Latour 2005).
This prompts us to think about recounting Nurul’s life history not in terms of the places his 
body came to occupy (to reside in), but rather in terms of wayfaring, of lines along which he 
inhabited various places only to move through others. This theoretical move is important in 
light of our attempts to come to terms with our axiological/theoretical commitments not to re-
inscribe a humanistic attitude that privileges bodies occupying/residing in places, as if bodies 
are demarcated from their surroundings. Thus, we sought Nurul’s movements not in places, as 
if Nurul is pre-constituted by them, but Nurul as his movement, performing himself endlessly 
in the process (Ingold 2011).
Thinking with bodies, hence, pushes us to reconcile a view of the body not as a vehicle for 
the mind but rather as that which comes into existence from its encounters with other bod-
ies (humans, non-humans). Materiality, thus understood, is emerging (Barad 2003); it is what 
comes to matter (and matter less) through acts of storying and bringing bodies-meanings 
together and away from each other. Thinking with bodies affords ways to interrogate assumed 
demarcations of bodies, as an ontological move toward increased social and ecological justice 
through science education (Martusewicz, Lupinacci and Schnakenberg 2010).
Thinking with stickiness
Feminist and cultural theorist Sara Ahmed (2004) employs notions of stickiness to refer 
to “accumulation of affective value” as part of affective economies “that generates attach-
ments to others, to world-views and to a whole array of sources and objects” (Micciche 
2007, p. 1). In affective economies, emotions do not reside in any ‘body.’ Rather, emotions 
are likened to a form of capital that increases in affective value with continuous movements 
90 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
among bodies and their meanings. In analyzing public texts and discourses that reinforce 
notions of nation, Whiteness, others (e.g., refugees, immigrants, indigenous), Ahmed 
(2004) notes how emotions such as hate, anger, shame, disgust are not ‘objects’ to be sin-
gled out in those texts but that those emotions are processes, subliminal forces and intensi-
ties that bind and separate bodies by sticking them to certain ideas, objects and discourses 
(and not others). In our study, we examine how Nurul’s life history accumulated affective 
value, as ideas, discourses and bodies (body understood here from post-humanist traditions 
as performative that “which affects and is affected”) gained currency through their circula-
tion in acts of telling, re-telling and coming to know with Nurul.
Life history methodologies have their own affective economies. In our case, there 
appeared to be something deeply comforting and satisfying in making sense of Nurul’s pre-
sent pedagogical practices in light of his past experiences. It felt ‘good’ to organize his life 
in linear and coherent ways to reveal ‘hidden’ aspects that brought meanings into his pre-
sent practices. Those emotions worked on us to orient us in particular ways (and not others) 
(Ahmed 2010). They oriented us as (human) bodies (i.e., authors/collaborators) to ‘know’ 
lives of other (human) bodies (i.e., Nurul). In the process and almost immediately, nature 
(as it figured in Nurul’s narratives) turned into a theme. Nature became the non-human. 
Nurul’s life lured us into putting order and making meaning out of what appeared random 
and in need of an explanation (e.g., his commitments to a pedagogical approach in the 
context of a structured and overly determined college education). Those affective econo-
mies even oriented us to recount lives according to fixed places and times. The chronologi-
cal progression in time and place of lives is equally predictable and “comforting” (Ahmed 
2019). There is almost a ‘naturalness’ (one might argue this is not the right word) to such 
affective orientations that make them hard to resist, that make them sticky.
Ahmed (2004, p. 91) writes: “Some forms of stickiness are about holding things 
together. Some are about blockages or stopping things moving.” Affective economies of 
life history methodologies worked on us to hold our attachments to humanist, anthropo-
genic, linear and phenomenological forms of analyses. Thinking with life history(ies), bod-
ies and stickiness afforded some blockages in those earlier analyses. Analytically, we found 
ourselves always in the middle (Aoki 1993); comforted in our efforts to organize ‘Nurul’s 
life’ into a coherent and meaningful story while feeling troubled by those very claims. Ale-
cia Jackson (2013) invites us to re-think the conventional biographical question of: “how 
do we accurately represent being?” into “how does being [widely understood] become in 
the act of representation?” (p. 114, emphasis in original).
Coming to know with Nurul
Nurul is a sessional instructor at a community college located in the Greater Toronto Area, 
Canada. He had recently immigrated from India. For the past 3 years, he has been teach-
ing courses in an industrial microbiology program. This two-year program is designed to 
provide college students with knowledges and skills needed to join a workforce of bio-
technicians. Specifically, students are trained to acquire skills that will allow them to work 
as “bench technicians in pharmaceutical and food industries” (as advertised on the col-
lege website). Thus, emphases are placed on acquisition of practical and technical skills 
(e.g., microbial plating, counting, identifying microorganisms in different water samples, 
testing effectiveness of antibiotics on specific microorganisms) often at expense of real-
izing implications of science and technology applications on societies and environments. 
91
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
Amidst those “socio-political silences” (Gough 2015), Nurul’s pedagogical orientations 
toward STEPWISE approaches may be perceived as unconventional in this context. STEP -
WISE, stands for Science and Technology Education Promoting Wellbeing for Individu-
als, Societies and Environments (Bencze 2017). As a pedagogical approach, it develops 
capacities for students to revisit their relationships with their world (El Halwany, Zouda, 
Pouliot and Bencze (2020)), through critical examination of science and technology prod-
ucts and through engaging in forms of activism for social and environmental justice. STEP -
WISE may be situated within socio-ecojustice current relative to STSE education (Pedretti 
and Nazir 2011). Against backgrounds of college science courses, STEPWISE was often 
received by students with a renewed sense of interest in science. Nurul’s students would 
often comment how “they never studied social and environmental connections of science 
and technology in their previous courses at the college” and how this learning experience 
was “new” to them.
This research was part of a year-long action research project (Noffke and Somekh 2009) 
with Nurul, who has been actively implementing lessons and activities around the STEP -
WISE pedagogical framework. As probably implied by now, the present research does 
not extend to Nurul’s actual practices with STEPWISE nor to his students’ direct experi-
ences with this framework. Instead, this life history project materialized following our past 
engagements with Nurul while teaching at the college. These past engagement afforded 
some “thickness” to our analyses (Denzin 1989) and to how we came to encounter Nurul’s 
life history.
This inquiry draws from various data sources that include: a 3-hour life history inter -
view with him (Goodson and Sikes 2001) followed by written reflections on his life his-
tory in relation to courses that he was teaching at the college (e.g., physics for food sci-
ence technology, microbiology projects), Nurul’s reflective journal that he maintained 
throughout a semester of teaching at the college using STEPWISE approaches, weekly 
audio-recorded meetings that primarily involved Nurul, Larry and Sarah and that resulted 
in further reflections on his life history and his practices and lastly, informal discussions 
and email correspondences asking for clarifications related to his own written and other 
transcribed reflections.
Initially, Sarah and Larry (first two authors) met to entertain potential research propos-
als that would involve all current collaborators and who have been previously involved in 
an action research project around Nurul’s uses of STEPWISE in his microbiology labora-
tory courses (Schaffer, Milanovic, El Halwany, Hassan, Zouda and Bencze 2017). Yet, this 
time around, we didn’t have direct access to Nurul’s teaching context (because of various 
logistical limitations) and, thus, our interest in studying Nurul’s life history appeared—
at least partly—to embody our current preoccupations, what was and was not materially 
available to us. While visiting Nurul’s teaching context was not possible, Nurul often came 
to us, to Larry’s office at OISE.1 The mundanity of those early material encounters trans-
lated into a research project whose more potent purpose became to know Nurul’s life his-
tory in relation to his practice.
As part of a 3-hour life history interview between Sarah (first author here) and Nurul, 
Sarah began by describing and detailing aspects of her own life history, making sure to 
situate life events in social, political and cultural contexts, as recommended for life history 
1 Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, teacher education college and research institute at the Uni-
versity of Toronto. All collaborators on this paper are associated with OISE, whether as faculty (Larry) or 
graduate students (Nurul, Kristen, Minja, Majd and Sarah).
92 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
research and timeline interviews (Adriansen 2012). Those created openings for Nurul to 
begin to talk about his life history. Given extents of details he provided, we could tell that 
Nurul was willingly sharing aspects of his life history. The mutual telling allowed us to 
juxtapose similar aspects and practices in Nurul and Sarah’s respective cultures (India and 
Lebanon, respectively), around gender roles, family expectations, religious and cultural 
norms, schooling and our experiences with science education. At various points during 
our life history interview, Sarah expressed “emotional understanding” (Denzin 2003) of 
Nurul’s reflections on certain aspects of his life history that she has personally experienced 
as part of her own life history. In other words, some meanings could be viscerally experi-
enced, marking the contours of her own gendered, non-White, immigrant body.
After introducing him to purposes of the study, Nurul reconstructed his life history, 
highlighting pivotal moments in his life (e.g., his science education in India, his teach-
ing experiences in various parts of the world, and his learning/teaching experiences in 
Canada). It’s important to point out that Nurul himself shares a similar trajectory as the 
students he teaches in the college. He identifies with some of his students’ cultural back -
grounds (India). Before he became an instructor at the college, he also graduated from 
biotechnology program from that same college. He was a graduate student in one of the 
teacher education courses taught by Larry (second author), during which he was introduced 
to the STEPWISE pedagogical framework. Kristen, Minja, Sarah, Majd and Larry further 
facilitated an action research project with Nurul as he infused his microbiology labora-
tory courses with STEPWISE approaches (Schaffer et al. 2017). Recently, Nurul started his 
PhD in education, as a part-time student (and alongside other collaborators on this paper), 
while still teaching at the college and continuing to implement STEPWISE in his practices. 
Sarah observed Nurul’s classes as part of her dissertation work. Thus, Nurul is uniquely 
positioned in various entanglements that he has with places and individuals that consti-
tuted aspects of his life history. Those entanglements make it even more difficult to think of 
Nurul’s life history as a mere object of our study. Instead, we came to know with Nurul as a 
companion among others.
Moving within data (analyses)
Because we are seeking hybrid conceptions of bodies (including bodies of data), we can’t 
merely think about our data, but also with our data. In a sense, our analytical approaches 
might be seen as embodying an onto/epistemic movement “within and against interpretiv -
ism” (Jackson and Mazzei 2013, p. 261).
At various times, we were confronted with stickiness of a thematic reading of Nurul’s 
life history. We hurried to search for analytical and theoretical frameworks that would help 
us fit our inert data into meaningful categories. Our approaches to those frameworks com-
plicated our efforts to think beyond meaning-making practices (and their reflective stances) 
while at the same time, they created openings for thinking–being differently within data-
nature-science (education).
It is important to acknowledge that Nurul’s depictions of his relationships to nature and 
his early life experiences were collectively told/crafted. Indeed, while Nurul alluded to 
his relationships to nature in his initial life history interview, we, as research collabora-
tors, became particularly interested in learning more about his experiences with nature as 
a result of reviewing the literature and coming across the work of Teresa Shume (2017), 
among others. In our subsequent meetings with Nurul, we purposefully turned his attention 
93
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
to Shume’s (2017) framework on “human relationships to nature,” asking him to further 
reflect on his relationships to nature. Since he could not recount in detail his early experi-
ences as a child in rural India, it later came to our attention that Nurul had been in con-
tact with family members still living in India to “ask for more details” (oral communica-
tion with him) about this period of his life. Ultimately, his written reflections about those 
early experiences were possible as distant and close bodies and memories were collectively 
mobilized to perform those relationships to nature. We think it is important to acknowledge 
those events in order to draw attention to complicities and affectivities that brought us in 
contact with Nurul’s life and to insist on material (and ultimately value-laden) nature of our 
encounters with his life history. Nurul’s representations of his life history were never really 
‘his’ own and his life history unraveled itself to us ‘as such’ because of his bodily inser -
tion with others in a distant time (his parents in India) and his bodily insertion with us as 
collaborators and colleagues in the program. Thus, ‘his’ representations were immanently 
performative drawing a landscape in which we all participated in continuously constituting 
his ways of knowing, being and valuing nature, science and science education.
As we hurried to make sense of Nurul’s life history, we found solace in Shume’s frame-
work especially after noting a repetitive reference to nature in Nurul’s storying of lives. 
In her adapted framework, Shume identifies variation in human-nature relationships along 
four dimensions: technocentrism (us over nature), egocentrism (us vs. nature), ecocentrism 
(us in nature), resiliocentrism (us within nature). Those dimensions are informed by rela-
tive intersections among ontological (from a reductionist to a holistic view of nature), epis-
temological (from pragmatic to idealistic interactions with nature) and axiological continua 
(from anthropocentric to biocentric value-based judgments about nature). For instance, 
egocentric orientations reduce nature to a ‘machine’ that produces consumable resources to 
satisfy human needs, often at expense of non-human needs.
Those categories attracted us. They appeared convenient, easy to work with, distinc-
tively distinct (acknowledging Shume’s argument that they are better seen on a continuum). 
Our own approaches to this framework rested on practices of associating and labeling 
excerpts of data from Nurul’s life experiences according to those four identified dimen-
sions. It seemed the ‘right’ and most evident approach, from our side at least. We were 
comforted by the apparent straightforward-ness of the task and felt attached to practices 
of labeling which supposedly legitimized our research, grounded it, made it strong, gave 
it meaning. We were haunted by a search for meanings. Labels, themes, codes organize, 
smooth out inconsistencies (MacLure 2017). They could be comforting to our eyes, ears 
and imaginaries. They circulated in affective economies of ‘good’ research practices.
As themes on bodies and embodiment started to take form, we took refuge in words 
from Csordas, who called for “a methodological attitude that demands attention to bodili-
ness even in purely verbal data such as written text or oral interview” (Csordas 1999, p. 
148). Our approaches to this methodological attitude (compounded by a missed opportu-
nity to question what “purely verbal data” might mean) led us into concluding that life 
history research enabled Nurul to reflect on his embodied connections to nature, others and 
science education. We believed this to be an important insight given paucity of research 
on bodies, affects and emotions in (science) education (Zembylas 2007a). Yet, embodi-
ment, thus understood, remained within a bounded body (including bodies of “purely ver -
bal data”). Notions of embodiment were once again phenomenological as we hurried to 
uncover how (human) bodies ‘are’ represented through verbal transcripts. At that time, 
such notions of embodiment appeared to matter for our research and perhaps what mat-
tered less was an inquiry into ways more-than-human bodies ‘become’ through acts of 
representations.
94 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Perhaps extending to a sticky thematic reading, we noted our propensity to jump to 
hasty conclusions, to close off potentials within data. We hurried to make sense of Nurul’s 
embodied connections to nature, science and science education, to determine what those 
embodied connections might mean to his current practices. In our attempts to move away 
from such reflective stances, we remarked how we might have conflated notions of per -
formativity with justification. We heard ourselves saying that Nurul performed his current 
practices by evoking his embodied relationships to nature, others and science education. 
Yet, we treated performativity as a mere confirmatory (reflective?) tool that made Nurul’s 
commitments to his practices preexist what we came to ‘discover’ later on through our 
inquiry (Zembylas 2007a). Our analysis of (post-human) performativity seemed to always 
fall short from attending to the doing of life history (research).
As we slowly absorbed uneasy stickiness of biographical approaches that came to inces-
santly (Ahmed 2004) on our approaches to life history research, we began exploring other 
analytical venues. Fenwick, Edwards and Sawchuk’s (2015) call for “tracing the socio-
material” in educational research appeared particularly promising. Specifically, we sought 
ways to become attuned to social and material arrangements in Nurul’s life history that 
“make visible the mundanity of everyday life” (p. vii) in carrying effects. Furthermore, we 
became specifically intrigued by research-creation practices (Manning 2015) that seek to 
generate new forms of experiences, bringing together what “often seem like disparate prac-
tices, giving them a conduit for collective expression” (p. 53). Non-representational meth-
odologies (Vannini 2015) and relational materialism (Latour 2005) constantly brought into 
our purview ways to think of “life [as] movement (…) a viscous becoming in time–space” 
(Vannini 2015, p. 3). In developing an argument around possible contributions of non-
presentational theories (NRTs) to education, Zembylas (2017) summarizes one of NRT’s 
tenets as “recognizing the vitality of life” (p. 397). This invites attunements to “complex-
ity, unpredictability and indeterminacy of things in the world as opposed to the lenses of 
rational behavior, causation, instrumental reasoning and mechanistic predictability” (p. 
397). Non-representational theories “redirect attention from the posited meanings of rep-
resentations towards the materiality of things in which everything co-exists on the same 
‘plane of immanence’” (Deleuze and Guattari, cited in Manning 2015, p. 395). Non-repre-
sentational methodologies do not set themselves in opposition to representational research, 
“but they pursue it in parallel with differentiation” (Vannini 2015, p. 7). Such differen-
tiation may exist in very acts of research creation, characterized by a “marked attention to 
events and the new potentialities for being, doing and thinking that events may bring forth” 
(Anderson and Harrison 2010, p. 19).
Movements of inquiry
This section is subdivided into three subsections that follow Nurul’s life with others in 
ways that (re-)produce (new) potentialities for being within nature, science and science 
education. In each subsection, phenomenological/thematic accounts of Nurul’s life history 
are presented in parallel with posthuman/materialist analyses as we strive to think with 
life history(ies), bodies and stickiness. In moving between those two levels of analyses, we 
seek to embody continuities and discontinuities between modes of thinking about data and 
with data, building on dilemmas presented earlier in this paper.
95
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
This move into and out of phenomenological accounts of life history is further entan-
gled with Nurul’s own accounts moving into and out of certain (natural) landscapes when 
storying his life with others.
Within nature
Nurul gave meanings to his commitments to STSE issues by referring to his relationships 
to nature as a child growing in a rural town in India, ‘Malyal.’ In re-telling his early child-
hood experiences, his descriptions came to be saturated with olfactory, auditory, gustatory 
and tactile re-encounters with nature. Speaking of his emotional attachments to nature as 
a child roaming the forest, he said: “I felt a kind of emotional connection with that wilder -
ness. Even to this day, I remember that delicious smell of fresh foliage.” Those embodied 
reflections allowed Nurul to relive visceral sensations and were situated in his discussions 
of his own personal values of temperance, harmony and sustainability with nature. Such 
values were embedded in an ecocentric worldview (us in nature) when he says: “Like all 
other people in the village, my family and I knew that we are deeply embedded in nature 
and that our very survival depended on nature’s generosity.” Those ecocentric relation-
ships to nature might even have allowed him and other villagers to witness and experience 
beauty in nature: “We heard so many first-hand experiences of villagers that happen to 
watch a peacock dancing in the forest when it rains.”
A thematic reference to ecocentric relationships to nature supposedly translate into 
humans feeling captivated by ‘it.’ Sensuous and emotional connections to nature within 
ecocentric relationships seem to maintain nature as that which is demarcated from that 
which is human. Within those demarcations, the ability to live in harmony and temperance 
with nature, maintains nature as that which is lived with, possibly as the “other” (Hoeg 
2016). To “experience beauty in nature” is phenomenologically articulated, centering the 
human eye. Aesthetic experiences with nature circulate in affective economies that main-
tain nature as a human experience. In here, those affective economies produce nature as 
beautiful, sensuous and romanticized. “A peacock dancing” further attests to anthropomor -
phizing what is simultaneously produced as non-human, a peacock. From a phenomeno-
logical account, the dancing is ‘in’ the peacock, ‘in’ a body. Re-reading this segment “We 
heard so many first-hand experiences of villagers that happen to watch a peacock dancing 
in the forest when it rains,” we felt inclined to offer an alternative account that extends 
notions of embodiment to all that is bodied (Manning 2010). We playfully tinkered with 
this aesthetic scene so that “hearing,” “watching,” “villagers,” “forest,” “rain,” “peacock” 
and “us” collaborators are now all doing the dancing. The dancing seems to embody all of 
those other bodies and sensibilities, pushing us to ask: Who is dancing? Who is becoming 
beauty? Who is moved by who?
Amidst his re-telling of those early experiences, we also encountered instances whereby 
Nurul’s relationships to nature could be more characterized as technocentric (us over 
nature), when he and his friend would playfully engage in tricking nature: “Sometimes we 
felt bad for cheating mother hen by including other species’ eggs in its clutch of eggs for 
it to incubate.” Yet, Nurul acknowledges that “they felt bad for cheating mother hen.” This 
could be an insight into complexities of one’s relationships with nature, as it is fluid and 
interchanging, hence, Shume’s (2017)) depiction of those relationships on a continuum.
Feelings of guilt toward the ‘non-human’ living other calls our attention; “feeling 
bad for cheating mother hen” extends emotions to the hen, who feels cheated on, thus 
96 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
causing Nurul and his friend to “feel bad.” Yet, at the risk of re-inscribing human-hen 
divisions, we are invited, through this playful scene that involves incubating the ‘wrong’ 
eggs under mother hen, into considering naturalized and normalized meanings of moth-
erhood. Here, feelings of guilt circulate in affective economies, articulated at points of 
contact (Ahmed 2004) further sticking young bodies to what is normal/natural mother -
ing and what is not. In turn, this emotional sensibility of guilt might be pregnant with 
pedagogical possibilities for being–feeling–relating differently with others.
Embodied relationships with nature were also visible as we followed Nurul’s move-
ments as a child playing with other kids in Malyal. His childhood adventures comprised:
Swimming in the local lake (that we were not allowed, but we did anyway), play -
ing hide and seek in the local graveyard, hunting hares and rabbits by making 
traps and nooses, wandering beyond the lake to pick palm fruits, climbing trees to 
pluck raw mangos and tamarind in the summer, collecting butterflies, dragonflies 
and Red velvet mites (also known as Birba Boti) in the Spring and often returning 
home with bruised knees and elbows (Nurul, reflective journal).
This passage appears to describe ecocentric or even technocentric relationships with 
nature, where humans appear to be distinctively taking advantage of natural resources. 
Acts such as swimming, playing, hunting, climbing, collecting delineate contours of 
‘human’ bodies who do such actions against a ‘natural’ landscape. Feelings of risks and 
pleasures (Zembylas 2007b) could be materially mapped to bodies seeking pleasures in 
forbidden and unusual terrains, playfully controlling the other more-than-human (e.g., 
hunting hares and rabbits; collecting), savoring nature’s fruits (palm fruits, mangoes, 
tamarind), only for the materiality of such encounters to “im-press” (Ahmed 2004) as 
bruises on their young bodies. Those bruises epitomize points of contacts, of being with 
nature, of being touched by nature. Here, nature touches; it is not only touched/played 
with. Nature plays (with) humans. Playfulness is extended to more-than-human others.
In other instances, Nurul recounts ordinary and natural processes of composting 
mango skins in their houses’ backyard in Malyal. He says:
Dad often arranged mango parties at home, we had an earthen pot full of mangoes 
in water, pot was covered with a dampen jute cloth that naturally kept the contents 
cool. We did not use a knife, squeeze one using hands then suck the juice. My 
brother and I were responsible for collecting all the skins and seeds and bury them 
in our garden (Nurul, reflective journal).
In this excerpt, we note how local knowledge is embodied in a technological artifact 
(Ihde 2009), “a dampen jute cloth,” and ultimately in people’s actions using alternative 
ways, locally informed techniques to keep mango cool during the hot summer months. 
Simultaneously, we could follow the ritual of savoring a mango, “squeezing one using 
hands then suck the juice” as an embodied and sensuous experience that ensures a fully 
savory experience otherwise denied to the trained palate had a knife (another techno-
logical artifact) been used. In this case, the absence of the knife as another technologi-
cal tool, ensures a more embodied and unmediated experience. Eventually, composting 
took place in the most natural of ways, as Nurul and his brother collected remains of 
mango and buried them in their home garden. The absences of technological artifacts 
(knives, fridges, composting receptacles) appear to give immediate access to that which 
is ‘nature’ (Mango, skins, seeds, garden), possibly extending/confounding human bod-
ies with their surroundings.
97
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
Thus, Nurul’s reflections on those early experiences do not only reveal embodied 
re-encounters with nature, but they also show how technology is taken up in bodies 
through everyday mundane routines. Nurul speaks about how the start of the day takes 
place “before sunrise with multiple roosters crowing at once” followed by a “loud sound 
of a motor pump, pumping water from a huge well into a concrete-based ditch that 
divided into multiple canals which run into the fields to irrigate the crops” and “how 
the first person to come knocking at their door in the morning is Mohan, the milkman.” 
This shows how sounds of nature and technology are taken up by his body and oth-
ers’ bodies (the milkman) as perceptions of time (start of the day). Extending this phe-
nomenological analysis to post-humanist analyses, we can begin to trouble our assumed 
depictions of bounded (human) bodies who perceive time. Here, materiality emerges as 
bodies are blurred at the nexus of humans (Nurul, milkman), more-than-human (roost-
ers) and technology (motor pump). In other words, humans do not merely make use of 
nature and technology to determine the time, but nature and technology entanglements 
with humans do time (Barad 2001).
Nurul’s later education (secondary and postsecondary) occurred in two main urban cit-
ies in India (Karimnagar and Hyderabad, respectively) in which “the scene was completely 
contradictory.” In those settings, he became part of a discourse that “emphasizes economic 
productivity at the expense of social and environmental responsibility.” Nurul says:
People did not care about nature, we had no idea where our garbage or waste goes 
(…), roads were crammed with fuming vehicles and people were super busy with 
jobs, businesses, education and making careers. The education system was designed 
to produce experts. Even I started to see and believe myself as a subject-matter expert 
when I graduated (Nurul, follow-up written reflections on life history interview).
As he re-encountered this period of his life, we could sense how bodies (including 
Nurul’s) weighted on those two urban cities as humans sought to occupy (Ingold 2011) 
their surroundings through discourses on “expertise” and “economic productivity.” This 
leads to further containment and demarcation of humans versus non-humans, illustrating 
once again people’s technocentric and egocentric relationships toward nature. Nature was 
not merely omitted in Nurul’s accounts of those life experiences, but nature was further 
produced in opposition to economic productivity and anthropogenic actions. In briefly re-
telling those experiences, it became clear to us that Nurul didn’t want to dwell in a place 
where nature was absent. Or more rightly, nature was produced as absent, further stick -
ing Nurul to particular forms of care within nature, with potential effects into ways nature 
might be talked about as part of his pedagogy.
Within science
Recalling his experiences as part of his formal science education in grade 11, Nurul is par -
ticularly reminded of:
[His] three science teachers. They have taught forever and were considered the sci-
ence trinity. They only cared about the right answer. Sometimes, we manipulate the 
results just to pass. Profound memory that science is the real thing, everything else is 
fiction (Nurul, life history interview).
98 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Through this excerpt, we could probably follow affective economies of care as part of sci-
ence/science education and ways they contour how Nurul might have experienced science 
in his secondary education. Those economies circulate through material bodies of three 
science teachers regarded as “the science trinity” who “only cared for the right answer.” 
Religiosity and reverence for science as “the truth” materialize and are materialized by 
forms of care that stick Nurul to a view of science as the “real thing,” a view of science as 
“objective, where reality is fixed, factual.” We are left wondering how an insistence on the 
“right answer” as part of science enables a hard demarcation between what is “real” and 
what is “fiction.” Those depictions of ‘hard’ science might have been accentuated/exag-
gerated to perform Nurul as a college instructor whose current views about science have 
grown in stark opposition to such initial conceptions of science, further evident in ways he 
comes to admit how he and his friends in class “would manipulate the result just to pass.”
Nurul’s previous realist views about science as “The Truth” (as he puts it) could be 
followed through his experiences in Zoology, his field of graduate studies. He mentioned 
how “in collecting an earthworm, we made sure that the earthworm was identical to the 
picture in the book, otherwise we would throw it away and look for that ‘perfect’ species.” 
It appears that his realist epistemological views (i.e., science is a true representation of 
nature/reality) were dialectically informed by technocentric/egocentric orientations toward 
nature fueled by larger social, educational and economic discourses. This quote further 
brings into view a notion of science as interchangeable with nature. It appears that so-
called objectivity of science, spills into a view of nature as needing to be equally perfect, 
objective, essentially un-defective. Such associations are sticky, re-producing norma-
tive distinctions within larger fields of science and science education and how they might 
inscribe bodies as ideal-less ideal, healthy-unhealthy (see Kirchgasler 2018).
Nurul’s formal exposure to STSE issues occurred as he pursued his Master’s in edu-
cation at OISE:
Then, I would say OISE happened to me, different courses I took here, particularly 
with Larry and [other professors] gave me the opportunity to see science education 
completely through a different lens. I learned to see the interconnected nature of all 
disciplines, I developed naturalist views about knowledge production (Nurul, reflec-
tive journal).
We are attracted to affectivity embedded in this proposition: “Then, I would say OISE hap-
pened to me.” This sentence attests to how places (in this case, places of teacher education) 
‘im-press’ (Ahmed 2004) on bodies, the ‘happening’ of OISE, as an affective intensity 
(Massumi 2015), speaks to movement of the wayfarer. OISE is a place with an affective 
force along Nurul’s path where he got to “see science education completely through a dif-
ferent lens.” His Naturalist (Loving 1991) views about knowledge production were materi-
ally entangled with people and places. People and places exude affect unto epistemologies. 
Science epistemologies are imbued with affect (Jaber and Hammer 2016).
In making sense of his commitments to STSE education, Nurul referred to a culturally 
and personally relevant socio-scientific issue that was debated among his own family and 
a family friend (“Uncle”) to whom he had deep respect and affection. The STSE issue was 
around “illegal logging” that took place in a forest that was, for him, “a playground as 
a child.” He reflected on his uncle’s “grief and concern over illegal logging, particularly 
of Teak wood trees (Tectona grandis) which were commercially valued.” Those emotions 
of grief and concern are relational performing Nurul’s uncle’s own relationships with the 
forest as he explained to Nurul “how forests are more than home to numerous animals 
99
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
and plants,” stressing on “the interrelationship between plants, animals and their environ-
ment and how, if we remove one component, such as a tree, then the whole ecosystem 
gets impacted.” Against this background, emotions of grief and concern are extended 
over to Teak wood trees as pedagogical companions along Nurul’s own becoming, vibrat-
ing (within) a whole ecosystem and not merely inanimate objects, whose lives rest in the 
background.
Illegal logging, Nurul explained, took place following “government’s policies to down-
size the departments that deal with lands and forests,” noting how “how the profit motive 
underpins the government’s decision to provide industry easy access to forests and wildlife 
properties.” Nurul’s knowledge of powerful groups in STSE relationships was reflected in 
a personally meaningful experience that involved bodies with competing interests and to 
some of whom Nurul had close affinities (e.g., ‘uncle’, forest and the Teak wood trees). 
Teak wood trees and the issue of illegal logging, when recalled in the context of this 
research, perform Nurul as an instructor committed to new understandings of what science 
might mean.
Within science education
After finishing his master’s degree in Zoology from India, Nurul was offered his first teach-
ing position on a small island in the Republic of Maldives. In this context, he says: “I was 
able to relive some of my childhood experiences in terms of small community, connected-
ness, respect for nature and natural resources.” In Maldives, he describes himself “not as a 
teacher, but as community member.” After lots of trials and errors as a teacher, he slowly 
grasped merits of knowing his students at more personal levels. This greater intimacy 
coincided with his students’ parents welcoming him and accepting him in their homes and 
community since they “recognized from his name that he was a Muslim just like them.” In 
this instance, Nurul was readily identified as part of a religious identity which facilitated 
more direct bodily encounters with his students and their parents, giving him access to 
their personal lives, homes and contributing to his pedagogical priority to knowing his stu-
dents more personally prior to teaching them science.
Referring to his interactions with students on the island, Nurul says:
In the practical science courses, students would tell me: “Teacher, let’s go,” and I 
would ask: “Where do you want to go?”. They say: “The beach”. It’s like their labo-
ratory (Nurul, life history interview).
We stop at the words, “Teacher, let’s go,” as a pedagogical invitation for movement that 
refuses containment, structure and closed-endedness. The wayfarer, Nurul, is his move -
ment alongside other wayfarers (Ingold 2011). Rather than the teacher taking the kids from 
one place (the classroom) to the other (outside the classroom), transporting them across 
preexisting locations, here the teacher is being invited into “going” alongside others, it is 
the lived curriculum (Aoki 1993), embodied in intimacies from having lived daily with 
students/their parents and knowing alongside each other. Later, he mentioned how his stu-
dents “taught him lots of things, such as names of creatures in the ocean.” They taught him 
“swimming, snorkeling, as they form a circle around (him) to watch out that (he) doesn’t 
go in the deep water.” Bodies forming a circle around their teacher attest to an ethic of care 
(Tronto 1993), fusing teaching and taught bodies and not merely inversing who teaches 
and who gets taught. He continues saying: “The beach was their daily afternoon leisure, 
eating from jackfruit trees, hanging on comfortable swings, reading books and watching 
100 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
the sunset.” As he paints this scenery of humans indulging into pleasures of being ‘outside’ 
with nature, nature seems to be romanticized, a human experience, contouring yet again, 
humans’ bodies as separate from nature.
Nurul further mentioned how his first teaching job in the Maldives allowed him to 
develop genuine concerns for human actions on environments, “especially with the loom-
ing dangers of global warming and rising sea levels that threatened local communities of 
the islands.” During that time, Nurul experienced, first-hand, fears and anxieties of a popu-
lation that was under the threat of inundation “due to human actions in other parts of the 
world,” pointing to how climate change was viscerally experienced and disparately influ-
encing communities. He mentions:
The islands are on average 1–1.5 meters above the sea level and based on the cur -
rent trends and the predictions of the future rise in the sea levels by climate scientists 
(IPCC), it can be reprieved for another two or three generations at the most. Hence, 
this topic of going extinct was so hot in every conversation (Nurul, life history inter -
view).
Dangers and threats of nature related to climate change pose risks that remain deeply affec-
tive. Nature is not only beautiful but can be equally scary. Living in anticipation of the 
dangers of climate change is an affective state, unequivocally shared among different popu-
lations around the world. This brings into view new pedagogical questions around unequal 
distribution of affective economies linked to climate change, texturing communities (and 
not others) over imminent fears, enacting the very socio-material fabrics being sensed by 
those communities as their worlds (Williams 1977).
As a science teacher, I was involved in numerous discourses about the issue. It was 
expected from me to provide little more explanation and justification for the global 
warming than just some scientific explanation of how the sea levels were increasing. 
I could see the helplessness of a complete nation and the imminent danger that they 
were placed in due to our own technological advancements (Nurul, reflective jour -
nal).
This quote provides insights into ways affective economies of climate change (fear, help-
lessness)—as they pertain to Nurul’s own life within Maldivian communities—circulate 
in discourses that demarcate what is science (“scientific explanations of how sea levels 
were increasing”) from what is non-science (“justification for the global warming”). Such 
demarcations stick Nurul to his role as a science teacher in this particular community, 
while gesturing at the same time to how he came to re-imagine what science education 
could mean following his involvement with STEPWISE.
As Nurul took on his second teaching position in Saudi Arabia at “a private elite 
school”, his descriptions of this period of his life were brief, revealing feelings of aliena-
tion from a teaching position in which he was perceived more as “a salesperson, than a 
schoolteacher.” He recalls how he developed study material for his grade 11 students who 
didn’t have a textbook to study for their International General Certificate of Secondary 
Education (IGCSE) tests and how, soon after, the school principal turned those developed 
materials into a “profitable product.” He says: “Students were the clients and the teacher 
could be summoned at any time to deliver extra teaching sessions.” He further experi-
enced discrimination as an Indian citizen compared to his counterparts who had US or 
European nationalities. He says: “We had same responsibilities, same teaching hours, but 
American and European teachers would get paid double.” Nurul felt devalued and dissatis-
fied within a “corporate” school system, alienated by an education that privileges certain 
101
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
bodies (Western teachers, private school children from rich expatriates’ families) who get 
“special treatments” over others (non-Western teachers). Practices within corporatized 
educational systems, steeped in neoliberal forms of governance of schools (Apple 2013) 
might re-inscribe and further help constitute Western and non-Western bodies in opposi-
tion (Said 1995). Nurul’s “otherness” as a teacher from India is contoured through affective 
economies that circulate in citizenship documents, school salaries, extra teaching lessons 
and overworked bodies. He distanced himself from this system of education by resisting to 
dwell with those experiences, recounting them with much brevity and once more, without 
any reference to his relationships to nature. Once again, the absence of nature might extend 
Nurul as somehow absent in his own past pedagogies, gesturing to Nurul’s desires to be in 
different relationships within science education.
Becoming alive within STEPWISE/science education
Becoming alive could be regarded as a continuous state of striving, borrowing from Spi-
noza who says, “all existence is intrinsically striving” (Spinoza cited in Colombetti 2013, 
p. 4). It is an incessant “coming into presence” (Biesta 2010) into our research and peda-
gogical practices. As a pedagogical journey, collectively, yet distinctively traveled by each 
of us collaborators from our past (life) experiences, STEPWISE brought us in touch with 
Nurul, with his life along other lives. “These lives are not traced, as we might trace lines on 
a cartographic map, across a world already laid out, but through a world in perpetual for -
mation” (Ingold 2011, p. 168, emphasis in original). Nurul’s life with others was perpetu-
ally produced, through the life history research, to extend his striving within STEPWISE. 
The life history research, as tinkered with here, does not only afford capacities for Nurul to 
come into presence (to continuously strive) in his own pedagogy but the pedagogy itself 
(i.e., STEPWISE) allowed us to come into the presence with this work and with each other. 
Points of contact between life history research and STEPWISE as a pedagogy allowed us to 
re-encounter Nurul’s life in new ways. Moreover, such points of contact contoured Nurul as 
an instructor who can enact forms of care that lie outside what is formally cared for within 
the particular context of college education. STEPWISE most fundamentally asks: What is 
science? What does it mean to learn science? For what? STEPWISE opens spaces to be in 
different relationships with science and technology, perhaps, intervening in ethico-political 
projects of science/STEM education (Zouda 2018). Hence, the life history research does 
not neatly feed into making sense of Nurul’s commitments to STEPWISE relative to his 
work context. Instead, it created unpredictable openings as we continuously travel with 
STEPWISE-like approaches from our various situated practices.
Some of the onto-epistemic movements—depicted through our efforts storying Nurul’s 
life with others—seek to (de)stabilize thematic analysis, to present how lived histories 
could extend beyond simple meanings and reflective stances, to (re-)produce what is nature 
and what is human (among other demarcations). We wish to suggest that life histories 
could become pedagogical opportunities to move teachers/students into new ways of being 
within nature, science and science education. This research, then, responds to calls for 
“triggering a conceptual vitality within science education” (Wallace et al. 2018, p. 201), 
whereby “educational bodies of science and science bodies in education” (Alsop 2016, p. 
555) come to matter to/with one another. This conceptual vitality within science education 
is needed in times of social and ecological problems, enabling teachers/students/research-
ers to “re-imagine sustainability in precarious times” (Malone, Truong and Gray 2017).
102 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
In subtler ways, this research meets previous research that looked at how views about 
“objectivity” as part of school science are emotionally mediated (Davis and Bellocchi 
2018). It invites further attunements to affective economies when circulating in acts of 
storying/performing nature, science and science education. Such economies might carry 
effects into ways teachers enact pedagogies aimed at social and environmental justice 
within science educational contexts. Attending to affective, aesthetics and embodied regis-
ters within one’s relationships to nature, science and science education invite and reconnect 
to questions such as: How might notions of affective economies/emotions be more lever -
aged in discussions of climate change? How/Which bodies/lives are talked about and per -
formed within science education contexts and what/who gets left out (Alsop 2011)? What 
absences or demarcations circulate in affective economies of science education? How 
might they stick students/teachers to ways of being, relating and knowing (with) more-
than-human lives, science and technology? How might we as teachers/educators care for/
within nature differently (de la Bellacasa 2011)?
Modalities of care toward nature may necessitate specific attention in ways they get 
taken up through our science educational practices. Caring is necessarily affective, non-
innocent and political (Murphy 2015). When asking our students to care for nature, do we 
retain nature as a mere resource to be cared ‘for’? How is ‘nature’ talked about in class-
rooms? Returning to de La Bellacasa’s work around soil, she offers critical perspectives on 
conservationist and sustainability efforts that want to care for the soil in more ‘sustainable 
ways’ while still working from a premise that maintain soil as essentially a resource for 
humans. Thus, teachers, especially committed to science and technology education for sus-
tainability, may engage in re-thinking along with their students, their modes of care within 
nature that might extend beyond “paradigmatic modes of technical rationality” (Carter 
2011, p. 3) to consider alternate knowledge practices that draw on complicated (colonial) 
histories of ‘natural’ places within science and environmental education (Nxumalo 2015).
Becoming alive within (life history) research
Thinking with life history(ies), bodies and stickiness enabled us to question our initial 
desires for representing ‘human beings’ which appeared to rest on unexamined assump-
tions of “extraction and proceduralism” (Springgay and Truman 2018). We sought to col-
lect (extract?) data about Nurul to tell an ‘interesting’ story that would lead us to uncover 
his commitments to a pedagogical approach, STEPWISE. Such acts of extractions to tell an 
‘interesting’ story troubled us as they appeared to commodify Nurul’s and others’ live sto-
ries. Instead, we sought ways to turn life history research into an approach for “becoming 
entangled in relations” (Springgay and Truman 2018, p. 2) with others.
Posthumanism and constructions of nature-human relationships have not yet received 
enough attention in science education research (Higgins, Wallace, and Bazzul 2019), while 
life history research continues to be a vibrant field, ripe with different methodological and 
theoretical affordances for studying science teacher identities (Avraamidou 2016). Life 
history research may be one suitable medium to tinker with humanist and biographical 
approaches to storying lives, even though, one might ironically remark, how the present 
research ended up tinkering with ‘us’ (note how our linguistic devices seem to always suc-
ceed in setting ‘us’ outside our research). Life history research turned into a methodologi-
cal journey, along which our epistemic, axiological and ontological commitments were 
continuously shaped and re-shaped as we encountered lives (and possibilities for becoming 
103
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
alive) within Nurul’s storying. We thought we could unproblematically read his life with 
others within post humanist research traditions yet found that we always needed to start 
from humanism. For instance, thinking about life history (assuming a knowing stance of 
what life history ‘means’) provided us with a path for thinking with life history(ies). More-
over, thematic analyses appeared comfortable to us from previous “uses”. Ahmed (2019, p. 
43) writes: “use can mean the lessening of receptivity to others”. When our methodologi-
cal approaches have long been calibrated and used in ways that give primacy to language, 
to meanings—in this case to what is uttered by Nurul during our interviews together, to 
his voice as meaningful data—our attunements to other material and embodied enactments 
during interviews were lessened, relegated as ‘irrelevant’ to this research, perhaps out of 
a buried “desire to control difference” (MacLure 2017, p. 3–4). Recoiling onto human-
ist traditions was further mediated by our own positionalities as researchers. As some of 
us collaborators are candidates in their PhD programs in science education, we wondered 
if we were stepping onto risky terrains by fully inhabiting a literature (i.e., ‘posthuman-
ism’) that continues to be challenged and revisited (Badley 2018). Writing this piece was 
deeply an affective experience, not the least because of our methodological and theoretical 
dilemmas, but because of haunting fears mixed with desires for belonging to communities 
of research within science education steeped in certain traditions more than others. It is, 
perhaps, in this methodological striving that one might encounter this work, in its inability 
to completely release itself from that which has turned so sticky, always involving uneasy 
“(in)tensions” (Springgay and Truman 2018).
Extending beyond the life history as a methodology, this work finds resonance in calls 
for finding pedagogical possibilities within “seemingly mundane corporeal aspects of (…) 
performances and representations” (Alsop 2011, p. 611) as teachers/students re-encounter 
their subject matter (e.g., science, STSE education) and others and as we, researchers, re-
encounter our research (e.g., data) and our research participants.
References
Adriansen, H. K. (2012). Timeline interviews: A tool for conducting life history research. Qualitative Stud-
ies, 3(1), 40–55. https ://doi.org/10.7146/qs.v3i1.6272.
Ahmed, S. (2004). The cultural politics of emotion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. https ://doi.
org/10.4324/97802 03700 372.
Ahmed, S. (2010). Orientations matter. In D. Coole & S. Frost (Eds.), New materialisms: Ontology, agency, 
and politics (pp. 234–257). Duke: Duke University Press. https ://doi.org/10.1215/97808 22392 996-011.
Ahmed, S. (2019). What’s the use?: On the uses of use. Duke: Duke University Press. https ://doi.
org/10.1215/97814 78007 210.
Alsop, S. (2005). Beyond cartesian dualism: Encountering affect in the teaching and learning of science 
(Vol. 29). Berlin: Springer.
Alsop, S. (2011). The body bites back! Cultural Studies of Science Education, 6(3), 611–623. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1142 2-011-9328-4.
Alsop, S. (2016). Encountering science education’s capacity to affect and be affected. Cultural Studies of 
Science Education, 11(3), 551–565. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1142 2-015-9692-6.
Anderson, B., & Harrison, P. (Eds.). (2010). Taking-place: Non-representational theories and geography. 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Aoki, T. T. (1993). Legitimating lived curriculum: Towards a curricular landscape of multiplicity. Journal 
of Curriculum and Supervision, 8(3), 255–268.
Apple, M. W. (2013). Interrupting the right: On doing critical educational work in conservative times. In J. 
Di Leo & W. Jacobs (Eds.), If classrooms matter: Progressive visions of educational environments (pp. 
61–80). Abingdon: Routledge.
Avraamidou, L. (2016). Studying science teacher identity: Theoretical, methodological and empirical explo-
rations. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers. https ://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-6300-528-9.
104 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Badley, G. F. (2018). “Manifold creatures”: A response to the posthumanist challenge. Qualitative Inquiry, 
24(6), 421–432. https ://doi.org/10.1177/10778 00417 72983 9.
Barad, K. (2001). Re(con)figuring space, time, and matter. In M. DeKoven (Ed.), Feminist locations: Global 
and local, theory and practice (pp. 75–109). New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to matter. 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 28(3), 801–831. https ://doi.org/10.1086/34532 1.
Bencze, L. (2017). Science and technology education promoting wellbeing for individuals, societies and 
environments: Stepwise (Vol. 14). Berlin: Springer. https ://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-55505 -8.
Biesta, G. (2010). A new logic of emancipation: The methodology of Jacques Rancière. Educational The-
ory, 60(1), 39–59. https ://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-5446.2009.00345 .x.
Carter, L. (2011). Gathering in threads in the insensible global world: The wicked problem of globalisa-
tion and science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 6(1), 1–12. https ://doi.org/10.1007/
s1142 2-010-9307-1.
Cary, L. (1999). Unexpected stories: Life history and the limits of representation. Qualitative Inquiry, 5(3), 
411–427. https ://doi.org/10.1177/10778 00499 00500 307.
Chaudhury, A. (2019). Still life? Musings on vegetal life and inanimate constitutions, and their agencies 
in the human umwelt. Academia. Retrieved December 1, 2019, from http://www.acade mia.edu/downl 
oad/35429 184/6149_Criti cal_Refle ction s.docx.
Chinn, P. W. (2002). Asian and Pacific Islander women scientists and engineers: A narrative exploration 
of model minority, gender, and racial stereotypes. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The Offi-
cial Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 39(4), 302–323. https ://doi.
org/10.1002/tea.10026 .
Cole, A. L., & Knowles, G. J. (2001). Lives in context: The art of life history research. Lanham: AltaMira 
Press. https ://doi.org/10.1891/1062-8061.13.1.230.
Colombetti, G. (2013). Primordial affectivity. In G. Colombetti (Ed.), The feeling body: Affective science 
meets the enactive mind (pp. 1–24). Cambridge: MIT Press. https ://doi.org/10.7551/mitpr  ess/97802 
62019 958.001.0001.
Crossley, N. (1995). Merleau-Ponty, the elusive body and carnal sociology. Body and Society, 1(1), 43–63. 
https ://doi.org/10.1177/13570 34X95 00100 1004.
Csordas, T. J. (1999). Embodiment and cultural phenomenology. In Perspectives on embodiment: The inter -
sections of nature and culture (pp. 143–162).
Davis, J. P., & Bellocchi, A. (2018). Objectivity, subjectivity, and emotion in school science inquiry. Journal 
of Research in Science Teaching, 55(10), 1419–1447. https ://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21461 .
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social Studies 
of Science, 41(1), 85–106. https ://doi.org/10.1177/03063 12710 38030 1.
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social 
Studies of Science, 45(5), 691–716. https ://doi.org/10.1177/03063 12715 59985 1.
Deleuze, G. (1988). Spinoza: Practical philosophy. San Francisco: City Lights Books.
Denzin, N. K. (1989). Interpretive biography (Vol. 17). Atlanta: Sage. https ://doi.org/10.4135/97814 12984 
584.
Denzin, N. K. (2003). Performance ethnography: Critical pedagogy and the politics of culture. Atlanta: 
Sage. https ://doi.org/10.4135/97814 12985 390.
Dhunpath, R. (2000). Life history methodology:” Narradigm” regained. International Journal of Qualitative 
Studies in Education, 13(5), 543–551. https ://doi.org/10.1080/09518 39005 01564 59.
Ekman, P. (1993). Facial expression and emotion. American Psychologist, 48(4), 384. https ://doi.
org/10.1037/0003-066X.48.4.384.
El Halwany, S., Zouda, M., Pouliot, C., & Bencze, L. (2020). Student-teachers’ relationships to knowledge 
and to their practices for critical and activist STSE education. In K. W. Clausen & G. Black (Eds.), 
The future of action research in education: A Canadian perspective (pp. 171–193). Ottawa: Canadian 
Association for Teacher Education/Canadian Society for Studies in Education.
Fenwick, T., Edwards, R., & Sawchuk, P. (2015). Emerging approaches to educational research: Tracing 
the socio-material. Abingdon: Routledge. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97802 03817 582.
Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). Coping as a mediator of emotion. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 54(3), 466. https ://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.54.3.466.
Goodson, I., & Sikes, P. (2001). Life history research in educational settings: Learning from lives (doing 
qualitative research in educational settings). Buckingham: Open University Press.
Gough, A. (2015). STEM policy and science education: Scientistic curriculum and sociopolitical silences. 
Cultural Studies of Science Education, 10(2), 445–458. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1142 2-014-9590-3.
105
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
Higgins, M., Wallace, M. F., & Bazzul, J. (2019). Staying with the Trouble in Science Education: 
Towards thinking with nature—A Manifesto. In Posthumanism and higher education (pp. 155–
164). Berlin: Springer. https ://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14672 -6_9.
Hoeg, D. G. (2016). Constitutions of nature by teacher practice and discourse in Ontario grade 9 and 
10 Academic science (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Toronto: Ontario Institute for Studies in 
Education.
Hwang, S., & Roth, W.-M. (2011). The (embodied) performance of physics concepts in lectures. 
Research in Science Education, 41(4), 461–477. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1116 5-010-9175-4.
Ihde, D. (2009). Postphenomenology and technoscience: The Peking university lectures. Albany: Suny 
Press.
Ingold, T. (2011). Being alive: Essays on movement, knowledge and description. Abingdon: Routledge. 
https ://doi.org/10.4324/97802 03818 336.
Jaber, L. Z., & Hammer, D. (2016). Engaging in science: A feeling for the discipline. Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, 25(2), 156–202. https ://doi.org/10.1080/10508 406.2015.10884 41.
Jackson, A. Y. (2013). Data-as-machine: A Deleuzian becoming. In Deleuze and Research Methodolo-
gies (pp. 111–124).
Jackson, A. Y., & Mazzei, L. (2012). Thinking with theory in qualitative research: Viewing data across 
multiple perspectives. Abingdon: Routledge.
Jackson, Alecia Y., & Mazzei, L. A. (2013). Plugging one text into another: Thinking with theory in 
qualitative research. Qualitative Inquiry, 19(4), 261–271. https ://doi.org/10.1177/10778 00412  
47151 0.
Kirchgasler, K. L. (2018). Moving the lab into the field: The making of pathologized (non)citizens 
in US science education. Curriculum Inquiry, 48(1), 115–137. https ://doi.org/10.1080/03626  
784.2017.14095 95.
Kress, G. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. Abing-
don: Routledge. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97802 03970 034.
Lather, P., Jackson, A. Y., & Mazzei, L. A. (2009). Against empathy, voice and authenticity. Voice in 
Qualitative Inquiry: Challenging Conventional, Interpretive, and Critical Conceptions in Qualita-
tive Research. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97802 03891 889.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Lemke, J. (2015). Feeling and meaning: A unitary bio-semiotic account. In P. P. Trifonas (Ed.), Interna-
tional handbook of semiotics (pp. 589–616). https ://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-9404-6_27.
Loving, C. C. (1991). The scientific theory profile: A philosophy of science model for science teachers. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28(9), 823–838. https ://doi.org/10.1002/tea.36602 80908 .
Lupton, D. (1998). The emotional self: A sociocultural exploration. Atlanta: Sage.
Maclean, M. (1988). Narrative as performance: The Baudelairean experiment (Vol. 981). Milton Park: 
Taylor & Francis.
MacLure, M. (2017). Qualitative methodology and the new materialisms. Qualitative Inquiry in Neolib-
eral Times. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97813 15397 788-4.
Malone, K., Truong, S., & Gray, T. (Eds.). (2017). Reimagining sustainability in precarious times. https  
://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2550-1.
Manning, E. (2010). Always more than one: The collectivity of a life. Body and Society, 16(1), 117–127. 
https ://doi.org/10.1177/13570 34X09 35412 8.
Manning, E. (2014). Wondering the world directly–or, how movement outruns the subject. Body and 
Society, 20(3–4), 162–188. https ://doi.org/10.1177/13570 34X14 54635 7.
Manning, E. (2015). Against method. In P. Vannini (Ed.), Non-representational methodologies (pp. 
62–81). Abingdon: Routledge. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97813 15883 540.
Martusewicz, R. A., Lupinacci, J., & Schnakenberg, G. (2010). EcoJustice education for science edu-
cators. In Cultural studies and environmentalism (pp. 11–27). Berlin: Springer. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/978-90-481-3929-3_3.
Massumi, B. (2015). Politics of affect. Hoboken: Wiley.
Mazzei, L. A., & Jackson, A. Y. (2017). Voice in the agentic assemblage. Educational Philosophy and 
Theory, 49(11), 1090–1098. https ://doi.org/10.1080/00131 857.2016.11591 76.
Micciche, L. R. (2007). Doing emotion: Rhetoric, writing, teaching. Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook 
Publishers.
Murphy, M. (2015). Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health prac-
tices. Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 717–737. https ://doi.org/10.1177/03063 12715 58913 6.
Noffke, S. E., & Somekh, B. (2009). The SAGE handbook of educational action research. Atlanta: Sage. 
https ://doi.org/10.4135/97808 57021 02.
106 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Nxumalo, F. (2015). Forest stories: Restorying encounters with “natural” places in early childhood 
education. In Unsettling the colonial places and spaces of early childhood education (pp. 31–52). 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Pedretti, E., & Nazir, J. (2011). Currents in STSE education: Mapping a complex field, 40 years on. Sci-
ence Education, 95(4), 601–626. https ://doi.org/10.1002/sce.20435 .
Roth, W.-M. (2001). Learning science through technological design. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 38(7), 
768–790. https ://doi.org/10.1002/tea.1031.
Said, E. W. (1995). Orientalism: Western conceptions of the Orient 1978 (p. 115). Penguin: Harmonds-
worth, Engineering.
Schaffer, K., Milanovic, M., El Halwany, S., Hassan, N., Zouda, M. & Bencze, L. (2017). Inertial ten-
sions in promoting socio-political actions among future technoscience technicians. In Paper pre-
sented at the European science education research association, Dublin, Ireland, August 20–25.
Shume, T. J. (2017). Mapping conceptions of wolf hunting onto an ecological worldview conceptual 
framework—hunting for a worldview theory. In M. Mueller, D. Tippins, A. Stewart (Eds.), Ani-
mals and science education. Environmental discourses in science education (vol. 2, pp. 223–241). 
Cham: Springer. https ://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56375 -6_16.
Springgay, S., & Truman, S. E. (2017). Stone walks: Inhuman animacies and queer archives of feel-
ing. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 38(6), 851–863. https ://doi.
org/10.1080/01596 306.2016.12267 77.
Springgay, S., & Truman, S. E. (2018). On the need for methods beyond proceduralism: Speculative 
middles,(in) tensions, and response-ability in research. Qualitative Inquiry, 24(3), 203–214. https ://
doi.org/10.1177/10778 00417 70446 4.
Tan, E., & Barton, A. C. (2008). Unpacking science for all through the lens of identities-in-practice: 
The stories of Amelia and Ginny. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 3(1), 43–71. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1142 2-007-9076-7.
Tronto, J. C. (1993). Moral boundaries: A political argument for an ethic of care. New York: Psychol-
ogy Press.
Vannini, P. (2015). Non-representational methodologies: Re-envisioning research (Vol. 12). Abingdon: 
Routledge. https ://doi.org/10.4324/97813 15883 540.
Wallace, M. F., Higgins, M., & Bazzul, J. (2018). Thinking with nature: Following the contour of minor 
concepts for ethico-political response-ability in science education. Canadian Journal of Science, 
Mathematics and Technology Education, 18(3), 199–209. https ://doi.org/10.1017/CBO97 80511  
80393 2.
Whatmore, S. (2006). Materialist returns: Practising cultural geography in and for a more-than-human 
world. Cultural Geographies, 13(4), 600–609. https ://doi.org/10.1191/14744 74006 cgj37 7oa.
Williams, R. (1977). Structures of feeling. In Marxism and literature (pp. 128–135). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Zembylas, M. (2007a). The specters of bodies and affects in the classroom: A rhizo-ethological 
approach. Pedagogy, Culture and Society, 15(1), 19–35. https ://doi.org/10.1080/14681 36060 11620  
30.
Zembylas, M. (2007b). Risks and pleasures: A Deleuzo-Guattarian pedagogy of desire in education. British 
Educational Research Journal, 33(3), 331–347. https ://doi.org/10.1080/01411 92070 12436 02.
Zembylas, M. (2017). The contribution of non-representational theories in education: Some affective, 
ethical and political implications. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 36(4), 393–407. https ://doi.
org/10.1007/s1121 7-016-9535-2.
Zouda, M. (2018). Issues of power and control in STEM education: A reading through the postmodern 
condition. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 13(4), 1109–1128. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1142 
2-017-9820-6.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Sarah El Halwany is a Ph.D. Candidate in Science Education at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Educa-
tion, University of Toronto. She finished her Bachelor of Science and her Master’s in Science Education 
from the American University of Beirut, Lebanon. She is an Ontario Certified Teacher and has taught math, 
biology and French. Her dissertation explores how cultures of technoscience technicians are affectively con-
stituted in the context of college education. She further explores effects of pedagogies centered on STSE 
107
Becoming alive within science education (research): thinking…
1 3
education (such as STEPWISE) in engendering new subjectivities vis-à-vis fields of STEM. Her research 
interests include SSI or STSE education, emotions and aesthetics in science education.
Larry Bencze (PhD, MSc, BSc, BEd) is an Associate Professor (Emeritus) in Science Education at the Univer -
sity of Toronto (1998-present). Prior to this role, he worked for fifteen years as a science teacher and as a 
science education consultant in Ontario, Canada. His research programme emphasizes critical analyses—
drawing on history, philosophy, sociology, etc.—of science and technology, explicit teaching about prob-
lematic power relations and student-led research-informed and negotiated socio-political actions to address 
personal, social and environmental harms associated with fields of science and technology. Recent publica-
tions include two edited books about proactive citizenship. He also is co-editor of an open-source activist 
journal (goo.gl/ir7YRj).
Nurul Hassan is a PhD student in the Department of Curriculum and Pedagogy at OISE, University of 
Toronto. His doctoral dissertation focuses on identity construction through STEM education in the post-
secondary context. Nurul is also a sessional professor at a college in Toronto and is involved in Action 
Research Projects to implement various pedagogical approaches.
Kristen Schaffer is a Ph.D. candidate at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education (OISE), University of 
Toronto. She is keen to learn more about socio-ecological justice and community-responsive research initia-
tives in informal science education.
Minja Milanovic is currently a Science Lab Technician, Teaching Assistant & Research Internship Co-ordi-
nator at The Bishop Strachan School. As a member of the STEPWISE team she has participated in creating 
teaching and learning resources, organizing teacher PD workshops, action research projects and publications 
in science education.
Majd Zouda is a Ph.D. candidate in Science Education at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 
University of Toronto. Her doctoral dissertation focuses on STEM programmes in independent schools in 
Canada. Majd holds a B.Sc. in Microbiology and M.Sc. in Medical Microbiology. Prior to pursuing a Ph.D. 
degree, she worked as a high-school science teacher and the head of the junior science department in an 
international school in Damascus, Syria. For her doctoral research, she has received a SSHRC doctoral fel-
lowship (Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council). Majd has been actively involved in publica-
tions regarding socioscientific and STSE issues, STEM education and student activism.
