© The Author(s) 2025
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
tecnoscienza.unibo.it
T/S
TECNOSCIENZA. Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies  
15(2)   pp. 39-59   ISSN 2038-3460
DOI:  10.6092/issn.2038-3460/18076
Abstract
In this paper, we focus on soil as a “contested terrain” emerging from the in -
terplay of competing socio-political and cultural frames. Starting from the 
analysis of international reports on soil, we show how the urgency frame 
acts as a powerful discursive device that progressively reduces the inherent 
complexity of soil as a socio-ecological system, compressing the tempo -
rality of future perspectives and demarcating the inclusion/exclusion of 
non-human actors in soil communities. In the second part, we draw on 
examples of practice from our project BRIDGES to highlight possibilities for 
re-framing research as a “practice of attention” and experimenting with dif -
ferent temporalities and modes of relation with soil. Findings point to the 
need to address the fundamental questions that such an approach poses 
for all research communities. Bringing sedimented attitudes, perceptions, 
and ways approaching research to the surface, our experiences cast light 
on the importance of methodological choices for thinking differently about 
soil and about slowing down the narratives of research: not as a tool or 
resource, but as a shared process of crafting mutual relations amongst all 
kinds of practitioners, including more than humans.
Keywords
technoscientific narratives; environmental policies; urgency; soil; practices 
of attention; post-normal science.
1. Introduction
Pivoting on constraining the time available for action, urgency and “crisis” talks have be -
come a key feature of contemporary policy discourses on socio-ecological issues. As critiqued 
across multiple domains (see for example Roitman 2014), “governing through emergency” 
tends to reproduce existing forms and relations of power, preserving the neo-liberal social 
order (Anderson et al. 2020), which, in order to grant its promise of freedom, is intimately 
relying on the management of danger and disorder (Pellizzoni 2011). CNR-IRCrES, Rome
Pianpicollo Selvatico ETSCNR-IREA, Milan
Pianpicollo Selvatico ETSUniversity of Edinburgh
CNR-IREA, Milan
Corresponding author
Rita Giuffredi
National Research Council, Research 
Institute on Sustainable Economic 
Growth (CNR-IRCrES)
Via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Rome, Italy
     rita.giuffredi@cnr.it
Submitted : January 10, 2023
Accepted : March 26, 2024
Rita Giuffredi
Raffaella SpagnaChristian Colella
Andrea CarettoLaura Colucci-Gray
Alba L’AstorinaBeyond Crisis Talk: Making Time for Re-Searching New 
Narratives of Human Relations With SoilESSAY
Due to its critical positioning in current environmental debates, the issue of soil is a case 
in point. Featuring centrally in global discourses on food production, biodiversity loss, land 
use, but also urban planning and climate regulation, it is by no chance that soil itself both 
underpins and encompasses all the critical zones identified by Rockström et al. (2009) as the 
“safe operating space for humanity”. Y et, this raised attention sits alongside imaginaries of 
soil which remain largely connected to the rural past, disassociated from human experiences, 
sociality and economic practices in the urban present (Meulemans 2020; Granjou and Meule -
mans 2023). New contributions from soil science itself have put forward the need for a new 
anthropedology: “a proposed disciplinary development that understands human activities as 
integral to soil genesis” (Meulemans 2020, 251). 
Echoing the dominant rhetoric of human agency in the Anthropocene, global discourses 
on soil will thus appear to swing between alternative conceptions. On the one hand, the ur -
gency frame – in policy and scientific institutions alike – pushes for solutions in the imme -
diate future. This way of presenting problems dominates funding calls from external organ -
isations (e.g., EU funds, or private investments), a process that, for instance, is also visible in 
schools and Higher education, via systems and practices emphasising short circuits of input 
and outputs via measurable outcomes (Hancock et al. 2023). 
On the other hand, while discourses of urgency prevail, the literature on soil has also wit -
nessed the progressive emergence of counter-narratives, questioning the timescape imposed 
by techno-scientific interventions set on maximising fertility and productivity. Such narra -
tives account for the times of soil renewal and are focused on relations with soil based on 
“care” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015), including also local and indigenous knowledges, as well as 
experiential ways of relating and interacting with soils, as found in ethno-pedology and folk 
taxonomies (Krasilnikov and T abor 2010; Lyons 2020; Martin et al. 2015). 
Thus, to break the cycle of crisis-setting, it is necessary to reconsider the implicit assump -
tions underlying knowledge production practices vis-à-vis the natural system, with particular 
attention to the images of science and research that are transmitted and nurtured in current 
scientific and educational establishments (Burnard et al. 2022). To this regard, we are careful 
to state that it is not our intention to underestimate the warnings coming from the scientific 
community; quite the opposite, our analysis intends to identify the urgency frame in dis -
courses about soil, in order to reflect on and articulate the temporalities for a more inclusive, 
and democratic relation with the soils upon which we intimately depend.
1.1 Focus of This Paper
Addressing the wider international debate on soil as a contemporary socio-ecological issue, 
this paper brings together contributions from the field of policy analysis with emerging lit -
erature in Science & Technology Studies (STS) to illustrate an example of collective praxis, 
whereby a multidisciplinary community of researchers sought to enter into dialogue with a 
plurality of ways of knowing, practices and modes of relating with soil. T o achieve this aim, we 
first engage with an analysis of narratives pivoting around the concept of urgency produced by 
international bodies and communicated through the impactful reports on which public poli -
cies are grounded. We highlight the frame and limitations of technoscientific approaches driv -40
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)41
en by urgency, characteristically informed by a linear trajectory from problem to solution and 
pragmatic, rationally planned actions, with experts as privileged knowledge-holders, often sur -
rogating the public space for debate and deliberation (Benessia et al. 2012; T allacchini 2015). 
In the second part, we draw upon some of the experiences of BRIDGES (Building Reflex -
ivity and response-ability Involving Different narratives of knowledGE and Science)1 – a pro -
ject involving the authors of this paper – to describe and discuss our experience of “slow” sci -
ence (Stengers 2017) hinged on the practice of transdisciplinary research involving a commu -
nity of peers, not only humans. BRIDGES engaged a group composed of senior and young 
researchers, practitioners, artists, students and citizens, in creating extended communities of 
research with soil, informed by the framework of post-normal science (Funtowicz and Ravetz 
1992; 2020) and in accord with a socio-ecological and epistemic justice standpoint (Benes -
sia et al. 2012). Our experience, positioned at the border between research and education, 
was denoted with an explicit attention to the emergence of tacit narratives shaping our work 
and our ability – as researchers – to relate with other perspectives and account not only the 
multiplicity of voices but also the copiousness of both human and non-human temporalities 
involved in soil care practices. The article will conclude with a discussion on the importance 
of methodological choices underpinning the creation of soil narratives; and specifically, the 
possibility of redirecting the narrative of urgency towards new practices of attention, denoted 
by a slow and continuous conception of time.
2. Background: Framing Human Relations with Soil in the Anthropocene
At a time of unprecedented global environmental change, the scientific community has 
characteristically endeavoured to “speak truth to power”, bringing evidence to bear upon the 
pervasive disruption of a planet under pressure. Moreover, not only is science tasked to pro -
vide evidence informing decisions, but also to spur society into action: calling for innovation 
and investments to “fix” a world that is presented as increasingly fragile, inhospitable and un -
stable. Ostensibly framed within a techno-scientific view, nature is presented as “scarce”, with 
resource extraction becoming more expensive and difficult to perform as such resources be -
come less available (Déry 2007); metaphors like “peak oil”, “peak nitrate”, “peak phosphorus” 
are used to convey the anxious forewarning of an impending breakdown, by which a resource 
is heading toward exhaustion without equivalent efforts to renew (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015).
Indeed, we can identify the conceptualisation of the Anthropocene as an over-compassing 
master narrative of the troubled relationship between humans and environment. Since the 
concept was first proposed, in the late 90s, natural scientists, mainly in the geo-environmen -
tal sciences (Hamilton et al. 2015) have been extensively engaged in debating the thematic 
core and temporal boundaries of such epoch: when, where and why the radical break with 
the Holocene took place (Steffen et al. 2015). Randazzo and Richter (2021) have called this 
perspective “discontinuous-descriptive”, underlining the radical discontinuity, interrupting 
the linear temporality, underlying such debate. Such framing of the Anthropocene, clear -
ly highlighting the unfolding of catastrophic and unprecedented ecological changes (IPCC 
2019), is particularly suitable to ground the pressing call to decision-makers for swift actions.
In opposition to this master narrative of the Anthropocene, Randazzo and Richter (2021) 
advance the so-called “continuous-ontological” approach, aiming at “mapping out ecological 
relationality and agency in a way that precedes, and will outlive, the current ecological chang -
es that characterise the Anthropocene” (Randazzo and Richter 2021, 297). 
Running counter to the “positivistic catastrophism” that fuels the construction of the cri -
sis, the ontological relationality allows for an acknowledgement of the limits of human agen -
cy (Chandler 2018; T aussig 2020), and a refusal of the eco-modernist myth of technological 
mastery of nature (Lynch and V eland 2018), going towards a post-cartesian theorization, in 
which the networked agencies of both human and non-humans become the object of inquiry 
(Latour 2018). Hence what is at stake in the Anthropocene is “not the scientific measure -
ment and political management of a set of ecological shifts, but rather a seismic shift in our 
understanding of being” (Randazzo and Richter 2021, 298).
While originating within a discourse primarily located within the natural sciences, particu -
larly geology – which has recently, incidentally, dismissed the Anthropocene as a formal unit of 
the geological timescale (Witze 2024) – the narrative potency of this epoch has permeated the 
social sciences, intersecting with post-structuralist, eco-Marxist, and other debates (Bonneuil 
2015). More importantly, it is something that has evolved from a debate about the “most ap -
propriate unit of measurement for the crisis” to a reflection on the multiple relationalities and 
temporalities that traverse humans and non-humans, including the soil and its inhabitants.
2.1 Narratives and Counter-Narratives of Soil
As Cronon was urging, as early as in 1992, the challenge to scholars is “telling not just sto -
ries about nature, but stories about stories about nature”, acknowledging that each and every 
label we give to phenomena or periods of time implies different narratives and prescribe dif -
ferent possible endings (Cronon 1992). Studies on shared imaginaries focussed on metaphors, 
collective representations, paradigms, frames and narratives show how such shared visions, 
most often tacitly evoked, contribute – together with power structures, interests and rational 
choices – to shape future developments: they define the horizon of possible and acceptable ac -
tions, impose classifications, legitimise actors, serve to identify relevant issues and, when used 
in public debate, can affect collective self-understanding and action (Jasanoff and Kim 2015). 
“Land imaginaries”, in particular, have recently been proposed by Sippel and Visser (2021) as 
influencing “the notions of what land is, what it can or should do, and how humans can or should 
interact with it” (Visser 2021, 315); they concern the shared, implicit ideas grounding how soil-re -
lated environmental issues are interpreted, the paths towards the desirable futures, the ethical 
norms underlying actions and the cultural dimensions related to space and place transformations.
While the dialectic interplay of narratives cannot completely account for the emergence of 
specific socio-environmental issues, their analysis in science-based policy discourses casts light 
on epistemic practices, how evidence is selected and used and the levels at which conflict is both 
managed and understood. Thus paying attention to counter-narratives is important to disclose 
alternative framings and to open up paths hitherto neglected, in terms of both thinking and 
action. Often counter-narratives have been used to describe and confer systematicity to minor -
ity positions, and have been particularly studied, among others, in the field of post-colonial 42
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)43
studies, to show the existence and relevance of non-W estern conceptualisations and approaches 
(Schiebinger 2004). Counter-narratives are also suitable to account for more-than-human pro -
cesses of world-making, as shown by anthropological (Kirksey and Helmreich 2010), sociolog -
ical (Murdoch 2001), and geographical works (Whatmore 2006) of the last decades. 
In our reflection, we refer to narratives of research as frames which define the focus of atten -
tion but also the way in which knowledge is produced and legitimated in academia, as well as 
their underlying values. This work sets the premise for a rethinking of research practices, recast 
as a practice of attention, with its inherent features of slow times, relations, reflexivity and care.
3. Part 1: Frames and Narratives Within Policy Reports 
As regards big socio-ecological issues, the critical sensitive endeavour of knowledge col -
lection, comparison, systematisation and editing that sits behind both problem-setting and 
problem-solving is actually realised within a few international bodies. They function as in -
termediate authoritative entities between the scientific community, tasked to produce sound 
and objective knowledge, and the governments, which are finally called to take action. A 
major instrument of communication of such efforts is the periodic publication of reports, 
condensing data and proposed policies for policy makers and the media. As such, those docu -
ments are well positioned to be analysed with the lenses of incorporated narratives and imag -
inaries, describing the deeply-seated cultural visions of human-environment relationships, as 
they are shaped within the scientific community and amplified for politics and society. 
W e focused on the decade 2012-2022, since FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation 
of the United Nations) launched the Global Soil Partnership. Recognising soils as a crucial 
but neglected factor of food production, a number of initiatives and pilot projects were set 
in motion to raise awareness and support strategic networks, in order to “speak up” for soil 
and boost action (FAO 2022b).
W e started from an initial focus on international bodies holding an explicit institutional 
mandate to address soil: FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation) and UNCCD (United 
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification). These institutions are critical for their role 
in shaping the debate; their reports are normally commissioned to groups of internationally 
recognised experts, with the power of yielding influence over the terms of the debate. We 
then expanded the original set by following internal cross-references, proof of mutual recog -
nition and legitimation as sources of authoritative and trustful knowledge, which allowed us 
to include IPCC’s (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), IPBES’ (Intergovernmen -
tal Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services) and GSP’s (Global Soil 
Partnership) reports, in addition to those produced by joint institutional initiatives. Broadly 
following the example of Browne et al. (2018), we performed a theory-driven, qualitative, 
discourse analysis, in two subsequent steps.
First, we explored how the themes of crisis and urgency were semantically and conceptually 
articulated in the reports, recursively identifying the following discursive lines:
• Crisis : all the discourses articulating around the concept of crisis, depicting negative, 
fearful  scenarios;
• Urgency : all the discourses containing a push to urgence;
• Action : all the discourses proposing actions as responses to problems;
• Speed : all the discourses referring to quickness (e.g., need of acceleration, timely action);
• Pragmatism : all the discourses referring to a pragmatic mindset in responding (e.g., 
tangible, viable, proven, evidence-based, etc.).
As part of this initial analysis, we also conducted an exploration of the themes of “un -
certainty” and “care”, in order to identify discourses pointing to alternative framings of the 
issues affecting soil and options for humans to intervene.
Secondly, we performed a close-reading of the reports with the heuristical lenses of the 
different temporalities of the Anthropocene, with a view to identifying actors and solutions 
which are made visible and possible within the different frames. Since these reports are usually 
structured with forewords and summary parts targeted to non-scientists, followed by lengthy 
accounts of technical information, after their extensive readings we carried out a thematic 
analysis of the parts devoted to summaries and recommendations. This is where conceptual 
framings are normally found, because these sections are specifically aimed at communicating 
with societal actors, as well as being the most common source of information relaunched by 
the media and policy discourses.
3.1 “Moving to a Crisis Footing”: Framing the Roadmap to Tackle Soil Degradation 
We are aware that each single Institution has both a story and a specific identity, which 
shaped its approach, vision and proposals; such diversity emerges clearly also from the respec -
tive reports. However, here we aim for a synoptic reading of their positions, to highlight some 
common features of crisis talking at the sensitive interface between research and society (par -
ticularly media and politics). Where relevant, we will underline peculiar institutional positions.
An urgency frame generally infuses policy with the necessity for action to address the spe -
cific issue of soil degradation:
In a world of profligate consumerism, global supply chains, and a growing population, land 
resources – our soil, water, and biodiversity – are rapidly being depleted. As a finite resource 
and our most valuable natural asset, we can no longer afford to take land for granted. We must 
move to a crisis footing to address the challenge and make land the focus. (UNCCD 2022)
It is clear in this particular extract the sense of impending danger and calamity which por -
trays soil as waste-land, unusable and therefore in need to be remedied or salvaged by humans. 
The “universalist narrative of crisis” (Randazzo and Richter 2021), proper of a discontinuous 
frame, is also reminiscent of points if discontinuity in the recent past, such as the early Mal -
thusian warnings of a geometric progression in population growth, coupled with the later 
neo-Malthusian ecological anxieties (Ojeda et al. 2019).
Urgency is then further fuelled by a linear logic demanding human intervention:
It is no longer enough to prevent further damage to the land; it is necessary to act decisively 
to reverse and recover what we have lost. (UNCCD 2022)44
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)45
Time is of the essence but the subjects who should be involved to undertake such changes 
or even to contribute  relevant knowledge towards understanding  the issues at stakes are con -
cealed in the third-person  written text:
Time is of the essence. Current trends in natural resource depletion indicate production 
from rainfed and irrigated agriculture is operating at or over the limit of sustainability. In -
jecting a sense of urgency into making the necessary transformations in the core of the glob -
al food system is essential. (FAO 2022a)
When urgency frames are employed, some recurrent sub-discourses emerge:
• Crisis times require action;
• It is necessary to act quickly;
• It is necessary to act pragmatically;
• Non-action determines a threat, projecting a gloomy future.
These elements can be logically visualised as in Figure 1 below, which depicts an accelerat -
ing short circuit: the situation of crisis needs urgent, strong and practical action, or new crises 
will emerge, threatening our future and bringing us back to the need of acting urgently.
Figure 1.
The thinking pattern underpinning the urgency conceptual frame.
3.2 “A Full Package of Solutions”: Crisis Times require Action
All documents share a common, abiding call to action, and the reports themselves conceive 
of their role as tools to systematise and assess the viable “institutional and technical respons -
es” (FAO 2022a), leading to a “platform for action to avoid and reduce land degradation and 
promote restoration” (IPBES 2018). Most interestingly, the appeal to action in rhetorical 
terms works well as the opposite of inaction, appealing to the highest moral ground of act -
ing to rescue and take responsibility for others. Indeed, inaction is specifically addressed as 
an expensive, destructive option. Alternative pathways involving the necessity to slow down, 
observe, reflect, relate, share experiences and negotiating values appear in fact only marginally. 
It is necessary to act quickly . Inextricable from the emphasis on urgency, the need to act 
“immediately”, “timely”, “now” is the invoked time infrastructure. Although longer-term 
policies and different time scales are also mentioned, the continuous push to urgency suggests 
a contraction of time over increasingly short time-spans.
It is necessary to act with a pragmatic mindset . Reinforcing the intended call to action, this 
is presented as an “outcomes-oriented approach” (FAO and GSP 2022), which encourages 
thinking in terms of effectiveness, tangibility, practicality, and workability of solutions:
A “full package” of workable solutions is now available to enhance food production and tackle 
the main threats from land degradation, increasing water scarcity and declining water quality.  
(FAO 2022a)
Impressing upon the soundness of proposals, extensive reference is made to the evi -
dence-base, informed by data and illustrated by scientific plots. Particularly, IPCC and GSP 
stressed the value of robust knowledge assessment, performed by “hundreds of experts world -
wide” (IPCC 2019), and the importance of quantifiable targets and indicators (FAO and GSP 
2022), while FAO gathered experts from several institutions to describe the “state of the art” 
of research about soil, following the “tremendous growth in the methods available for the 
study of soil organisms by the scientific community” (FAO, ITPS, GSBI, CBD and EC 2020).
Just like the crisis defines the discontinuous-descriptive frame of the Anthropocene, so do 
the solutions, aiming to turn problems around and restore an optimal situation. Alongside 
the extensive use of technical knowledge, the reports also borrow from the culture of finan -
cial valuation, using concepts like “ecosystem services” and “natural capital”, and a general 
tone of budgetary balance calculation (e.g., the dialectic degradation/restoration), the under -
lying logic being that “the worth of goods, things, activities, spaces, and other species can be 
essentially translated into financial evaluations” (Papadopoulos 2018, 31).
No country can stand alone – alliances, coalitions, partnerships, collaboration, and co -
operation will be essential to build, scale, and deliver the required mix of human, social, 
and financial capital needed to restore natural capital and transform land use systems. 
(UNCCD 2022)46
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)47
As highlighted by Papadopoulos, cultural framings pivoting on valuation also act as “tech -
nologies of temporality”, since they are sustained by an underlying objective of “appropriat -
ing the future” ( ibid. , 40).
Notably, one of the documents feels compelled to report a critical position towards the 
prevalent W estern concept of “ecosystem services”, seen as coming from “instrumental value 
systems”, and describes the effort of reframing it as “nature’s contribution to people”, to be 
used especially in reference to “relational value systems” (IPBES 2018).
Non-action determines a threat, projecting a gloomy future . Projected futures are painted 
with menacing features; even when the rhetorical appeal to urgency is less emphasised, the 
price of inaction is described as full of “soil threats” (FAO and GSP 2022). We are not dis -
cussing here the exercises of scenario-building based on available knowledge normally used by 
environmental modelists. W e are referring to the logical conclusion of the appeal to urgent 
action: a sanction, in the form of a threat to humans, and their social or economic well-being: 
[…] [T]he human-environment relationship must drastically change to avoid catastrophic tip -
ping points whereby the human power of exploitation is overwhelmed by the power of nature.  
(UNCCD 2022)
However, imposing an abiding sense of urgency to discourses quickly equates to a device 
of control, accelerating closure of the debate and narrowing the framing of the problems at 
stake, expedited by the delivery of effective solutions:
Establishing the underlying causes of land degradation provides policymakers with the in -
formation needed to develop appropriate response options, technologies, policies, financial 
incentives and behaviour changes. (IPBES 2018)
In the case of complex socio-ecological issues, as is land degradation, problem-framing is 
particularly sensitive, given their value-based nature, their positioning at the intersections be -
tween different disciplinary descriptions, and at the crossroad of social realms. The risk here 
is that reports act as surrogates of open discussions, subsuming different positions and values, 
and directly proposing (practical) solutions.
Actors mentioned in the reports have differentiated roles: decision-makers are the first in -
tended recipients of the messages (each document contains a summary for policymakers), 
alongside “planners and practitioners” (FAO 2022a), although also the whole group of “sci -
entists, laymen and policy makers” (FAO and ITPS 2015) are targeted, and in some cases 
citizens are involved as “consumers” (FAO and GSP 2022). An implicit hierarchy is estab -
lished: “governments, scientists, farmers, private sector, and local communities” all have the 
“shared responsibility” to “support target initiatives”, while “youth, indigenous people and 
local communities” need to be “empowered” (UNCCD 2022); “farmers, pastoralists, forest -
ers and smallholders […] are nature’s stewards and the best agents of change to adopt, adapt 
and embrace the innovation we need to secure a sustainable future” (FAO 2022a).
Hence, although all documents devote attention to indigenous knowledge and local communi -
ties’ involvement, stating their right to “be given equal footing alongside modern scientific methods” 
(UNCCD 2022), a framework for actual epistemic justice does not follow, and these actors are more 
often called to action at the end of the policy development line, to comply to pre-established solu -
tions. Crucially, although all societal actors are judged relevant and necessary to address the problems 
concerning land degradation, the overall perspective of the reports is the technopolitical, W estern 
one. Notably, it is a position that neglects the presence of others, human and non-human actors, 
resounding with colonial positions against minorities regarded as expendable (Zografos et al. 2020). 
Alongside the analysis of urgency-related categories, we performed throughout the reports an 
exploratory search for alternative visions of human-environment interplay. For example, we tested 
the use of the concept of “uncertainty”, to account for any understanding embracing a non-mas -
tery relation with nature: when it is not denoted in negative terms (e.g., the uncertainty principle 
as a dangerous brake to the needed acceleration, used to avoid unpopular or costly decisions, as in 
IPBES 2018), the term is seldom employed. In some cases, FAO reports introduced the concept 
in the problem diagnosis, possibly opening up towards a post-normal understanding:
The uncertainty of climate change and the complex feedback loops between climate and 
land present agriculture with amplified levels of risk that need to be managed. (FAO 2022a)
Interestingly, FAO is also the institutional body which more frequently employs the con -
cept of “care” to denote the interplay with land:
T aking care of land, water and particularly the long-term health of soils is fundamental to 
accessing food in an ever-demanding food chain, guaranteeing nature-positive production, 
advancing equitable livelihoods, and building resilience to shocks and stresses arising from 
natural disasters and pandemics. (FAO 2022a)
When interpreted as “stewardship”, the same conceptual approach is mostly used to de -
scribe the interplay with minority groups, like indigenous and young people.
In sum, although reasonably employed by international bodies seeking to draw the attention 
of the public and policy-makers towards severe environmental situations, the usage of a crisis 
talk cannot avoid the major flaw of representing a narrative of time contraction over the short -
est periods in the future, i.e., while declaring the need for a resolute jump towards the future, it 
actually forces a stuck on an eternal, uncanny, present (Bryant 2016). Restricting the space and 
time available for reflexive discussions and evaluation of problems and possible solutions, and 
favouring the enactment of action-oriented responses, the urgency frame short-cuts the space 
for action. T o produce a paradigm change, critical discussion of the process of production of sci -
entific knowledge, including its actors and values represents the foundation stone, which is ex -
actly what the urgency frame tends to constrain, finally leading to an actual inability to change.
3.3 Short-Cutting Time / Short-Cutting Relationships in the Reduction of 
Controversial Issues
The analysis of the narratives incorporated within the reports’ discourses showed how 
the political framing of ecological issues is generally confined to what we have termed as the 48
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)49
“urgency frame”, expression of the so-called “governance through time” (Pellizzoni 2020) 
or “chronopolitics” (Kaiser 2015). The urgency frame is pervasive in European policy docu -
ments of the first two decades of the Millennium, promoting innovation in terms of econom -
ic and techno-scientific progress: it is necessary to act quickly, it is argued, as serious dangers 
loom over the “European way of life”, threatening to destroy it (Giuffredi 2019). 
“Governing through emergencies” has been critiqued for its promise of a crisis resolution 
based upon a sharp distinction between normal and extraordinary times, often happening 
at the expense of weaker strands of society (because of class, race or gender), whom, on the 
contrary, are familiar to chronic states of crisis (“slow emergencies”) (Anderson et al. 2020). 
In the context of environmental governance, a notable mechanism for implementing ur -
gent and time-effective measures is the short-cutting of biological relationships. Whether it is 
about soil depletion or the need to contain a biological infection that is harmful to humans, 
the most effective package of solutions  will focus on restricting the spreading of a disease by iso -
lating the sick from the healthy (i.e., quarantine); or minimise its damage through collective 
interventions (i.e., prophylactic measures); or even by selecting resistant and tolerant varieties 
as in the case of plant epidemics in agriculture. In such cases, the reduction of biological 
complexity of a problem may be accompanied by a reduction in the complexity of knowledge 
at disposal, not only in terms of “scientific cultures” serving the problem, but also for the 
possibility of including non-academic actors in the debate over potential solutions. 
A noteworthy case revolves around the management of the Xylella crisis in the Italian context 
(Colella et al. 2019; Milazzo and Colella 2022), which is illustrative of such reductionist prac -
tices. Following a wave of olive tree deaths in the province of Lecce (southeast Italy) in 2013, a 
bacterium identified as Xylella fastidiosa  triggered an emergency procedure under the then-ex -
isting European phytosanitary policies (2000/29/EC). Along with other prophylactic proce -
dures targeting plants’ and insects’ lives, infected olive trees and those at high risk of infection 
in the area were removed and destroyed, in order to contain the spread to other healthy plants. 
One of the most interesting aspects of the phenomenon was the emergence of local move -
ments which, employing various tactics (street demonstrations, legal actions, formation of 
autonomous research groups, etc.), openly critiqued the bio-securitarian framework ruling 
the containment action, but also the science underlying such decisions. 
The general thesis upheld by this wave of mobilizations was that the death of the olive 
trees was not to be attributed solely to the Xylella pathogen, but it was the result of a more 
protracted crisis rooted in the depleted state of soils. While the scientific and institutional 
response focussed on the urgent removal of the known pathogen, the civic mobilizations 
sought to reclaim the possibility of “healing the plant” through experimental practices involv -
ing a wider range of expertise as well as other representatives of institutions willing to listen 
to their proposals. The effect of time compression and the consequent social struggles can 
be depicted through the visual metaphor of the hourglass (see Figure 2). As urgency-infused 
discourses reduced the breadth of the debate by focussing on symptoms or apparent causes, 
the complexity of the issue reappears elsewhere, for example in the calls for protection of soils, 
or as collateral effects re-occurring after the action.
4. Part 2:  Evolving Understandings of Soil
Hegemonic understandings of soil, and of its relations with humans, are challenged by the 
emergence of alternative visions within and outside the Academic community, rooted on a 
rethinking of the nature-culture dialectic. Starting from the second half of the 1990s, newer 
takes on materialism and matter stood in opposition to humanist (and dualist) traditions pred -
icated on a separation of mind and body, humans and non-humans (Coole and Frost 2010). 
In this context, soil becomes a space to experiment with new reflective research practices 
that are open to public involvement and a “technoscience from below” (Krzywoszynska et 
Figure 2.
A schematic depiction of the “hourglass” structure of time induced by emergency: 
urgency infused in discourses pushes to reduce the available epistemic options, 
excluding the more complex hypotheses, only to reinclude the complexity of 
the issue after the action. The reduction of hypotheses causes a shrinking of the 
political space available to a narrow set of knowledge producers, reducing the social 
robustness of the political choice. The image is adapted from (Colella et al. 2019).50
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)51
al. 2018; Meulemans 2020), encompassing experiences of transdisciplinary research across the 
sciences, humanities and the arts (Meulemans et al. 2017). Doing research about soil will thus 
bring into focus some new questions both for policy-making and for science, asking “whose 
science”, “whose logic” and what kind of research processes can be deployed to understand the 
problematic and fundamentally dialectical relationship between human communities and soil.
4.1 BRIDGES: Experimenting in the Minor Key
Encompassing research and education, the BRIDGES project was designed with a focused 
attention to the narratives shaping research and the researchers’ ability to relate with other 
perspectives and the more than human soil. In line with the ideas of post-normal science 
(Funtowicz and Ravetz 1992; 2020), in which the quality of a research process is grounded 
into a multiplicity of perspectives and visions framing a problem, the project promoted the 
creation of a community of research involving a multiplicity of legitimate actors – humans 
and more-than-humans – in researching with soil. 
Such approaches, based on exchange of practices and involving different forms of knowledge 
and disciplinary perspectives, are visibly minoritarian, and are particularly disavowed by the ties 
and requests of traditional Academic Institutions. Hegemonic narratives of scientific research 
rooted in the mastery of disciplinary expertise are introduced from the very early stages of educa -
tion, and consolidated further into one’s research career; hence the task of setting out alternative 
ways of doing research requires a critical and reflexive stance that must be explicitly introduced 
and nurtured within the research community. The underlying questions of the project were: 
how to develop an ecological approach to our research practices transcending disciplinary views 
and common attitudes to nature? How do we enact attentive and inclusive practices? Which 
epistemic posture, dispositions and languages lead to re-framing soil and research narratives?
The process was articulated around a series of transdisciplinary workshops involving young 
and senior researchers, and a research-artistic residence in the rural environment of Pianpicol -
lo Selvatico2, in the high hills of Piedmont in Italy3.
W e began this process by working directly on ourselves as a group of senior researchers, who 
would later in the project guide the young researchers and local citizens. Amongst us were: 1 sci -
ence educator, 3 science communicators, 1 sociologist, 2 visual artists, 1 philosopher of science/
photographer, and 3 natural scientists with cross-disciplinary expertise in botany, geology and 
agricultural sciences. W e note here that the mix of discipline within our group was not dictated 
by the ambition of piecing together expertise to solve a set problem as set out by International 
funding agencies promoting multi and interdisciplinary networks to address the global chal -
lenges. On the contrary, we sought to create a space for critical reflection and dialogue amongst 
ourselves and with the soil in order to surface and to explore the values and tacit narratives that 
we hold, transcending the particular interests of our disciplines (Khoo et al. 2019). Through -
out the process we took reflective notes of our discussions and audio and video recorded our 
conversations. Two of us (Giuffredi and Colucci-Gray) were also acting in the double capacity 
of participants and participant observers in charge of taking notes and offering those as stimuli 
for shared reflection over the course of the project following the practice of participatory action 
research in community and educational settings (Chevalier and Buckles 2013).
4.2 Working Across Frames of Experience
Our experience set out to examine the dynamics of such a collective experiment of working with 
the soil in its multi-dimensional and multi-levelled complexity. Important in this regard are the 
insights of Gregory Bateson (2000) who referred to the “pathologies of epistemology” that inhibit 
the unconscious, perceptive and fundamentally sensorial processes in order to recover the “experi -
ence of knowing what one feels” and “feeling what one knows”, as very particular ways of knowing 
that are rooted in one’s body. One such experience was led in our project by two artists – Andrea 
Caretto and Raffaella Spagna – who involved us in the performative act of “digging” the soil. 
Digging is one of the most immediate and perhaps most fundamental of human activities. 
We dig to find water, minerals, food and we dig in order to plant seeds and work the soil. But 
following Bryant (2007), digging seen from an arts and humanities perspective is perhaps one 
of the closest metaphors we associate with doing research. 
The challenge and the opportunity were to experience the research process as situated in 
lived and embodied situations, with every single object and every single change experienced in 
the course of the relation with soil mattered . This approach took charge of recent critiques of 
attentiveness (see Krzywoszynska 2019), cautioning against the more simply construed idea of 
care-giving encoded in protocols and best practices etc., moving instead with Stengers’ (2006) 
call for slowing the time of research and making place for «hesitating». In this sense, research 
as attentive practice would not simply “seek out” but tend forward towards those interrelations 
and interdependencies that may not be immediately visible. As Haraway (2008) also described 
it, soil as the ground for research acts as a spatio-temporal “place” of  “power, knowledge and 
technique, [and] moral questions” ( ibid. , 205). From the diverse ethnographic records col -
lected (interviews transcriptions, group discussions recordings, fieldnotes), the experience of 
“slow”, reflexive science led to critically re-examining some taken-for-granted features of re -
search, and opened the space for addressing them. We can organise and briefly describe such 
reflections in parallel with our analysis of the features of the urgency frame, as follows.
Urgency frame Slow science experience
Crisis time require action The fatigue and the opportunity of inaction
It is necessary to act quickly Unaccustomed to slowness
It is necessary to act with a pragmatic mindset The need for relentless reflection
Non-action projects a gloomy future Response-ability over our common futures
Table 1.
A synthetic view of the features of the urgency frame, as identified and analysed in the 
devoted section, and some categories of reflection stimulated in the participants to the 
BRIDGES project by the experimentation of alternative vision and practices of research.52
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)53
• The Fatigue and the Opportunities of Inaction . The BRIDGES digging experience 
was framed within an indefinite time of observation. The mandate was to close the 
observation only when all of us agreed to have had the time to observe and note down 
everything . This requirement was felt particularly challenging by some of us: some 
reported feelings of boredom and fatigue of staying within an indefinite present time . 
Conversely, space was opened to note and record feelings and affective dispositions 
that are commonly neglected in our working lives (especially when compiling research 
accounts), such as sensorial experiences (hot/cold, smells and perfumes, hunger/thirst) 
and the opportunity to notice the presence (or the absence, in some contexts) of ani -
mal and plant creatures, insects, worms, maggots, different types of grasses, trees and 
their roots, along with careful and meticulous noting down of the material properties 
of the soil (dusty/dry/hard/soft/moist). A certain difficulty was also reported regard -
ing the lack of a proper language to name the objects of observations; alternative ways 
to describe the observations were then proposed, including sketching the objects and 
testing the features of soil by preparing colours for painting. 
• Unaccustomed to Slowness . The experience of digging was performed over the course 
of all 4 days and it was only at the end of the period spent together that we realised the 
importance of having been away from our everyday commitments and in a context that 
invited a curious openness (Haraway 2016). This aspect became particularly apparent 
when the same experience, constrained in time and space, was proposed in an urban set -
ting (a public park in Milan). Some participants reported a negative opinion on the ex -
perience, perceived as being not so meaningful and uncomfortable: the urban context 
appeared to reduce the space for openness to encounters, in many ways different from 
the experiences reported by those of us who had been in the rural context of Pianpicollo.  
Dishabituation to slowness also emerged when dealing with the life of researchers, 
packed with deadlines, anticipation of outputs and impacts, and in general based on 
“human” times, removed from the times of relations and the times belonging prop -
erly to non-humans. This was a problem which affected planning in the project as 
researching with soil also demanded taking account of its rhythms, the seasonality of 
plant and animal life as well as the unpredictability of the weather and how this was 
to be reconciled with the timelines of human working lives. Resonating with the ob -
servations of Meulemans (2019), our experiences spoke to us about the importance 
of recognising the modalities and the specific context in which we come to know soil.
• The Need for Relentless Reflection . Over the course of the project, it became apparent 
that the journey towards a new way of doing and being in research necessitates times 
and spaces for reflection, that are not simply individual but shared within a commu -
nity. This led to modifications in our communication infrastructure to accommodate 
discussion on emerging issues: in-presence meetings under the guidance of more expert 
colleagues as well as online research conversations amongst us, shared documents for 
writing down ideas and the creation of a photographic repository as a memory of our 
journeys, a way of remembering the community and bringing it together, each time 
offering a new perspective. Later in the project, when we worked with the group of 
young researchers, it was notable the need at every meeting to re-discuss the grounds of 
their research work: for example, when dealing with the idea of developing participa -
tory indicators of soil fertility, the debate centred on the meaningfulness of such an in -
strument, for what purpose and for whom; a critical stance towards the overwhelming 
measuring attitude of the natural sciences emerged regularly as a point of discussion. 
Many young researchers reported that creating the space for discussion of pre-existing 
structures and assumptions was one of the most revitalising features of the project.
• Response-Ability Over our Common Futures . As the project is currently ongoing, 
the next steps in this inquiry will revolve around addressing the fundamental questions 
and dilemmas that such an approach poses for all research communities wishing to 
account for the needs of soil communities. Bringing sedimented attitudes, perceptions, 
ways and modes of approaching research to the surface, and recasting cognition as part 
of a set of artistic-relational practices, was the first methodological choice we made to 
physically bring soil to our own attention; focus and reflect on the role of intermedi -
aries in this contact-zone, those being our values, prejudices but also our pre-existing 
knowledge and the tools chosen (or not chosen) for our inquiry. In this sense we began 
to think differently both about soil and about research: not as a tool or resource, but as 
a set of mutual relations amongst crafting practitioners of human-nature relationships.
5. Conclusions: Re-framing Narratives of Research as “Practices of 
Attention”
Rhetoric based on urgency is widely diffused across Western countries’ science policy dis -
courses. Soil in this case is not only the ground upon which we walk, but it is also the terrain 
of the debate; it is perhaps more appropriately understood with capital “S” as suggested by 
Ulmer (2017), to mean a state of being which can be framed differently according to alter -
native master narratives; one such narrative foregrounds results and outcomes over subjects 
and relations; while the other, which we pointed to as a narrative of attention, is the one 
which highlights processes of mutual interdependencies and co-evolution, and can be re -
ferred to as the narrative of Slow (Stengers 2017). 
Guiding our experiments was the idea of moving in the opposite direction of the narrative of 
urgency, widening the range of perspectives and points of view and thus slowing down rational 
action, by making visible and possible dimensions of our existence which are normally negat -
ed, silenced or left unconscious. As Coole and Frost (2010, 5) observe, ontology facilitates the 
study of the “existence[s] that shape our everyday relationships to ourselves, to others, and to 
the world”. In this regard, Slow Ontology is not simply about expanding time to the point of 
grinding to a halt, or even justifying the lack of action, but it offered us a lens through which 
to re-examine methodological practices, and our experiences in BRIDGES showed some op -
portunities but also difficulties. While framing a relationship with Soil within a Slow ontology 
has the potential to multiply and expand the possibilities and dimensions for knowing, this 
approach challenges the current system of competitive funding, demanding researchers to 
work in a hurry as they chase the next paper or the next contract. Time constraints are always 
problematic for projects but even more so in a project like BRIDGES, which has the ambition 54
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)55
to develop relationships and community, make tacit narratives emerge and promote a trans -
formative process. Further research is thus required to understand the extent to which master 
narratives can be reformulated in everyday research practices within and beyond academia.
From this perspective, we can at least start exploring what might be alternative rhythms of 
inquiry running alongside the industrial beat of economic production. In the Slow framing, 
we can ask different questions of our own research communities: how diverse are the relation -
ships that are being forged and with whom? What values underpin our practices, aspirations 
and perspectives? And how far and for how long are we letting the other enter our percep -
tion, and be prepared to listen? Such questions revolve around methodological choices that 
are dialogical and sensorial; they do not operate via logical-analytical thinking but they seek 
patterns, connections, and story-telling, calling for a more-than-human, entangled approach 
to research with and through the multiple epochs of Soil.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the entire team of the BRIDGES project, which contributed substantially 
to the development of the research. They also thank Pianpicollo Selvatico ETS for having hosted the 
residential workshops, as part of the project. BRIDGES is a project funded by Fondazione Cariplo, 
grant n° 2020-1204. L’ Astorina also acknowledges the contribution from the Italian National Center 
for the Future Biodiversity (NCFB).
Notes
1 See: https://www.progetto-bridges.it .
2 See: http://www.pianpicollo.org/ .
3 Not covered in this paper’s account of the BRIDGES project was the final experiment – inspired by 
Citizen science – involving a number of citizen networks engaged in different forms of soil care activism 
in the urban area of Milan (Criscuolo et al. 2024). Inspired by the European Responsible Research and 
Innovation (RRI) Approach (L’Astorina and Di Fiore 2017), the citizen science experiment headed to -
wards a responsive and iterative process aimed at discussing and collectively co-producing “soil fertility 
indicators”, based not only on techno-scientific but also social, political, and esthetical categories.
References
Anderson, Ben, Grove, Kevin, Rickards, Lauren and Kearnes, Matthew (2020) Slow emergencies: Tem -
porality and the racialized biopolitics of emergency governance , in “Progress in Human Geography”, 
44(4), pp. 621-639.
Bateson, Gregory (2000) Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in Anthropology, Psychiatry, Evo -
lution, and Epistemology  [Revised edition curated by Mary Catherine Bateson], Chicago, Chicago 
University Press.
Benessia, Alice, Funtowicz, Silvio, Bradshaw, Gay, Ferri, Francesca, Ráez-Luna, Ernesto and Medina, 
Charito (2012) Hybridizing sustainability: Towards a new praxis for the present human predicament , 
in “Sustainability Science”, 7(Suppl_1), pp. 75-89.
Bonneuil, Cristophe (2015) The geological turn: Narratives of the Anthropocene , in Clive Hamilton, 
François Gemenne and Christophe Bonneuil (eds.), The Anthropocene and the Global Environmen -
tal Crisis: Rethinking modernity in a new epoch , London, Routledge, pp. 17-31.
Browne, Jennifer, Coffey, Brian, Cook, Kay, Meiklejohn, Sara and Palermo, Claire (2018) A guide to 
policy analysis as a research method , in “Health Promotion International”, 34(5), pp. 1032-1044.
Bryant Logan, William (ed.) (2007) On Digging Holes , in Dirt: The Ecstatic Skin of the Earth , New Y ork, 
W. W. Norton & Company, pp. 136-144.
Bryant, Rebecca (2016) On Critical Times: Return, Repetition, and the Uncanny Present , in “History 
and Anthropology”, 27(1), pp. 19-31.
Burnard, Pam, Colucci-Gray, Laura and Cooke, Carolyn (2022) Transdisciplinarity: Re-Visioning How 
Sciences and Arts Together Can Enact Democratizing Creative Educational Experiences , in “Review 
of Research in Education”, 46(1), pp. 166-197. 
Chandler, David (2018) Ontopolitics in the Anthropocene: An Introduction to Mapping, Sensing and 
Hacking , London, Routledge.
Chevalier, Jacques and Buckles, Daniel (2013) Participatory Action Research: Theory and Methods for 
Engaged Inquiry , Abingdon (UK), Routledge. 
Colella, Christian, Carradore, Roberto and Cerroni, Andrea (2019) Problem Setting and Problem Solv -
ing in the Case of Olive Quick Decline Syndrome in Apulia, Italy: A Sociological Approach , in “Phyto -
pathology”, 109(2), pp. 187-199. 
Coole, Diana and Frost, Samantha (eds.) (2010) Introducing the New Materialisms , in New Material -
isms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics , Durham, Duke University Press, pp. 1-43.
Criscuolo, Laura, Bordogna, Gloria, Barbara, Lara, Benessia, Alice, Bergami, Caterina, Calastri, Elisa, 
Capocefalo, V alentina, Caretto, Andrea, Cavallo, Chiara, Chakraborty, Anwesha, Colella, Chris -
tian, Colucci-Gray, Laura, Crosetto, Stefano, De Lazzari, Amelia, Di Lonardo, Sara, Ercole, Enrico, 
Giuffredi, Rita, Grasso, Francesca, Grasso, Valentina, Laurenza, Lucia, Mallardo, Salvatore, Nigro, 
Francesco, Oggioni, Alessandro, Piccolin, Fabio, Pizzi, Flavia, Serini, Beatrice, Spagna, Raffaella, Ub -
biali, Giorgio A., V ergine, Pompilio and L’ Astorina, Alba (2024) Developing a Participatory Process 
for Soil Fertility: A Case Study in an Urban Area of Italy , in “Sustainability”, 16(12), 4882.
Cronon, William (1992) A Place for Stories: Nature, History and Narrative , in “The Journal of Ameri -
can History”, March, pp. 1347-1376.
Déry, Patrick (2007, August 13) Peak phosphorus . Resilience [Originally published by Energy Bul -
letin]. Available at: http://www.resilience.org/stories/2007-08-13/peak-phosphorus/  (retrieved 
July 7, 2015).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2022a) The State of the W orld’s 
Land and W ater Resources for Food and Agriculture 2021 – Systems at breaking point  [Main Re -
port]. FAO. Available at: https://openknowledge.fao.org/items/ff3cfcc4-e895-4df0-a925-c8ce -
240004ab  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2022b) Global Soil Partnership 
2012/2022 – A decade of speaking up for soil health  [Video]. Y ouTube. Available at: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=cs39tN0yRfs  (retrieved April 30, 2024).56
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)57
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Intergovernmental T echnical Pan -
el on Soils (ITPS), Global Soil Biodiversity Initiative (GSBI), Convention on Biological Diversity 
(CBD), and European Commission (EC) (2020) State of Knowledge of Soil Biodiversity – Status, 
challenges and potentialities . FAO. Available at: https://openknowledge.fao.org/items/8562c177-
1fd4-4630-a704-a54cc3efb21d  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and Global Soil Partnership (GSP) 
(2022) Global Soil Partnership Action Framework 2022-2030 – Healthy soils for a healthy life and envi -
ronment: From promotion to consolidation of sustainable soil management  [Framework]. FAO. Avail -
able at: https://www.fao.org/global-soil-partnership/about/gsp-action-framework-2022-2030/en/  
(retrieved April 30, 2024).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and Intergovernmental T echnical 
Panel on Soils (ITPS) (2015) Status of the W orld’s Soil Resources (SWSR)  [Main Report]. FAO. Avail -
able at: https://www.fao.org/policy-support/tools-and-publications/resources-details/en/c/435200  
(retrieved April 30, 2024).
Funtowicz, Silvio and Ravetz, Jerome (1992) Connaissance utile, ignorance utile: Dissertation sur deux 
types de science , in Jacques Theys and Bernard Kalaora (eds.), La Terre outragée: Les experts sont for -
mels!, Paris, Autrement, pp. 87-101.
Funtowicz, Silvio and Ravetz, Jerome (2020) Post-Normal Science: How Does It Resonate With the 
W orld of Today? , in Vladimír Šucha and Marta Sienkiewicz (eds.), Science for Policy Handbook , Lon -
don, Elsevier, pp. 14-18.
Giuffredi, Rita (2019) «… before it is too late»: contrazione della dimensione temporale e retorica dell’ur -
genza nei discorsi europei sulla ricerca , in “Futuri”, 11, pp. 23-31.
Granjou, Céline and Meulemans, Germain (2023) Bringing soils to life in the human and social sciences , 
in “Soil Security”, 10, 100082.
Hamilton, Clive, Bonneuil, Cristophe and Gemenne, François (eds.) (2015) Thinking the Anthropo -
cene , in The Anthropocene and the Global Environmental Crisis: Rethinking modernity in a new ep -
och, London, Routledge, pp. 1-13.
Hancock, Jonathan, Gray, Donald and Colucci-Gray, Laura (2023) A view from the garden: Interrupt -
ing politics of attainment and re-orienting education towards sustainable futures , in “European Edu -
cational Research Journal”, 0(0). 
Haraway, Donna (2008) When Species Meet , Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Haraway, Donna (2016) Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chtulucene , Durham, Duke 
University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2019) Climate Change and Land – An IPCC 
Special Report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, 
food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems  [Report – P. R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. 
Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, 
R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. 
Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi and J. Malley (eds.)]. IPCC. Available at: https://www.
ipcc.ch/srccl/  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) (2018) The Assess -
ment Report on Land Degradation and Restoration  [Report – L. Montanarella, R. Scholes and A. Brainich 
(eds.)]. IPBES. Available at: https://www.ipbes.net/assessment-reports/ldr  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Jasanoff, Sheila and Kim, Sang-Hyun (eds.) (2015) Dreamscapes of Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginar -
ies and the Fabrication of Power , Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 
Kaiser, Mario (2015) Reactions to the Future: The Chronopolitics of Prevention and Preemption , in “Na -
noEthics”, 9(2), pp. 165-177.
Khoo, Su-Ming, Haapakoski, Jani, Hellstén, Meeri and Malone, Joanne (2019) Moving from inter -
disciplinary research to transdisciplinary educational ethics: Bridging epistemological differences in 
researching higher education internationalization(s) , in “European Educational Research Journal”, 
18(2), pp. 181-199.
Kirksey, S. Eben and Helmreich, Stefan (2010) The Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography , in “Cultur -
al Anthropology”, 25(4), pp. 545-576.
Krasilnikov, Pavel and Tabor, Joseph (2010) Ethnopedology and Folk Soil Taxonomies , in Willy H. V erh -
eye (ed.), Soils, Plant Growth and Crop Production – V olume III , EOLSS, pp. 135-160.
Krzywoszynska, Anna (2019) Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: The role of attentiveness in more-
than-human ethics , in “Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers”, 44(4), pp. 661-675.
Krzywoszynska, Anna, Matt, W atson, Buckley, Alastair, Chiles, Prue, Gregson, Nicky, Holmes, Helen 
and Mawyin, Jose (2018) Opening Up the Participation Laboratory: The Cocreation of Publics and 
Futures in Upstream Participation , in “Science, Technology, & Human Values”, 43(5), pp. 785-809.
L’Astorina, Alba and Di Fiore, Monica (2017) A New Bet for Scientists? Implementing the Responsible 
Research and Innovation (RRI) approach in the practices of research institutions , in “Relations – Be -
yond Anthropocentrism”, 5(2), pp. 157-174.
Latour, Bruno (2018) Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime , Cambridge (UK), Polity Press.
Lynch, Amanda H. and Veland, Siri (2018) Urgency in the Anthropocene , Cambridge (MA), MIT Press.
Lyons, Kristina M. (2020) Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners and Life Politics , Durham, Duke University Press.
Martin, Aryn, Myers, Natasha and Viseu, Ana (2015) The politics of care in technoscience , in “Social 
Studies of Science”, 45(5), pp. 625-641.
Meulemans, Germain (2019) W ormy Collaborations in Practices of Soil Construction , in “Theory, Cul -
ture & Society”, 37(1), pp. 93-112.
Meulemans, Germain (2020) Urban Pedogeneses: The Making of City Soils from Hard Surfacing to the 
Urban Soil Sciences , in “Environmental Humanities”, 12(1), pp. 250-266.
Meulemans, Germain, Legrand, Marine, T ondeur, Anaïs, Thibault-Picazo, Y esenia and V ergnes, Alan 
(2017) Soil Fictions: Addressing Urban Soils between Art, Soil Ecology, and Anthropology , in “Collab -
orative Anthropologies”, 10(1-2), pp. 20-44.
Milazzo, Enrico and Colella, Christian (2022) “L’emergenza la sentivi ovunque”: Temporalità e Confini 
della Tecnoscienza e della Cura nell’epidemia di Xylella fastidiosa in Salento , in “Antropologia”, 9(2 
N.S.), pp. 97-121. 
Murdoch, Jonathan (2001) Ecologising Sociology: Actor-Network Theory, Co-construction and the Prob -
lem of Human Exemptionalism , in “Sociology”, 35(1), pp. 111-133.
Ojeda, Diana, Sasser, Jade S. and Lunstrum, Elizabeth (2019) Malthus’s spectre and the anthropocene , in 
“Gender, Place & Culture”, 27(3), pp. 316-332.
Papadopoulos, Dimitri (2018) Experimental Practice: Technoscience, Alterontologies, and More-Than-
Social Movements , Durham, Duke University Press.
Pellizzoni, Luigi (2011) Governing through disorder: Neoliberal environmental governance and social 
theory, in “Global Environmental Change”, 21(3), pp. 795-803.58
 Giuffredi, Colella, Colucci-Gray, Caretto, Spagna, L’Astorina
Tecnoscienza. 2024. 15(2)59
Pellizzoni, Luigi (2020) The time of emergency: On the governmental logic of preparedness , in “AIS”, 16, 
pp. 39-54.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care , in 
“Social Studies of Science”, 45(5), pp. 691-716.
Randazzo, Elisa and Richter, Hannah (2021) The Politics of the Anthropocene: Temporality, Ecology, and 
Indigeneity , in “International Political Sociology”, 15(3), pp. 293-312.
Rockström, Johan, Steffen, Will, Noone, Kevin, Persson, Åsa, Chapin, F. Stuart III, Lambin, Eric, Len -
ton, Timothy M., Scheffer, Marten, Folke, Carl, Schellnhuber, Hans Joachim, Nykvist, Björn, De 
Wit, Cynthia A., Hughes, Terry, van der Leeuw, Sander, Rodhe, Henning, Sörlin, Sverker, Snyder, 
Peter K., Costanza, Robert, Svedin, Uno, Falkenmark, Malin, Karlberg, Louise, Corell, Robert W., 
Fabry, Victoria J., Hansen, James, Walker, Brian, Liverman, Diana, Richardson, Katherine, Crutzen, 
Paul and Foley, Jonathan (2009) Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for human -
ity, in “Ecology and Society”, 14(2), 32. Available at: https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/
iss2/art32/  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Roitman, Janet L. (2014) Anti-Crisis , Durham, Duke University Press.
Schiebinger, Londa (2004) Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic W orld , Cam -
bridge (MA), Harvard University Press.
Sippel, Sarah R. and Visser, Oane (2021) Introduction to symposium “Reimagining land: Materiali -
ty, affect and the uneven trajectories of land transformation” , in “ Agriculture and Human V alues”, 
38(1), pp. 271-282.
Steffen, Will, Broadgate, Wendy, Deutsch, Lisa, Gaffney, Owen and Ludwig, Cornelia (2015) The tra -
jectory of the Anthropocene: The Great Acceleration , in “The Anthropocene Review”, 2(1), pp. 81-98.
Stengers, Isabelle (2006) La vierge et le neutrino: Les scientifiques dans la tourmente , Les Empêcheurs 
de Penser en rond.
Stengers, Isabelle (2017) Another Science is Possible: A Manifesto for Slow Science , London, Polity Press.
T allacchini, Mariachiara (2015) To Bind or Not To Bind? European ethics as soft law , in Stephen Hilgar -
tner, Clark A. Miller and Rob Hagendijk (eds.), Science and Democracy: Making Knowledge and 
Making Power in the Biosciences and Beyond , London, Routledge, pp. 156-175.
T aussig, Michael (2020) The Mastery of Non-Mastery in the Age of Meltdown , Chicago, University of 
Chicago Press.
Ulmer, Jasmine B. (2017) Writing Slow Ontology , in “Qualitative Inquiry”, 23(3), pp. 201-211.
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) (2022) Global Land Outlook – 
Land Restoration Recovery and Resilience . UNCCD. Available at: https://www.unccd.int/resourc -
es/global-land-outlook/global-land-outlook-2nd-edition  (retrieved April 30, 2024).
Visser, Oane (2021) Persistent farmland imaginaries: Celebration of fertile soil and the recurrent igno -
rance of climate , in “ Agriculture and Human V alues”, 38(1), pp. 313-326.
Whatmore, Sarah (2006) Materialist returns: Practising cultural geography in and for a more-than-hu -
man world , in “Cultural Geographies”, 13(4), pp. 600-609. 
Witze, Alexandra (2024) Geologists reject the Anthropocene as Earth’s new epoch – after 15 years of debate , 
in “Nature”, 627(8003), pp. 249-250.
Zografos, Christos and Robbins, Paul (2020) Green Sacrifice Zones, or Why a Green New Deal Cannot 
Ignore the Cost Shifts of Just Transitions , in “One Earth”, 3(5), pp. 543-546.
