 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DiGeSt   
Journal of Diversity  and Gender Studies  
 
 
Beyond burnout culture?  Artistic imaginations of care 
(crisis) in Barbara Raes’s Zon dag kind and Els Dietvorst’s 
Field Guide  
Sarah De Mul  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DiGeSt Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies, Volume 9, Issue 1 
https://doi.org/ 10.21825/digest.81848  
Print ISSN: 2593 -0273. Online ISSN: 2593 -0281  
Content  is licensed  under  a Creative  Commons BY    
DiGeSt  is hosted by Ghent University Website:  https://digest.ugent.be   

De Mul                                                                          
61 
 Beyond burnout culture?  Artistic 
imaginations of care ( crisis) in 
Barbara Raes’s Zon dag kind and Els 
Dietvorst’s Field Guide  
 
Sarah De Mul  
Professor  of Culture, Gender and Diversity , Open University Netherlands – Faculty of 
Humanities  
sarah.demul@ou.nl   
 
 
Abstract  
 
Recent studies of contemporary burnout culture, as I will argue, have much to gain from 
recent feminist critical theorisations and artistic imaginations of care  (crisis) . The suggestion 
is indeed to re -think burnout culture  in relation to capitalism’s care crisis in order to bring 
into view  the valuable perspectives offered by femin ist theorizations and artistic 
imaginations, which have thus far been largely side-lined , or not properly been considered  in 
the discussion .   
Closereading Zon dag kind  by Barbara Raes and Field  Guide by Els Dietvorst, I show  that 
both works challenge conv entional artistic boundaries so as to carry out experiments in 
sociability which help us imagine caring subjects and a sense of community, which can be 
seen as an important part of the answer to the self -sufficient entrepreneurial individual in our 
neolibe ral society, in particular, to his or her total exhaustion and other related mental and 
affective states.    
 
 
Keywords  
Care, Vulnerability, Burnout culture , Capitalism’s care crisis, Women’s art, Belgium  
 
  
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
62 
 Introduction  
Bodies are exhausted under today’s unrelenting pressures and divisive and exploitative 
climates.  That we are currently experiencing a ‘burnout’ epidemic is increasingly recognized 
as a major public health problem. B urnout rates have grown in alarming numbers , although 
women are more  prone than men (Robinson, 2019). In the face of the unprecedented 
challenges created by the COVID -19 pandemic emergency, rising numbers of cases and new 
types of burn -out have been acknowledged, which were already widespread.  
Concomitantly burnout has in creasingly been studied as more than ‘just’ an issue of 
mental health, but rather, as a ‘signature affliction ’ of the early 21st century acutely revealing 
all that has gone wrong in the spirit of our age.1 From this perspective, the roots of the burnout 
concept are seen to be embedded within broader social, economic, and cultural developments 
that took place in the last quarter of the past century and signifies the rapid and profound 
transformation from an industrial society into a neoliberal service economy, a social and 
cultural transformation resulting in unprecedented psychological pressures. Examples of 
such cultural approaches to burnout are, for example, Byung -Chul Han’s The Burnout Society  
(2010) , and Pascal Chabot’s Global Burnout  (2013).2 Both Han and Chabot contend that 
burnout, exhaustion , and depression are affective states linked to neoliberal capitalist political 
economies, which  are centred around values of meritocracy, hyperindividualism , and free -
market competition.  
Each in their own way, Han and Chabot try to seek alternative propositions to the 
early 21st century burnout culture they diagnose.  Han finds inspiration in a notion of “We -
Tiredness” ( Wir-Müdigkeit ), as elaborated in Peter Hand ke’s Versuch über die Müdigkeit  (An 
Essay on Tiredness).Warning that grind and fatigue often lead to emptiness and isolation, 
Handke summons individuals to change this individual form of ‘I-Tiredness ’ to ‘Wir-
Müdigkeit ’, a ‘communal tiredness ’, ‘which results in a feeling of unquestioned belonging 
and of taking in the whole world ’, ‘a pleasant impersonal tiredness in which the superego is 
finally quiet, leaving a space of receptive, creative emptiness. ’ In so doing, Han proposes as 
an antidote to a life  reduced to, or subjected to, positivity, profit and productivity, a model 
that revalorizes contemplation, conviviality, life -making activities and care -based 
communities. In Global Burnout Pascal Chabot introduces a notion of ‘subtle progress ’ 
through whi ch he argues for a renewal of renaissance humanism, ‘to restore and nurture, 
along with useful progress, a subtle progress that ‘centres  around individuals, their education, 
their way of living and caring for themselves […] the prioritization of their happ iness. ’ To 
Chabot we are in need of a new version of the 18th century ‘social contract’, a form of 
regulative ideal that is to prevent us from making the human cost secondary to the logic of 
economics and technology, and which will ensure that ‘our primary  objective is the human 
race and the biosphere that sustains us. ’  
Byung -Chul Han’s The Burnout Society  (2010) and Pascal Chabot’s Global Burnout  
(2013) are undoubtedly spot on in their diagnosis of burn -out as a 21st century cultural 
phenomenon.3 Yet, it seems that their suggestions provide us with too facile concepts of 
‘burnout culture ’ and fall short in providing the adequate conceptual framew orks that could 
properly guide us towards imagining post -burnout socialities and imaginations. For instance, 
 
1 Originally burnout is deployed as a metaphor describing an individual’s state of mental weariness 
(Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004) characterized by emotional exhaustion, depersonalization and reduced 
personal accomplishment among those who do people work of some kind (Maslach & Jacks on, 1986).  
2 Another example is Paul Verhaeghe’s What about me? The Struggle for Identity in a Market -Based 
Society  (2014).  
3 All the more since more often than not burnout has conventionally been reduced to an individual 
pathology. The latter approach has  particularly problematic consequences, all the more since it leaves 
seeking solutions to the problem of burnout up to the individual, while at the same time the 21st 
century cultural norms and values of profit, production, self -responsibility to which ind ividuals are 
subjected remain unaddressed, even reconfirmed.  
 
De Mul                                                                          
63 
 it is difficult to envision the extent to which a restoration of an eighteenth -century notion of 
social contract will be structurally helpful in ad dressing the current global burnout pandemic 
problem. In a similar vein, Han’s proposal of ‘we -tiredness’ seems to be an idealized, 
ahistorical metaphor which is far removed from the actual early 21st century cultural 
conditions producing burnout in the fi rst place.  
Perhaps even more importantly, social historian Hannah Proctor (2019 , p. 89) has 
pointed to Chabot’s rather unspecific use of notions of care(work), despite the fact that 
burnout originated as a term relating to overworked caregivers and still disproportionately 
affects people, especially women, in ‘caring professions’.  To Proctor, Chabot is too abstract 
and ahistorical about care – the extent to which it is (un)waged labour, what kind of people 
it is traditionally performed, its affective dimen sions – and ‘he does not engage with the large 
existing feminist literature on these subjects, from social reproduction theory to theories of 
emotional labour. ’  
In what follows I will build on Proctor’s observation and propose to consider recent 
feminist theorizations and artistic imaginations that have taken up the issue of care, 
capitalism’s care crisis , and social production in today’s neo -liberal austerity policies  and 
capitalist political economies. Cultural approaches to burnout culture, as I would t hus like to 
argue, have much to gain from these recent feminist critical theorisations and artistic 
imaginations. The suggestion is indeed to reframe the debate on the so -called ‘burn -out 
society’ as a debate on capitalism’s care crisis to bring into the d iscussion the valuable 
perspectives offered by feminist theorizations and artistic imaginations of care, which have 
thus far been largely sidelined, or not properly been considered.   
This essay, then, signals the start of a proposition that explores how concepts of care 
can be developed, troubled , and enhanced through a close  reading of some recent artistic 
imaginations of care and, simultaneously, how these art works can be better understood by 
situating these within a theoretical context of  contemporary gender theory in which a renewed 
interest can be viewed in care ethics as an alternative mode to the governing neoliberal 
technologies of self. To this purpose, I will sketch out in the first section a series of recent 
approaches and key conc epts of care and neoliberalism. I will outline how recent gender 
theorists of different backgrounds have discussed how the structural inequity and 
disenfranchisement engendered by neoliberalism come with corporeal and emotional tolls 
that care seeks to rem ediate. The latter theoretical framework will inform my analysis of two 
contemporary imaginations of art as a matter of care, Zon dag kind  by Barbara Raes and Field  
Guide by Els Dietvorst.    
As I hope to show, in their own idiosyncratic way, the two works under investigation 
explore different ways in which art can act as a matter of care that can bind together 
individuals and communities where larger institutions or governments fail to intervene. In 
doing  so, Raes and Dietvorst break down conventional artis tic boundaries and the 
conventions of the performing and visual arts respectively to carry out experiments in 
sociability which help us imagine caring subjects and a sense of community, which can 
arguably be seen as an important part of the answer to the s elf-sufficient entrepreneurial 
individual in our postmodern society, in particular, to his or her total exhaustion and other 
related mental and affective states.    
 
Contemporary Theorizations of Care and Capitalism’s Care Crisis  
In the last decades feminists of different backgrounds and strands have addressed  ‘the crisis 
of care’ . This commonly refers to the systematic pressures , mainly  related to the  ways in 
which labour is currently organised and which are squeezing a key set of  social capacities, 
including capacities  available for birthing and raising children, caring for friends and family 
members, maintaining households and broader communities, and sustaining connections 
more generally.  These ‘life -making’ instead of profit -making, activities and professions, 
which are also called processes of ‘social reproduction’, have been historically cast as 
women’s work. Although often performed without pay, such forms of care work are 
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
64 
 indispensable to society.4 According to feminist theorist Nany Fraser ( 2016 , n.p.): ‘No 
society that systematically undermines social reproduction can endure for long. Today, 
however, a new form of capitalist society is doing just that. ’ The result is a major crisis, not 
simply of care, but of social reproduction in this broader sense, which in Fraser’s eyes is one 
aspect of a ‘general crisis’ that also encompasses economic, ecological , and political strands, 
all of which intersect with and exacerbate one another. Capitalism’s care crisis thus shows 
itself in the persistent devaluation of the time, energy , and human resources it takes to 
perform life -making activities and care(work), whereas these are crucial in providing the 
political, social, material, and emotional conditions that  allow for people, planet , and non -
human creatures to thrive.  
 Despite, or precisely because of, today’s structural erosion of society’s capacities 
for care, care seems to be experiencing a remarkable success  lately. Care has become indeed 
a veritable buzzword during and in the wake of the Covid -19 pandemic, which led to 
tremendous ‘discursive explosions of care ’, as the editors of a recent special issue in Feminist 
Media Studies  (Chatzidakis e.a ., 2020) have o bserved. It is as if care’s popularity has grown 
proportionally alongside the way in which the pandemic has democratized human 
vulnerability. At the same time, however, the amplified rhetorical use of care in the public 
arena, where it is deployed by celeb rities and politicians across the spectrum as well as by 
corporations promoting themselves as ‘caring’ , summons us to be cautious, as the editors in 
Feminist Media Studies  warn us: ‘Underlining these representations and proclamations are 
often disturbing a ssumptions about what counts as meaningful care ’ (Chatzidakis e.a ., 2020 , 
p. 980).    
 When corporations are trying to present themselves as socially responsible, while 
simultaneously contributing to, even capitalising on, social inequalities, the term 
‘carewashing ’ has been coined to denote the rhetorical move that uses discourses of care 
while profiting from the care crisis they have helped to create (Chatzidakis e.a ., 2020 , p.891). 
In April 2020 a new care emoji was launched on Facebook, as ‘a way for pe ople to share 
their support with one another during this unprecedented time ’, as Facebook's tech 
communications manager, Alexandru Voica, explained.5 Such caring initiatives, however, 
disguise the more uncaring practices in which global companies, like Facebook, structurally 
engage (Baumer e.a., 2019). Such forms of corporate care are what Emma Dowling (2020) 
calls a ‘care fix ’ – they offer us a temporary comforting balm whilst failing to address the 
deeper structural crisis.  
Given such shifting uses and contradictory significations of care, such as the ones 
described above, it might perhaps be tempting to derive from this that we have to resist care 
as a politics, in a way similar to Sarah Bracke’s (2016) intriguing proposal to resist resilience. 
In ‘Boun cing Back. Vulnerability and Resistance in Times of Resilience ’, Bracke offers a 
critique of resilience, which she views as ‘a point of departure to tell yet another tale of 
neoliberal governmentality ’ (Bracke, 2016 , p. 34). One of the main problems Bracke has with 
resilience is that it ties up the subject structurally to the shocks of neoliberalism she is 
assumed to bounce back from, while simultaneously withholding her the possibility of 
imagining substantial social tra nsformation. Bracke thus calls for a resistance to resilience, 
even though she admits that it is unclear what this might precisely entail. Part of this 
difficulty, she argues, possibly results from our understanding of ‘a neoliberal social ontology 
that re volves around the individual, and the paralyzing effect that the complexity of our world 
has on that individual. ’ Bracke’s suggestion, then, principally revolves around the refusal of 
such ontology and a shift to a ‘social ontology centred in relationality  and 
interdependence ’(Bracke, 2016, p. : 72). 
 
4 Many feminist theorists have made versions of this argument. see Fraser, “Contradictions of Capital 
and Care,” 99 –100, esp. 100n4  
5 https://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/uk -news/what -facebook -care-emoji -how-
18183980  
De Mul                                                                          
65 
 In so doing, Bracke joins a chorus of feminist voices who have recently embraced 
and reclaimed notions of vulnerability, precariousness and care as a ground for politics and 
ethics (e.g. Butler, 2004 ; Butler & G ambetti , 2014 ; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017 ; The Care 
Collective, 2020). Vulnerability in this sense is understood, not as something that needs to 
be overcome (as resilience asks us to do) but seeks to reconstruct an ethical condition of 
human life, which is  domesticated and obscured within contemporary political economies of 
neoliberalism.  (Bracke, 2016 ). It sees human beings as embodied creatures who are 
inexorably embedded in social relationships and institutions and thus underscores the 
necessity of rethi nking social relations and interdependencies as well as neoliberal notions of 
the autonomous, self -sufficient , and resilient individual.   
In Matters of Care  (2017) , Maria Puig de  la Bellacasa  offers a mode of thinking 
with care in a posthumanist world, which deserves special mention as it will be important in 
the closereading of Els Dietvorst’s Field guide  (2019) in the next sections. Extending the 
work of Donna Haraway, Joan Tronto, and Bruno  Latour, de la Bellacasa develops a 
philosophical framework and ethics of care which challenge dominant technoscientific 
productionist ways of thinking and acting in a posthumanist world. Puig understands care as 
a three -dimensional concept entailing labou r, affect/affections, and ethics/politics. Puig 
understands care as a vital part of sustaining worlds, yet it is also continually appropriated 
by, and entangled in, powerful configurations, including those with ultimately destructive 
effects (e.g. marketin g discourses that call for commodity -driven self -care or  justifications 
for armed international interventions). For Bellacasa, thinking with care offers a way to think 
both through and beyond these entanglements. Moreover, in contrast to a dominant notion  of 
care as an act of the human self, Bellacasa suggests humans are not the only beings engaged 
in practices of care and she stresses the importance of multispecies caring as a practice 
situated within historical and naturalcultural relationalities.  
The cu rrent interest in feminist theorisations of care builds on a long tradition of 
care ethics dating back to at least Nel Noddings question: ‘ Why care about caring? ’ (1986). 
Noddings’s book signalled a shift in moral philosophy away from conceptualisations of  an 
autonomous human subject and towards concepts of relationality and dependence. Other 
theorists such as Carol Gilligan (1982), Eva Kittay (1991), Joan Tronto (1993) , and  Virginia 
Held (1993) began to lay out philosophical frameworks for a terrain of car e ethics which 
would go on to influence a wide range of interdisciplinary fields such philosophy, political 
theory, education, nursing , and social work, although it has had arguably less impact on the 
arts. In particular Carol Gilligan’s work has been of g reat importance in challenging 
patriarchal and capitalist understandings of ‘justice’. In that work, Gilligan argued that girls 
exhibit distinct patterns of moral development based on relationships and on feelings of care 
and responsibility for others . Gilligan proposed that women come to prioritize an ‘ethics of 
care’ as their sense of morality along with their sense of self while men prioritize an ‘ethics 
of justice ’. Taken together, this body of theory has been fundamental in understanding how 
care and care work is socially engendered, historically being assigned to women and 
devalued.  
However, one of the most important concerns that has been raised towards this 
earlier second wave strand of predominantly white feminist theorists, is that a static notion 
of gender has been the privileged optic through which care ethics has been theorised. 
Consequently , it risks essentializing care work as a feminized realm. This conce rn echoes 
critiques to the idea of a universal ‘female’ subject by deconstructionist and postcolonialist 
feminist scholars (Mohanty , 1988; Butler and Scott , 1992). In their wake, a long line of 
theorists has argued that gender intersects with other vectors  such as race, class , and disability 
in the social world, including in caring practices. In this vein, an emergent literature on 
intersectionality and care ethics has focused on how raciali zed difference affects care 
practices and therefore care ethics (Hankivksy , 2014; Raghuram, 2019). From the latter 
perspective, care has been problematized, especially the ways in which discourses of care 
oppress, manipulate , and produce certain kinds of su bjects for certain purposes. For example, 
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
66 
 Fraser underscored how the capitalist crisis of care is built upon ‘transnational care chains ’ 
that disproportionately affect immigrant women of colo ur and their children (Fraser , 2016 ; 
Nguyen, Zavoretti and Tronto , 2017). T he changing division of domestic labour has resulted 
in the unpaid domestic labour of middle -class women in rich countries being replaced by the 
paid domestic labour of those from poorer nation s. 
 A related strand of anti -racist feminist scholars hip including Ericka Huggins 
(2016), Audre Lorde (1988), bell hooks (2000), Gloria Anzaldúa (2002) and Angela Davis 
(2018), has highlighted how the practice of self -care and self -love is crucial, particularly for 
women of colo ur, in dealing with the daily onslaught of racism, sexism, homophobia, and 
class oppression. Moreover, from very early on feminists of colour have challenged 
individualized, nuclear  family -based, white, middle -class understandings of care that do not 
recognize ‘othermothering ’ and how black women’s caring practices cent re on maintaining 
family and community bonds in the service of freedom and liberation. Patricia Hill Collins, 
for example, argues that although mainstream feminists’ re -evaluation of motherhood might 
effectively challenge  white, middle -class man's images of motherhood, yet these do not 
encompass black motherhood. Black mothers historically created women -centred networks 
among grandmothers, sisters, aunts, and cousins, all of whom are called ‘other mothers ’ 
(Collins, 1995).  They have struggled not with the image of attentive, self -sacrificing, and 
passive women, but rather with that of ‘the white -male -created ‘matriarch' or the Black -male -
perpetuated “superstrong Black mother” ’ (Collins, 1995 , p. 119).  
Given the theoretical debates about, and amplified discursive uses of, notions of care 
in the public arena today, we need  more theori zing of care ethics and the potentially 
productive links between contemporary art practice and care ethics, in particular in forging 
innovative responses to the various crises wrought by neoliberal values we are experiencing 
today. In what follows, I will endeavour to open up such worthwhile per spectives by 
exploring two very specific artistic imaginations of care (crisis) in the neoliberal context of 
contemporary Belgium.  
In the closereadings of the works by Raes and Dietvorst which follow, I will build 
on Toril Moi’s proposal to ‘think through  examples ’ (2015). Inspired by Wittgenstein’s 
philosophy, Moi argues that thinking through examples releases us from the grip of the logic 
of representation and the craving for generality which dominates, in Moi’s view, feminist 
theory today and consequent ly, transforms our understanding of concept and theory. Rather 
than aiming to ‘do’ theory or formulate a concept of care in contemporary artistic practice, I 
will alternatively approach the topic by means of attentive closereading of the particulars of 
two distinct illustrations.  
More specifically, I will think through the examples of the artworks by Barbara Raes 
and Els Dietvorst in order to theorise artistic imaginations of care a form of ‘aesthetic 
resilience ’ in the contemporary Belgian neoliberal cont ext (Steinbock e.a. , 2021). Both 
works’ engagement with care will indeed be seen as context -specific artistic expressions 
addressing a particular configuration of capitalism’s care crisis in contemporary Belgium. As 
such, the two works under investigation can be understood as part of broader currents of 
contemporary art that have sought to ameliorate neoliberal harms through social practice, 
including interdisciplinary collaboration, ritual, creative approaches to community, for 
example by artists such as A lain Platel or Arne Sierens and or more recent younger 
collectives such as Action Zoo Humain, K.a.K, Globe Aroma, Zuidpark. The ways in which 
artists have sought to confront systemic crises around the globe, searching for new and 
enduring forms of building  communities and reimagining the political horizon has been at 
the forefront of debates in literary and cultural studies (e.g. Steinbock, de Valck and Ieven, 
2020; Greenwald Smith 2021). In the next paragraphs let us now proceed with understanding 
the crea tive and critical  potential of artistic imaginations of care ethics against the 
background of this context by closereading Zon dag kind. 
 
De Mul                                                                          
67 
 Zon dag kind. Grief at the Crossroads of Performance and Ritual  
The project Zon dag kind by the Belgian artist -curator Barbara Raes probes some of the most 
essential conventions of the performing arts in order to create a modern ritual that transforms 
unacknowledged feelings of individual grief into a communal experience of vulnerability and 
care. Seen from this perspective, Zon dag kind can be seen as an expression of what Judith 
Butler wrote in Precarious Lives : that mourning can provide resources for the rethinking of 
community  (2004, p. 20) . Human beings are tied to one another, even in the form of loss and 
vulnerability, Butler argues, and it is precisely this human condition of interdependence and 
vulnerability that is the basis of reimagining the possibility of community .  
Following her personal experience of vocational burn -out in 201 4, Barbara Raes 
(2014, n.p.) extensively reflected upon  what she perceived as a society and a cultural sector 
‘in overdrive ’ and called upon the art world to transform itself into ‘a fertile zone with rich 
resources for a care -based society. ’ In today’s ag e of secularization, individualism and 
acceleration, humans lack the time and tools to work through feelings of loss and grief, ‘those 
moments in life in which we are not supposed to mourn […] because we live in a world in 
which even sadness must be consum ed quickly ’ (Raes, 2015 , n.p. ). From this realization, 
Raes decided to establish Beyond the spoken , an artistic space dedicated to inventing new 
rituals and rites of passages marking unacknowledged loss. To Raes  (2017, p. 10) , art and 
theatre could play a significant role in working through such unrecognized feelings 
collectively: ‘Creating and experiencing rituals for loss helps to keep our messy, vulnerable 
society together. ’  
Zon dag kind is a new ritual which deploys dramat ic conventions and the 
institutional environment of the performing arts to transform one child’s experience of loss 
into a collective work of care. Although programmed as a performance in a public, socially 
shared, space of a major theatre festival in the Belgian city of Ostend (an important aspect to 
which I will return below), Zon dag kind  is foremost a rite of passage in which one singular 
child honours and works through an experience of grief. Situated then at the crossroads of 
art, care , and ritual, in  Raes’ terms, Zon dag kind is ‘theatrical but not theatre. It is artistic but 
not art; it is therapeutic but not therapy; it is festive but not a festivity; it is playful but not a 
game; it is time out of time but not a time -out’ (2017 , p. 20).   
Like most  rites of passages, Zon dag kind 's basic narrative structure is deceptively 
simple. One child, oblivious about what is about to happen, is invited to spend the night on 
board of a fishing boat which will leave the port before sunrise. The child enters a realm 
where fiction and non -fiction, imagination , and daily reality become intertwined . They are  
woken up by a Sun Princess who asks the child to help the sun rising by singing a song. The 
child is thus invited to play a protagonist role alongside  a Sun princess in a theatre play in 
which the dramatic turning point is in fact one of the most normal, everyday natural 
phenomena: the sun rising. This pivotal encounter between the sun and the child will change 
the protagonist's fate, which is encapsula ted in the double meaning of the title: Zon dag kind 
is a composite signifying literally in Dutch ‘Sun. Greets. Child’. It also refers to the well -
known expression zondagskind, a very fortunate person. The suggestion is clear: just as the 
end of the night promises the breaking of a new day, so does loss open up space for the 
beginning of something new.    
Centralizing a sea journey by boat, Zon dag kind  navigates along the classical three -
phases structure of a rite of passage – separation, transition , and r eintegration (Raes, 2017 , p. 
25-29). After the boat’s departure from the shore (and its separation from society), the child 
enters a transition phase in which the cyclic time of the natural world prevails and where loss 
signifies rebirth and regeneration, as night always becomes day. In this shifting, fluid sea 
space, the child is invited to abandon the position of the passive sufferer of private pain in an 
isolated world and  is instead endowed with the more active role of singer and accomplice of 
the sun, bringer of light. It is worthwhile mentioning that not only water (sea ), but also other 
natural elements play a vital role – earth (port), fire (sun) and air (song). The universality of 
these references to the natural elements arguably serves a goal s imilar to archetypes such as 
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
68 
 the guide, the boat, the journey which Zon dag kind  integrates, and which characterize the 
ritual form  more generally: It releases humans from what ecologists Joanna Macy and Molly 
Brown in Coming Back to Life  call ‘the grip of  a hyper -individualized sense of self ’ (2014 , 
p.81).  
The institutional arrangements of the performing arts environment in which  Zon dag 
kind is embedded, further serve to transform individual feelings of loss and grief into a 
collective experience of care , which is socially shared and can be worked through together. 
Zon dag kind  was first performed as the central event of the major ten -day theatre festival 
Theater aan zee  in the Belgian coastal city of Ostend curated in 2018 by Raes. Just like all 
the thea tre plays of the festival, Zon dag kind  was programmed, publicized, sold , and 
performed daily for the duration of the festival. Yet in contrast to the other plays, the general 
audience is not supposed to attend in a traditional sense - Zon dag kind ’s only immediate 
audience is one single child (actor) per day. The audience coul d buy entrance tickets, yet the 
play’s starting time and location mentioned were intentionally kept vague. Ticket holders 
were directed to a geographical point at the quay where they could watch and wave to the 
fishing boat in the distance returning to the  shore. They had to figure out the starting time for 
themselves, the exact moment when the sun would rise on that particular day. By thus 
simultaneously engaging with, and subverting, the ‘horizon of expectations’ of a theatre 
performance, Zon dag kind  establishes a formal instantiation of making visible the invisible, 
of creating space for absence, of publicly  acknowledging loss which is nowadays in our 
society left too often unacknowledged. It ma kes a collective experience out of individual 
grief which is  too often left unrecognized.    
In yet another way Zon dag kind  engages the institutional environment of the 
performing arts for the transformation of personal pain into a matter of collective care and 
vulnerability. It involves multiple layers of spectat ors, who are placed in the position of 
witnesses to the child’s pivotal meeting with the sun. These various spectatorial witnesses 
form circles widening around the child’s rite of passage . Firstly, in recruiting and preparing 
the participating children, Ra es collaborated with their primary caregivers and social 
organizations and support groups for mourning children, such as vzw Lost . Secondly, 
members of the child’s social world are involved, who are invited to welcome back the child 
at the quayside once th e boat has returned to the shore and share breakfast together. Thirdly, 
the actress and shipper, the immediate witnesses of the child’s boat journey. Fourthly, the 
ticketholders who woke up in the morning and saw the sun rising together with the child, 
who were waving at the shore and made a connection to the boat.  
In so doing, an individual’s grief is honoured in its singularity , yet it is also seen and 
recognized by bystanders and becomes a source of shared vulnerability. In Precarious Lives,  
Butler inde ed argues that through the act of grieving we come to realise that we are inherently 
connected to others, both human and non -human. There is a realisation that there is a ‘you’ 
in the collective notion of ‘we’ and that part of us is lost when we grieve for  others. This 
notion is aptly expressed by Butler, who contends that ‘we are undone by each other’ (2004 , 
p.23).   
Yet Zon dag kind  goes one step further: this shared sense of vulnerability becomes 
a source of hope.  By means of a daily one -sentence announcement on social media, the 
general audience is implicated into a collective experience of a caring community. Every day 
for the duration of the festival, the child who undertook the rite of passage was designated 
and mentioned on social media, for example: ‘Today the sun was sung up by Finn (age 7) ’. 
This simple sentence draws for its immense emotive effect on the simultaneous invocation 
and disruption of the association we usually make between children and new beginn ings. We 
feel it appropriate that precisely children help the sun announcing the start of a new day, both 
conventional symbols of optimism and future. Yet this impression is unsettled since in this 
case, the child embodies loss and grief, which we, as adul ts, can connect to and identify with. 
And right at the moment when we start resisting or feel confused by this disruption of what 
we feel is the natural course of events, we are consoled by the restoration and even 
De Mul                                                                          
69 
 reinforcement of the association we usual ly make between children and beginnings: This 
particular child transforms a personal experience of loss and pain into a courageous, 
communal act of care by inviting the sun to start a new day, for us all.    
   In what follows I will examine how the Belgia n artist Els Dietvorst challenges in 
Field  Guide.* Acte de révolte  the literary genre of the field guide for her imagination of a 
web of care in a multispecies world inhabited by human and nonhuman agencies.  
 
Field  Guide.* Acte de révolte by Els Dietvorst. Caring for Soil at the Crossroads of Art 
and Farm Life  
From 2011 until 2018 Els Dietvorst ran a sheep farm in a small village in rural East Ireland 
together with her girlfriend, the Irish artist Orla Barry. Today Ba rry continues to manage the 
pedigree Lleyn flock on the farm. Els Dietvorst completed this artistic period with the 
publication of Field Guide  and the concomitant exhibition Wintrum Frod  at the Ostend 
museum Mu.ZEE in 2019, in which Dietvorst and Barry bro ught together the artworks that 
were inspired by their joint sheep farm life.  
 The title of Field Guide evokes the conventional type of an illustrated manual for 
identifying natural objects, flora, or fauna in nature, which is generally brought along on 
exploratory journeys into nature in order to help distinguish and identify natural phenomena. 
Dietvorst’s Field Guide  indeed captures observations, images, insights , and thoughts about 
life on the sheep farm in rural East Ireland. However, it simultaneously subverts the 
traditional field guide’s problematic systems of ordering based on Enlightenment ideals, such 
as man as master over nature and rationality as the governing principle of both man and 
nature, and replaces these with more care -based socialities b ased on vulnerability and 
interdependence. In this sense, the work could perhaps more fittingly be called a ‘critical 
field guide ’, defined by Johnston and Pratt as the type which loosely interprets and 
experiments with the field guide format to critique d ominant discourse and further 
possibilities for living in a more just society ’ (Johnston and Pratt, 2020 , p. 49). Indeed, as 
Dietvorst herself somewhat tongue -in-cheekily conveys in the opening pages, Field Guide  is 
‘a dictionary for the DIY (do it yourself) brigade, for the  DIWO (do it with others), but more 
likely for the DOIWN (do it with nature) or the DITSTW (do it to save the world). ’  
Field Guide  consists of nine chapters on seemingly arbitrary subjects: Resilience, 
Muck, the Circle of Things , the Black hole, Just Digging, Reverie, An Ode to Slowness, The 
Beast in Me. The respective chapters contain a multimedia patchwork of materials in black 
and white colours, including short autobiographical essays in which Dietvorst voices 
experiences, mem ories and opinions regarding the respective topics of the chapters, images 
and photographs portraying farmer’s life, drawings, documentary stills, woodcuts and 
artwork by other, befriended artists and even by the artist’s sons.  
 Like Raes’ Zon dag kind , Dietvorst’s work is characterized by an ambition to 
establish a sense of interconnectedness, which challenges conventional notions of the 
autonomous art  work and individual authorship. To Dietvorst, art is not as a goal in and for 
itself, but rather a mediu m for co -creation, a means to create dialogue and involvement. In 
Field Guide  the footnote text is in fact a long commentary written by the befriended artist 
Max Borka. The footnotes ‘got out of hand ’, run across the pages, become merged with the 
multimedi a materials which make up the different chapters and thus becomes an integral part 
of Field Guide  itself. Similarly, Dietvorst’s autobiographical e xcerpts  included in the 
chapters contain multiple footnote references, suggesting that autobiographical exper ience 
nor memory is inherently intertextual and never a totally individual affair . Furthermore, Field 
Guide  includes images of art works by befriended artists, for example Aurelie Di Marino or 
Gerry Smith, which are juxtaposed to Dietvorst’s own work. All of this makes of Field Guide  
an inherently collaborative, dialogical mixture. Instead of individual notions of Authorship, 
it suggests that art is produced by humans who are social beings, always relational, open, 
interacting with others. As is often noted , Dietvorst situates herself in the tradition of the 
German performance artist Joseph Beuys, who suggested with his notion of ‘Soziale Skulptur  
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
70 
 that the entire society could be seen as one large work of art, and that revolutionary social 
change could be brought along by means of an  interdisciplinary and participatory art practice 
for which the creativity of everyone is needed, not just of so -called artists.6  
 In Field Guide  (2019, p. 9) Dietvorst explains her reasons for moving to the Irish 
countryside as follows. She was ‘tired of the speed, the noise, the individualism and the 
hyperconsumerism ’ defining her former place of residence in the Bel gian city of Brussels. 
Her retreat into the Irish nature is thus an escape from the civil urban world of acceleration, 
capitalism, and social inequality, in ways similar to her famous predecessor, the 
transcendentalist American author Henry David Thoreau, who wrote his renowned memoir 
Walden  (1854),  a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings. Like Thoreau , 
Dietvorst wants to ‘speak a word for Nature, for absolute freedom and wildness ’.  (2019, p. 
9) Yet, the nature in Dietvorst’s work is all bu t a safe Arcadian paradise where humans could 
find refuge. It is a natural world reigned by chaos, loss, death , and decay. The nature that 
confronts her in rural Ireland is hard, merciless, unpredictable, it is raw, claire -obscure, Field 
Guide  is indeed a colourless world of shades of grey and black and white.  
Rather than a well -ordered guidebook designed for the purpose of scientific 
knowledge and the rational organization of natural phenomena, Field Guide  collects scraps 
and fragments of the natural world and models them, films them, draws them, tells their story 
in images. For example, the chapter ‘Just Digging ’ consists of an autobiographical essay on 
gardening, juxtaposed to a close -up photograph and a drawing of a broad leaf cress seed, a 
still photograph of broad leaf cress seed, a drawing of a pot plant and a drawing of a flower 
resembling a sun, entitled ‘sunshine, a photograph of a piece of driftwood. On page 32, we 
find a poem and a charcoal drawing by another artist, Aurelie Di Marino , on page 33 , a  recipe 
of ‘pancakes stuffed with sea beet’, by the artist Roger Philips, a drawing entitle d ‘The State 
of the World ’, a photograph of Seakale resting on a piece of white paper . Field  Guide portrays 
a messy micro -reality, a multitude of individual stories and images.  It a testimony of the 
particular, of the transient, of the natural web of life. The purpose is not so much to convey 
a political message about the world, nor impose an ordering system onto that world, but above 
all, to provide something to hold on to, albeit in bits and pieces, and through the enumerated 
chapters depict a messy reality that reflects our universal everydayness.  
 If we focus on Dietvorst’s portrayal of human -soil relations, it becomes clear how 
Field Guide  disrupts the field guide’s conventional governing principle of man as master 
over nature to portray a more care -based social ontology.  The notion of soil as a resource for 
humans is indeed replaced by a concept of care beyond human agency in a mul tispecies 
world, in a way reminiscent of Maria Puig de la Bellacasa’s idea of care (2015 , p. 691). In 
Matters of Care  Maria Puig de la Bellacasa argues that what soil is thought to be considerably 
determines how it is cared for, and vice versa, ways of car ing affect what soil become s. From 
this perspective, it becomes clear how the chapter Muck  conjures up an image of soil as a 
living community that involves humans amongst other species. The chapter includes a short 
essayistic text entitled Muck  which simul taneously engages with, and disrupts, the rational, 
scientific register of the conventional field guide. The essay reads as an attempt to categorize 
varieties of soil ‘objectively’ - muck, mud, chicken shit - a categorization, however, which is 
based on au tobiographical observation. ‘Muck is not the same as mud ’, the essay (2019, p. 
18) opens  , which is followed by the comment that the worst muck ‘can be found ’ in front of 
the chicken coop, ‘where simple muck becomes real muck: a mixture of mud and chicken 
 
6 "Only on condition of a radical widening of definitions will it be possible for art and activities related 
to art [to] provide evidence that art is now the only ev olutionary -revolutionary power. Only art is 
capable of dismantling the repressive effects of a senile social system that continues to totter along the 
deathline: to dismantle in order to build ‘A SOCIAL ORGANISM AS A WORK OF ART’… EVERY 
HUMAN BEING IS AN A RTIST who – from his state of freedom – the position of freedom that he 
experiences at first -hand – learns to determine the other positions of the TOTAL ART WORK OF THE 
FUTURE SOCIAL ORDER.Beuys statement dated 1973, first published in English in Caroline Tisdall: 
Art into Society, Society into Art (ICA, London, 1974), p.48.  
De Mul                                                                          
71 
 shit. Chicken manure is hot, high in nitrogen and kills the grass; it also turns the soil bone -
hard. ’ Although the passive tense and neutral register would suggest human control and 
mastery vis -à-vis the object of examination, quite the opposite is  stated: ‘Set one foot in some 
muck and you’ll immediately know that all is lost. ’ (2019, p. 18)  The controlling I/eye is 
totally subverted in the conclusion: ‘the only thing you can say about muck is that it 
perseveres. By the end of winter, all you can d o is accept your own vulnerability. ’ The 
‘scientific’ approach to soil is thus entirely abandoned, as the only knowledge the observing 
I/eye has gathered is the displacement of her own human agency.  
The idea of soil as an active, living multispecies world  involves changes in the ways 
humans maintain and care for soil and certainly disturbs the unidirectionality of care we 
conventionally associate with human -soil relations.  Juxtaposed to the autobiographical essay 
on Muck, we find in the same chapter a seri es of works portraying human -soil relations which 
foreground alternative modes of care, affective relations , and involvements with the temporal 
rhythms of more than only human worlds. For example, it includes a painting containing the 
text November Rain Ra in Rain , drawing attention to the repetitious, cyclic time of the natural 
world on which farm life is depended, while questioning the anthropogenic power of 
predominant timescales. In the photograph entitled Mud boys , a photograph of Dietvorst’s 
sons cover ed up in mud, the haptic as a mode of knowledge based on proximity and 
reciprocity is revalorized.  The muddy boys symbolise a mixture of soil and human. In their 
attempt to playfully control soil, they themselves got stuck in the sticky, liquid, powerful 
material, suggesting that for humans to touch mud means to become stuck in the mud. A 
similar idea of soil -human relations based on proximity and mutuality is suggested by the 
image of a woodcut entitled Mud. We see a human digging his or her hands in the m ud, 
forming one entity as the hands are covered in black substance, a black substance which is 
similar to the black hair. It reminds of Puig de  la Bella Casa’s suggestion that a ‘relational 
web of care [could] trouble productionist relations (2017 , p. 197).  
 
Conclusion  
In the previous paragraphs, I have tried to weave together feminist literature and artistic 
practices to build a critical notion of care, lifting the meanings, activities, emotions, politics 
and ethics of care as coordinated, relational and affective practices that build, support, and 
sustain communities of care in the context of racial capitalist political economies and neo -
liberal austerity politics. This endeavo ur was aimed at challenging the facile concept of 
‘burnout ’ shifting the fo cus from an individual problem of exhaustion, depletion, and 
psychological stress to a social  and cultural  problem, notably a problem of care, that is the 
outgrowth of economic and political policies. More specifically, I tried to reframe the debate 
‘on th e so-called ‘burn-out society ’ (2015)  as a debate on capitalism’s care crisis in order to 
bring into the discussion the valuable perspectives offered by feminist theorizations and 
artistic imaginations of care, which have thus far been largely sidelined, o r not properly been 
considered. ’ In the wake of Toril Moi’s proposal to think through examples, I have exp lored 
how, and particularly by which aesthetic strategies, an artistic politics of care could take 
shape by closereading Zon dag kind  by Barbara Raes and Field Guide  by Els Dietvorst. As 
became clear, in both instances, conventional aesthetic boundaries required probing for the 
imagination of care -based socialities.  
In Zon dag kind  Raes deploys dramatic techniques and the institutional environment 
of the performing arts to transform an individual child’s grieving ritual into a collectively 
shared sense of vulnerability. In the process, many conventional borders needed to be 
crossed: between everyday life and performance, night and day, d arkness and light, the end 
and the beginning, sufferers and actors; protagonists as well as bystanders all become 
implicated subjects in a human community connected in vulnerability and care. In Field 
Guide  Els Dietvorst invokes the conventional literary g enre of the field guide in order to 
question the Enlightenment ideals – anthropocentric notions of human rationality and 
mastery over nature - which underpin this genre ideologically. Instead , her art and farm life 
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
72 
 on an Irish sheep farm are presented as a  relational web of care through a variety of means: 
the view of art as a medium for dialogue and co -creation, the black and white patchwork of 
materials representing fragmented bits and pieces of transient natural elements, the 
displacement of human agency , the view of soil as an active, living multispecies world.    
  ‘If the pandemic has taught us anything so far, it is that we are in urgent need of a 
politics that recognises this interdependence and puts care front and centre of life, ’ as has 
recently been suggested by the members of the Care Collective (Care Collective, 2020 , n.p. ). 
That neoliberalism’s ideal subject of the self -sufficient entrepreneurial individual has run its 
course, is indeed an observation more and more  shared. Increasing groups of p eople indeed 
see a more sustainable future residing in care -based social ontologies based on 
interdependence and vulnerability, in ways in which recent feminist theorists of care ethics 
have suggested. Even though the arts and the humanities are very much part of the larger 
neoliberal ideologies and concomitant racial and gendered structures of inequality in which 
they are embedded, as for example recent controversies of sexual harassment in the arts have 
convincingly demonstrated, it might be reasonable to  assume that art and the humanities have 
a particular role to place in the collective task of imagining new, more care -based, post -
burnout culture socialities. As Judith Butler reminds us: ‘If the humanities has a future as 
cultural criticism, and cultural  criticism has a task at the present moment, it is no doubt to 
return us to the human where we do not expect to find it, in its frailty and at the limits of its 
capacity to make sense. ’(2004, p. 151)  
Art works such as the ones by artists such as Barbara Ra es and Els Dietvorst are 
only two out of many other possible examples to think with concerning the issue of care 
ethics and art. By opening up their perspectives it has become clear that we are in need of 
thinking through many more examples, certainly those imagining care from intersectional 
perspectives. For example, Blerri Lleshi’s defense of bell hooks’s notion of love in today’s 
context of racial capitalism (2016) illustrates how care is socially differentiated, racially 
marked , and makes racial diversi ty and power in care ethics more visible. Action Zoo 
humain’s recent piece Flemish Primitives  (2022) addresses, albeit in passing, the global care 
chains by referencing migrant  women’s  domestic work and by underscoring the deeply 
entrenched interlocking power inequities that undermine the realization of care in an 
increasingly complex context of n ational and international policy and politics.  
 
Conflict of interest  
The author declares no conflict of interest.  
 
Reference s 
AFROPUNK. (2018, December 17). Radical self care: Angela Davis  [Video]. Youtube.  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1cHoL4vaBs  
Ahmed, S. (2006). The non -performativity of anti -racism. Merideans: Journal of Women, 
Race and Culture,  7(1), 104 -126. https://doi.org/10.2979/MER.2006.7.1.104 . 
Anzaldúa, G. (2002).  “Now let us shift…the path of conocimiento…inner work, public acts.” 
In G. Anzaldúa and A. Keating (Eds.), This bridge we call home: radical visions for 
transformation  (pp. 540 -578). New York, NY: Routledge.  
Baumer, E.P.S., Skeba, P. , Guha, S., and Gay, G. (2019). All users are (not) created equal: 
Predictors vary for different forms of Facebook non/use. Proceedings of the ACM 
HumanComputer Interaction , 3(CSCW), 1 -28. https://doi.org/10. 1145/3359182 . 
Bioneers. (2016, November 18). Ericka Huggins: The Role of Spiritual Practice in Social 
Justice Work. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5eI4KUTC5I  
Bracke, S. (2016). “Bouncing back. V ulnerability and resistance in times of resilience.” in J. 
Butler, Z. Gambetti & L. Sabsay (Eds.), Vulnerability in resistance: Towards a 
feminist theory of resistance and agency  (n.p.) . Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.  
Butler, J. (2004) Precarious life:  The powers of mourning and violence. London: Verso.  
De Mul                                                                          
73 
 Collins, P. H. (2000). "Black women and motherhood." In P. H. Collins (Ed.),  Black feminist 
thought: Knowledge, consciousness and the politics of empowerment (pp. 187 -215). 
New York, NY: Routledge.  
Care Collective. (2020). “COVID -19 pandemic: A crisis of care.” 
https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/4617 -covid -19-pandemic -a-crisis -of-care  
Chabot P., (2018). Global bur nout. London: Bloomsbury.  
Chatzidakis, A., Hakim J., Littler j., Rottenberg C. & Segal L. (2020). From carewashing to 
radical care: The discursive explosions of care during Covid -19. Feminist Media 
Studies , 20(6), 889 -895. https://doi.org/10.1080/14680777.2020.1781435   
Dietvorst, E. & Borka, M., (2019) Field Guide.* Acte de révolte. Mu.ZEE.  
Dowling, E. (2020). The care crisis: What caused it and how can we end it?  London: Verso 
Books.  
Fraser , N. (2016). Contradictions of capital and care. New Left Review,  100(99), 117.  
Gilligan, C. (1982), In a different voice . Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Greenwald Smith, R. (2021). On compromise: Art, politics, and the fate of an American ideal.  
Minneapolis, MN:  Graywolf Press.  
Han, B. C. (2015). The burnout society . Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.  
Han, B. C. (2017). Psychopolitics: Neoliberalism and new technologies of power. London: 
Verso.  
Hankivsky, O. (2014). Rethinking care ethics: On the promise and potential of an 
intersectional analysis. The American Political Science Review , 108(2), 252 –264. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055414000094.  
Held, V. (1993).  Feminist morality: Transforming culture, society, and politics . Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.  
Hobart, H. J. & Kneese T. (2020). Radical care: Survival strategies for uncertain times. Social 
Text 38(1), 1 –16. https://doi.org/10.1215/01642472 -7971067 . 
hooks, b. (2000).  All about love: New visions. New York, NY: Harper.  
Huggins, E. (2018, M arch 20). Reclaiming our time: Radical self care now!  [Presentation]. 
California African American Museum , Los Angeles, United States. 
https://ca amuseum.org/programs/current/reclaiming -our-time-radical -self-care-
now-ericka -huggins .  
James, S. M. (1993). "Mothering: A possible Black feminist link to social transformation". 
In S. M. James & A. P. A. Busia (Eds.),  Theorizing Black Feminisms: The visio nary 
pragmatism of black women (pp. 44 -54). New York, NY: Routledge.  
Kittay, E. F. (1987). Metaphor:  Its linguistic structure and its cognitive force .  Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.  
Lorde, A. (1988). A burst of light and other essays . Ann Arbor, MI: Firebrand Books.  
Macy J. & Brown, M. J. (2014). Coming back to life . Vancouver: New Society Publishers.   
Moi, T. (2015). Thinking through examples: What ordinary language philosophy can do for 
feminist theory.  New Literary History,  46(2), 191 -
216. DOI:10.1353/nlh.2015.0014 . 
McGee. M. (2020). Capitalism’s care problem: Some traces, fixes, and patches. Social Text. 
38(1), 39 –66. https://doi.org/10.1215/01642472 -7971091 . 
Metcalf, E. (1990). Challenging the arrogance of power with the arrogance of impotence: 
Peter Handke’s somnambulistic energy. Modern Fiction Studies , 36(3), 36 9–379. 
Michiels, G. (2020, December 18). We moeten praten over mentale gezondheid. Rekto Verso.   
https://www.rektoverso.be/artikel/titel  
Mijs J.J.B., Bakhtiari E. & Lamont M. (2016). Neoliberalism and symbolic boundaries in 
Europe: Global diffusion, local context, regional variation. Socius: Sociological 
Network for a Dynamic World , 2, 1-8. doi:10.1177/2378023116632538  
Nguyen, M. T. N.; Zavoretti R. & Tronto J. (2017). Beyond the global care chain: 
Boundaries, institutions and ethics of care. Ethics and Social Welfare , 11(3), 199 -
212. https://doi.org/10.1080/17496535.2017.1300308  
              DiGeSt: Journal of Diversity and Gender Studies 9(1): Spring 2022   
74 
 Noddings, N. (1984). Caring: A feminine approach to ethics and moral education.   Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.  
Probyn, E.; Johnston, K. & Lee, N. (Eds.) (2020). Sustaining seas: Ocean ic space and the 
politics of care.  London: Rowman & Littlefield.  
Pratt, S. & Johnston, K. (2020). “Speculative harbouring at Blackwattle Bay: 
Interdisciplinary pedagogies and the politics of care.” In E. Probyn, K. Johnston and 
N. Lee (Eds.), Sustaining se as: Oceanic space and the politics of care (pp. 43 -58). 
London: Rowman & Littlefield.  
Proctor, H. (Spring 2019). Exhausting concepts. Radical Philosophy . 
https://www.radicalphilosophy.com/reviews/individual -reviews/exhausting 
concepts .  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity pace of care. 
Social Studies of Science: The Politics of Care in Technoscience , 45(5), 691 -716. 
https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0306312715599851 . 
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017) Matters of care. Speculative ethics in more than human 
worlds . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.  
Raes, B. ( 2014, September 25). Radiantly burning out and stacking stones. FoAM.  
https://fo.am/blog/2014/09/25/radiantly -burning/?fbc lid=IwAR0bFk -
N8scObAcYppwb -d3u3ozx2qALiWUMHVJND2wfvQBcwAaIgUiKCVk  Posted 
on Sept. 25, 2014. Accessed 31 May 2020.  
Raes, B (2015, October 20). Het verlangen te kunnen omdenken. Dewereldmorgen.  
https://www.dewereldmorgen.be/artikel/2015/10/20/het -verlangen -te-kunnen -
omdenken/  
Raes, B. (2017). Cafuné. Het ritueel een geliefde zacht met de vingers door de haren te strelen 
Karakters.  Leuven:  Lannoo/Academia Press.  
Raghuram, P. (2019). Race and feminist care ethics: Intersectionality as method. Gender, 
Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography , 26(5), 613 –637. 
https://doi.org/10.4337/9781839108433 . 
Robinson, B. (2019, November 6). Women workers are more likely to experience this 
medical disorder than their male counterparts. Forbes.  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bryanrobinson/2019/11/06/what -job-illness -do-the-
most -accomplished -women -have -in-common/?sh=683be01a2d89 . 
Schmidt, D. (1999). A guide to field guides: Identi fying the natural history of North America . 
Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.  
Steinbock, E.; Ieven B. & de Valck, M. (Eds.) (2020) Art and activism in the age of systemic 
crisis: Aesthetic resilience.  New York, NY: Routledge.  
Tisdall, C. (1974). Art into society, society into art.  ICA.  
Tronto, J. (1993). Moral boundaries: A political argument for an ethic of care . New York, 
NY: Routledge.  
Gaspar R. et al. (2021, September 3). De onmogelijke toeschouwer. Een collectief essay. 
Etcetera Magazine , 165.  https://e -tcetera.be/de -onmogelijke -toeschouwer/ . 
Verhaeghe, P. (Spring 2015). De ziekmakende neoliberale wegwerpmaatschappij. Christen 
Democratische Verkenningen , 1, pp. 60 -67. 
https://www.tijdschriftcdv.nl/inhoud/tijdschrift_artikel/CD -2015 -1-60/De -
ziekmakende -neoliberale -wegwerpmaatschappij.  
 
