Broadening the lens for the governance of emerging technologies:
Care ethics and agricultural biotechnology
Christopher J. Prestona,*, Fern Wicksonb
aDepartment of Philosophy, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, 59812, United States
bGenØk Centre for Biosafety, Forskningsparken, PB 6418, 9294, Tromsø, Norway
article info
Article history:
Received 14 October 2015Received in revised form
29 February 2016
Accepted 2 March 2016Available online 14 March 2016
Keywords:
Emerging technologyRisk assessmentAgricultural biotechnologyFeminist care ethicsabstract
In this paper we argue that insights from feminist perspectives, particularly in the form of an ethics of
care, have a number of advantages when used as a lens through which to consider questions relevant to
the governance of emerging technologies. We highlight how an emphasis on central themes of impor-tance in feminist theory and care ethics such as relationality, contextuality, dependence, power, affect,and narrative can shine a light on a number of salient issues that are typically missed by the dominant
and largely consequentialist risk assessment frame. We argue that the care ethics lens is a better ﬁtw h e n
technologies are understood not simply as devices designed to create a certain end experience for a userbut as transformative systems that smuggle in numerous social and political interests. The advantages of
these care ethics themes for emerging technologies are illustrated through a detailed consideration of
agricultural biotechnology. We show how the feminist care ethics lens might have anticipated the veryquestions that have proved themselves to be the sticking points for this technology. We therefore suggest
that applying a care ethics lens can signi ﬁcantly broaden the frame of appraisal processes used for the
governance of emerging technologies and usefully grant legitimacy to questions and concerns that areprominent in public discourse but typically left out of practices of risk assessment.
©2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
After thirty years of careful and innovative work, gender con-
siderations have secured an important place within science and
technology studies. Feminists have looked critically at the make-up
of research communities and exposed the hidden values and as-
sumptions those communities can perpetuate [8,12] . They have
exposed the association between a hegemonic conception of mas-
culinity and a culturally loaded understanding of science and tech-
nology [20]. By highlighting the material-semiotic dimension of
technological products, feminists have explained how technologies
can reproduce genderand recreate gender power relations in society
[32,79] . In addition, feminist science studies theorists have scruti-
nized unquestioned representationalist frameworks utilized in sci-
ence and have helpfullychallenged classic dualisms between subject
and object, active knower and passive known, nature and culture,
human and non-human, organism and machine [28,2] . Through
relentless analysis, the political dimensions of technoscience havebeen laid bare [80] and thanks to this body of work, it is hard to look
at science or its products without wondering where gender appears,
or remains concealed, within it.
Feminist care ethics, however, has made less frequent appear-
ances in science and technology studies. Evelyn Fox Keller's ex-
amination of Barbara McClintock's “feeling for the organism ”raised
the prospect of an important role for affect in scienti ﬁc research
[40]. Recently, prompted by Bruno Latour's reframing of “matters of
fact ”as “matters of concern ”[44], Maria Puig de la Bellacasa has
raised the notion of “matters of care ”to encourage “an ethos of care
within the study of science and technology ”[4; p. 85]. A special
issue soon to be released focuses on the politics of care in tech-
noscience, including some of the inherent ambiguities and chal-
lenges involved [50,77] as well as questions around temporalities of
care [5,62] . There has also been a small amount of work investi-
gating care under the banner of Responsible Research and Inno-
vation (RRI), a frame for understanding the craft of scienti ﬁc
practice [16] and addressing concern about future generations in
light of the uncertainty created by new technologies [23,24] . Aside
from these sporadic shoots of recent interest, care ethics has thus
far played only a minimal role in feminist science and technology
studies.*Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: christopher.preston@umontana.edu (C.J. Preston), fern.
wickson@genok.no (F. Wickson).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Technology in Society
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/techsoc
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2016.03.001
0160-791X/ ©2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57
While we suspect that feminist care ethics might indeed provide
a helpful lens through which to consider a proper relationship to
the matters of concern in science, and also provide a vision of how
to be responsible towards future generations, we think that the
advantages of feminist care ethics in the context of powerful
emerging technologies esuch as biotechnology, nanotechnology,
synthetic biology and geoengineering ereach considerably deeper.
We suggest that, compared to the consequentialist and broadly
utilitarian risk analysis approach that currently dominates
decision-making, care ethics can provide a broader framework
through which to appraise new and emerging technologies, one
that usefully illuminates important issues tending to remain con-
cealed in traditional risk assessments but often dominating public
discourse and debate. This includes issues relating to shifting re-
lationships, dependencies, and power distributions, as well as
attention to speci ﬁc context, to the affective dimensions of the
experience of technology, and the interconnections illuminated in
narrative forms of story-telling. In the body of this paper, we
illustrate the value of approaching technology appraisal through a
care ethics lens because of the way it opens for the legitimacy of
these issues using the case study example of genetically modi ﬁed
organisms (GMOs) in agriculture. However, in order to reveal the
advantages of the care ethics lens and explore their value in the
context of a particular case study, it is helpful to ﬁrst brie ﬂy review
some of the recognized shortcomings of the existing risk analysis
framework for appraising new and emerging technologies and to
appreciate the relational philosophy of technology that feminist
approaches tend to adopt.
2. Some limits of the dominant “risk ”frame
Sociologist Ulrich Beck has argued that risk has become the
central organizing concept of modern industrialized societies [3]
and indeed, risk assessment has become the dominant tool for
informing and aiding decision-making in the governance of new
and emerging technologies [38,84] . In this context, risk is typically
understood as involving the potential for negative consequences to
attend the introduction of a new technology, the magnitude of
these potential consequences, and the probability that they will
occur [13,14] . When used for the governance of new and emerging
technologies, the risks of interest are typically those relating to
potential harms to human health and/or the environment.
One inherent problem with the use of risk analysis as the
dominant approach to appraising emerging technologies is that the
risks they pose to human health and the environment are often also
novel. This leaves them poorly understood and requiring the
development of new test methods and/or instrumentation to
generate the empirical data required for such an assessment [52].
Such a lack of existing empirical data means that it is very dif ﬁcult
to predict and calculate prospective harms with any con ﬁdence in
advance. This shortcoming is ampli ﬁed by the fact that harms are
often non-linear, incremental, emergent, and (sometimes)
enduring. Rather than reducing uncertainties in a gradual step-
wise fashion, conducting more research on the potential risks ofemerging technologies can also open up previously unconsidered
questions and reveal new ﬁelds of uncertainty. Furthermore, the
uncertainties surrounding emerging technologies can exist in both
quantitative and qualitative forms [70,87] . Some uncertainties will
stem from a simple lack of knowledge and be reducible over time,
while others will be more systemically embedded, stemming from
the inherent limitations of scienti ﬁc knowledge for understanding
complex systems and the inevitable framing choices scientists
make in the planning and conduct of their research [83].
Further challenges abound. Not only can harms appear in radi-
cally different forms, conceptions of what actually constitutes aharm can also vary signi ﬁ
cantly. While harms to human health and
well-being tend to be regarded as prototypes, they are certainly not
the only form of harm. For example, economic harms (understood
as costs or losses) are often given signi ﬁcant weight and can also be
deployed as proxies to evaluate the seriousness of any predicted
health and environmental impacts. Other types of harm, sometimes
misleadingly called “moral losses ”, are also signi ﬁcant and impact
the social fabric in ways that often resist formal accounting.1For
example, harms to traditional knowledge, to community cohe-
siveness, or to a sense of place are different from harms to health
and well-being but should be no less an important part of the
assessment of a new technology. Harms to the non-human envi-
ronment are also real and often relevant but tend to be dif ﬁcult to
identify and quantify. This challenge stems in part from the way
that the object of interest can vary (e.g. harm to individual organ-
isms, species, populations, ecosystems, functions) but also by the
way in which constant change within nature gives no stable
baseline for de ﬁning harm. Subtle shifts in symbiotic relationships
(e.g. as one pollinator gets nudged aside by another that may be
more suited to a changed crop system) have no clear metric for
quanti ﬁcation. Growing interest in the signi ﬁcance of “socio-eco-
nomic ”impacts, “non-economic ”damages and the “cultural ser-
vices ”of ecosystems, arguably highlight the incompleteness of
technology appraisal processes focused solely on risks to human
and environmental health.
For emerging technologies that promise deep transformations
of social, economic, and biological life, the consequentialist
approach of risk analysis is inadequate for identifying the varied
forms of peril that may lurk beneath the hype and hyperbole sur-
rounding the technology's introduction. This is not only because of
the limited scope and quality of available information for assessing
risks associated with emerging technologies, nor simply because
the focus on impacts on human health and environment is too
narrow. It is also importantly connected to how technology is being
conceptualized.
3. Technology as a deep cultural practice
Feminists have joined a number of voices within the Science and
Technology Studies (STS) community and argued that technological
assemblages are not merely objects but “knots of social and political
interests ”[4]or what Bruno Latour called “embodied sociality ”
[43]. Such a standpoint demands a heightened sensitivity to the
technology's “political qualities ”[75]. The fact that this important
point was missed for so long re ﬂects the pervasiveness of the
“device paradigm ”, which Albert Borgmann claims has dominated
contemporary life [10]. In the device paradigm, “means ”are con-
cealed or shrink from view while “ends ”ethe commodity/outcome
that the technology has promised to deliver eoccupy all the
attention. When technology is perceived as a device merely deliv-
ering an end, a certain kind of blindness to underlying social and
cultural entanglements is encouraged. Within this paradigm,
technology gets assessed only thinly for the kind of end experience
it provides and not for the kind of transformations of material and
social structures it creates. With emphasis only on the experienced
end, it becomes reasonable to think that bene ﬁts and harms might
be isolated and quanti ﬁed using a consequentialist frame such as
that involved in risk assessment.
From Heidegger to contemporary feminist technoscience, the
warnings of the dangers of such a view are legion. Technology is not
a neutral device, it stems from and frames our socio-cultural beliefs
1This characterization is misleading because most types of harm considered by
risk assessment are in some sense ‘moral. ’C.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 49
and structures. “We are delivered over to [a technology] in the
worst possible way when we regard it as neutral …. utterly blind to
[its] essence ”[34: p. 1]. Technology is always more than simply a
material object delivering a certain experience. “The machine is not
an it to be animated, worshipped, and dominated. The machine is
us, our processes, an aspect of our embodiment ”[29: p. 180].
Technological artifacts are key components of social fabric, both
reﬂecting and promoting a particular vision of society. They should
be thought of “as formalizations, i.e., as frozen moments, of the
ﬂuid social interactions constituting them, but they should also be
viewed as instruments for enforcing meanings ”[29: p. 164]. With
these insights in mind, technology can be viewed as a system
embodied in a set of practices that both re ﬂects the world from
which it arose and in turn reconstitutes the world into which it is
introduced.
If an emerging technology reorders the social and cultural sys-
tem, then technological appraisal performed for the purpose of
governance clearly requires that one look as much at shifts in social
and political relationships as at bene ﬁts and harms. A utilitarian
analysis of costs and bene ﬁts or a consequentialist focus on risk
simply leaves too much concealed. It cannot fully recognize thedynamic social, cultural, and ecological restructuring the technol-
ogy performs. A richer and deeper analysis would examine tech-
nology as a transformative practice that dramatically restructures
relationships. This suggests the need for an ethic that is not just a
consequentialist consideration of risks to human health and safety
but which puts relationships at the forefront of concern.
4. GMOs: from isolated artifact to agri-food system
A highly illuminating example of how a narrowly consequen-
tialist frame works to conceal issues of concern in the governance of
emerging technology is agricultural biotechnology, and particularly
genetically modi ﬁed (GM) crops. While the risk-based approach to
technology appraisal in this case has claimed to represent an
objective assessment of safety and acceptability, and GMOs have
been routinely approved as a result of such assessments, they have
continued to generate ﬁerce social and political disagreement for
decades. Fueling this ongoing controversy is the fact that several
concerns held by citizens are simply not accounted for when a GM
crop is considered to be merely a biotechnical device for which the
only legitimate questions concern empirically demonstrable risks
to human health and the environment. An illustrative summary of
some of the concerns that this form of assessment misses include:
1) the domineering or hubristic relationship between humans and
nature that GMOs can be seen to represent and perpetuate [84,60] ,
2) the loss of freedom of choice for non-GM producers and non-GM
consumers [7,58] , 3) the increasing concentration of power and
capital in the hands of ever fewer social actors in agri-food systems
[53,71] , 4) the widespread implementation of patents and intel-
lectual property rights to control the distribution and development
of seed and varieties [51,41] , 5) the lack of sensitivity to un-
certainties, paradigms and values in the production of scienti ﬁc
knowledge [11,61] and 6) competing narratives and visions of
development and the future of agriculture [47,49] . This means that
even if GMOs are judged to pose no signi ﬁcant risks to human
health and the environment, they may still pose signi ﬁcant socio-
economic and cultural concerns.
The way we feed ourselves from the earth represents one of
humanity's most foundational relationships with nature. Agricul-
tural practices signi ﬁcantly structure both community and personal
identity, implicitly expressing deeply held moral convictions.
Through eating we move “inside the differential relationalities that
make us who and what we are and that materialize what we must
do…Multispecies human and nonhuman ways of living and dyingare at stake in practices of eating ”[31: p. 295]. Agri-food systems
represent a complex set of relationships and attitudes between
people and land and different forms of agriculture engender radi-
cally different forms of practice and networks of socio-ecological
relations. However, the way agricultural technologies, like GM
crops, embody and engender particular socio-ecological relations is
not immediately apparent to most people. As agri-food systems
have become increasingly industrialized and globalized in the
modern era, various elements of their practice have also become
increasingly removed from lived experience. No longer what
Borgmann calls “focal practices ”that might sponsor engagement
with the full “depth and context ”of the world in which we live [10],
industrialized agriculture turns the procurement of food into
something shallow, disembodied, disengaged, and often destruc-
tive to both persons and place. Immersed in the device paradigm,
people increasingly consume food solely as an end, disconnected
from the means of its production and distribution and therefore
typically disengaged from many of the ethical considerations at
play.
Just as other technologies, GM crops do not exist in a vacuum
but operate as socio-technical and eco-social systems. They areshaped by the interests, values, goals and visions that arise from
their contexts of development and deployment and, at the same
time, they themselves shape operating discourses, social practices,
skills and knowledge. By narrowing regulatory considerations to an
assessment of empirically demonstrable risks to human and envi-
ronmental health, the appraisal process has failed to see GM
technologies as agri-food systems and thereby failed to account for
the complex networks of interrelation and co-construction this
entails [45,57] . To do so requires thinking of the technology less as a
thing and more as a system comprised of practices, a system that
both breaks old relationships and establishes new ones, with sig-
niﬁcant implications for the socio-ecological matrix involved. The
challenge is then to ensure that these shifting relationships are
incorporated in an appraisal process and not quickly concealed
from view. For this task, it is clear that a more comprehensive and
sensitive ethical lens is required to replace, or at least to supple-
ment, the utilitarian one.
5. GM crops through the care ethics lens
A number of feminist themes identi ﬁable across several versions
of care ethics make it a uniquely useful lens to apply in the appraisal
of emerging technologies. These themes include: 1) A relational
ontology, 2) Emphasis on particularity and context, 3) Recognition
of the signi ﬁcance of dependence, 4) An analysis of power and
concern for the most vulnerable, 5) Weight given to the affective
dimensions of ethics, and 6) An important role for narrative. The
case study of GM crops shows how each of these themes makes
visible important issues of concern typically excluded or hidden in
risk assessment approaches.
5.1. Relational ontology
In the original formulations of what was distinctive about
feminist accounts of moral development, the contrast between theidea of autonomous individuals seeking to identify and follow
certain rules for behavior, and persons embedded in networks of
relationships they felt a responsibility to sustain, took on a high
proﬁle. In Carol Gilligan's studies of moral decision-making [22],
the real dif
ﬁculty in the paradigmatic case of Heinz's dilemma
about whether or not to steal a potentially life-saving drug centered
on what appeared to be the impossibility of Heinz maintaining the
integrity of existing relationships with both his sick wife and the
drug store owner. The need to sustain these relationships re ﬂectsC.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 50
an insistence broadly accepted in care ethics that we are necessarily
“second persons ”always partly constituted by the relationships in
which we stand [1]. A relational ontology shifts the view of what is
ethically important so that the relevant harms to be identi ﬁed are
not so much harms to individuals (whether human or environ-
mental) but the fracturing of relationships of personal, social, and
cultural signi ﬁcance. Applied to new and emerging technologies,
Susan Sherwin claims that the relational ontology in care ethics
demands at the very least “consideration of the social, as well as the
physical and psychological, impacts of proposed new technologies ”
[63: p. 290].
In modern agri-food systems, relationships extend across time
and space and include a range of actors beyond the iconic land-
farmer-consumer trio. For example, relationships exist across sci-
entists working to develop improved varieties in research and
development institutes, contractors producing seed for market,
companies responsible for storing and treating seed, beekeepers
operating on farm margins, workers operating mills, re ﬁneries and
processing plants, as well as transport and delivery drivers, store
owners and market vendors, just to name a few. Some of these
relationships are purely economic, but others are highly constitu-tive of individual and collective identities.
The relationship between farmer and seed, for example, was
traditionally an intimately interconnected one (stretching back
though generations), in which farmers saved seed from year to year,
carefully selecting and planting varieties that performed well ac-
cording to desired criteria. This interaction facilitated the co-
evolution of both crop plants and farming practice [75]. With the
development and uptake of commercial hybrid seed, this intimate,
personal and historically rooted relationship between farmers and
seed was broken, as the technology required the purchase of new
seed each year to achieve a consistent and reliable performance.
Under a GM system, however, this relationship breaks down even
further as GM crops have become patented inventions, which
require not only that farmers purchase new seed each year for
reliable performance, but that they sign a contract or “technology
use agreement ”which prohibits them from replanting the seed and
removes their right to conduct any further research or experi-
mentation with the seed [54].
In addition to farmer-seed relations, farmer-farmer relation-
ships can also be severely damaged by patented GMO crops.
Adjacent farmers have always had to negotiate a suite of issues that
include spraying, drainage, fences, escaping livestock, and cross-
pollination. Such issues demanded a particular type of neighbor-
neighbor tolerance, communication, and understanding. The
introduction of patentable seed inserts a third party into this
relationship, the technology's “inventor ”, and thereby raises the
stake considerably when lawsuits over patent infringement occur.
This happened in the paradigmatic case of Monsanto Canada Inc .vs.
Schmeiser where Monsanto successfully sued Canadian canola
farmer Percy Schmeiser for growing their patented GM crop, which
the court judged to be intentionally planted but the farmer main-
tained was an unintentional result of wind carrying pollen from a
neighboring farm [41]. Organic agri-food systems are particularly
vulnerable to negative impacts from this type of “contamination ”
since being GM-free has become one of their key distinguishingfeatures. Some farmers have now moved away from organic
farming so as to avoid potential legal rami ﬁcations from cross-
pollination contamination and from a speci ﬁc desire not to
destroy relations with their GM crop-growing neighbors and the
social cohesion of their small rural villages
[6].
These examples indicate how the GM agri-food system can
radically transform existing relationships and how new social and
ecological relationships of interaction are created through the
introduction of the technology. The shifting dynamic betweenactors such as different farmers, farmers and consumers, seed
producers and purchasers, and even between research scientists
working on patentable and patented technologies, should all be
scrutinized for a comprehensive appraisal of agricultural biotech-
nology. This would include not only considering the impact that the
technology as object would have on human health and the envi-
ronment, but also importantly how the technology as practice may
restructure relationships in signi ﬁcant ways and the extent to
which such recon ﬁgurations are desirable and just. The emphasis
that feminist care ethics places on the maintenance of nourishing
relationships could usefully bring such issues under consideration,
issues which are currently outside the scope of risk analysis frames.
5.2. Particularity and context
In an important article contrasting the justice and the care
approach to ethics, Seyla Benhabib elucidates the difference be-
tween an ethics that considers the “generalized other ”and one that
considers the “concrete other ”[6]. Benhabib articulates a common
complaint in feminist ethics that masculinist justice approaches
abstract from the “individuality and concrete identity ”of any given
person in order to make ethics into a non-partial enterprise dealing
only with nameless and autonomous others [6]. Ethical actors
become mere placeholders in moral equations who lack particu-
larity or speci ﬁcity. Jake, one of the research subjects in Kohlberg's
original studies of moral development, claimed that the famous
Heinz's dilemma amounted to “a math problem with humans ”[22:
p. 26]. Regarding moral dilemmas as math problems requires
abstracting away from all the particularities of any one individual
and the context in which they operate to focus only on a “gener-
alized other. ”
The emphasis on relational ontologies mentioned above
immediately starts to discourage this sort of abstraction because
individuals are understood to be constituted by their relationships
to very particular human and non-human others in concrete con-
texts. The abstraction is further discouraged by the move in femi-
nist care ethics away from ethics as an entirely rule governed
endeavor applying formulaically to the generic individuals that fall
under it. Feminist care approaches do not consider ethics to be
“math problems with humans, ”suggesting instead that ethics
typically demands sensitivity to context and might include, in
certain situations, room for partiality.
While the impacts of GM crops are inevitably impacts on
particular people and particular situations, it is rare that the spec-
iﬁcity of the concrete other is accounted for in either the devel-
opment of GMOs or in the formal risk assessment processes applied
to them (which are often based on quantitative research, statistical
analysis and expert judgment). Actual stakeholders are rarely
incorporated into assessment processes, and where they are, it is
typically through an opening to comment on expert scienti ﬁc as-
sessments of risk rather than to describe how they themselves may
be directly affected. It is also the case that public engagement ex-
ercises around emerging technologies have often speci ﬁcally
sought to engage only “the innocent citizen ”[37] or those without
any speci ﬁc interests, stakes or established opinions on the issue
[17]. This again favours the views of an impartial, generalized other
rather than those particularly involved in the issue.
Assessment processes for GM crops arguably demand a certain
level of abstraction simply by the scale of their operation and the
location of decision-making power ee.g. approval is usually given
to a GM crop by a national or supranational authority (such as the
European Commission). While there is clearly a place for general-
ized statistical analyses of harm when assessing a new agricultural
practice or product, the variability of social and ecological contexts
means that such abstractions can also be misleading. In riskC.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 51
assessment, some degree of consideration may be given to how
different environments can in ﬂuence the potential risks of GMOs,
however, there has historically been very little acceptance that
social and cultural particularities and context should be permitted
to inﬂuence decision-making.
This tendency to deny the signi ﬁcance of social and cultural
particularities has been most starkly demonstrated by the World
Trade Organisation's (WTO) arbitration of divergent decisions on
GMO regulation. In a famous case, the USA (and others) challenged
the legitimacy of a de facto moratorium on GM crops that the Eu-
ropean Union had in place as they attempted to manage consumer
concern. The challengers won the case on the basis of a ruling that
the moratorium was not based on scienti ﬁc evidence , which was
interpreted as an empirically informed assessment of health and/or
environmental risks [72]. The socio-political particularities con-
nected to cultural context were deemed not to be legitimate factors
for decision-making.
This lack of acceptance of the importance of context sensitivity
has also been an historical feature of the European regulatory
system for GMOs itself. Member States have previously not been
permitted to take their own decisions concerning the acceptabilityof GMOs unless it is speci ﬁcally based on new scienti ﬁc evidence
[85]. Interestingly and ewe would argue eappropriately, this
controversial situation has recently been overturned with a new
resolution of the European Parliament [19] that allows Member
States to prohibit the cultivation of GMOs within their territory on
the basis of grounds such as agricultural and environmental policy
objectives and socio-economic impacts.
This recent move in the European Union to open up and allow
for particular socio-cultural contexts to be given more weight in
assessment processes was implemented as an attempt to break the
long standing political impasse on GM crops in Europe. Global
policies that do not account for national, regional, or even local
differences in culture, economy, or ecology clearly treat techno-
logical appraisal as simply a math problem. But with agri-food
systems often being such a fundamental constituent of cultural
identity, there appears to be an emerging recognition that
approaching GM crops as a universal math problem is stimulating
rather than diminishing debate. A feminist emphasis on concrete-
ness and particularity in ethical decision-making can legitimize the
differences and divergences across actors that are clearly already
present in debates over emerging technologies but routinely dis-
missed. As such, it can open up space for different nations or re-
gions to legitimately adopt different positions on technologies like
agricultural biotechnologies depending on the particularities of
their context and culture (and not just across USA/Europe but also
the global north/south). It also opens space for different agricultural
biotechnologies themselves to be assessed for their individual
particularities, rather than treated as an indiscriminate block.
Furthermore, it would open appraisal processes to more directly
consider the impacts of the technology as a system on speci ﬁc ac-
tors, such as organic or smallholder farmers, seed companies of
different sizes, publicly funded researchers and plant breeders.
Such an openness to the relevance of context and particularity may
also allow for the development of a more nuanced debate rather
than the highly polarized and bifurcated division we currently seearound GMOs.
5.3. Dependence
The turn away from ethics as a set of rules applying equally to
groups of nameless and faceless individuals also suggests a
rethinking of the emphasis on autonomy that has pervaded ethics
since Kant. In both Nel Noddings' [55] and Eva Kittay's [42] artic-
ulations of a care ethic, there is recognition that caringrelationships often take place between those who are not equally
situated or autonomous. Kittay insists that a foundational human
experience in the world is one of dependence in which some kind
of difference in capacity exists between the persons in the rela-
tionship. “We are all some mother's child, ”she points out [
42:p .
19]. This idea that there are often important differences between
persons in a relationship also appears in Noddings' differentiation
between the “one caring ”and the “cared for. ”This emphasis on
asymmetrical relationships, while critiqued by some feminists [36],
can draw attention to the ways in which agri-food systems are also
comprised of networks of linked dependencies. In light of these
linked dependencies, individuals and groups of individuals can be
highly vulnerable to the possibility of network disruption. Partic-
ular shifts in relationships expose individuals to the possibility of
harm through the loss of the provision of something important on
which they depend, whether that be parental care, essential health
or educational services, or food itself. Though neither Kittay nor
Noddings are eager to extend their accounts of care and de-
pendency to include the natural world due to the speci ﬁc emotional
and cognitive components of care demanded by their views, it is
clear that an additional type of dependency exists between humansand ecological systems.
It is central to this feminist analyses that dependence itself is not
necessarily problematic, it is simply an inevitable part of the fabric
of life. What Noddings and Kittay show us is that relationships of
dependence can be nourishing or destructive for the people
involved. They can be socially legitimated and supportive or they
can be taken for granted and oppressive. An emphasis on depen-
dence draws attention to the values and structures that might
sustain this oppression.
Just as people inevitably depend on certain human others, they
also depend on functioning agri-food systems and the institutional
arrangements they contain (be they self-sustaining or otherwise).
Within GM agri-food systems, one of the major concerns has been
with how the technology creates new depths of dependency for
both producers and consumers on a select few powerful agents,
namely the multi-national corporations that own GM crops as their
patented property. The dependency of GM agri-food systems on
multi-national corporations includes not only access to seed, but
also to ‘co-technologies ’such as chemicals for production (such as
herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers) and to technical information
and support. As farmers and consumers become increasingly
dependent on a small selection of powerful actors, relevant ques-
tions arise concerning whether those actors are engaged in the
relationship in a caring and nurturing manner or whether the
relation is extractive, pro ﬁt-driven, and destructive [64]. The pre-
dominance of herbicide tolerant GM crops (such as Roundup
ready
®soybeans, corn, cotton and canola), which are designed to be
used together with particular chemicals that are owned by the
same companies selling the GMO, has raised signi ﬁcant questions
about the motivations involved, particularly as bene ﬁts for con-
sumers have not been prominent in the ﬁrst generation of GM
crops.2
The point here is obviously not that dependency in agri-food
systems is always bad. Farmers have always been dependent
upon experience, know-how, local knowledge, and a range ofexisting economic relationships. Some degree of locally distributed
dependency is in fact a source of the very relationships and
2While there is little evidence to support a link between farmer suicides in India
[25] and the introduction of Bt cotton, concerns about the relationship between
farmer debt, the seed economy created by GM crops, and suicide have created a
ﬁerce and emotional public debate around the pros and cons of biotechnology use
in the developing world.C.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 52
practices that create and sustain a community over time. With this
more traditional type of dependency, the agents on whom one
depends are typically relatively accessible/present and therefore
potentially more engaged and attentive (as demanded by Noddings
and Kittay) than abstract and distant. This type of dependency is,
however, arguably different in scale and scope from the type of
dependency that GM crops have created. GM crops amplify and
intensify the move within agri-food systems away from a locally
distributed dependency and towards a dependency imposed from
the outside by a handful of powerful actors. In the globalized sys-
tem of industrialized agriculture that GM crops emerge from,
perpetuate and strengthen, dependencies are increasingly
concentrated in a select few distant actors rather than distributed
amongst diverse and more accessible agents. A feminist ethic lens
would call for speci ﬁc attention to be paid to the types of de-
pendency being created by a new technology and question the
extent to which they were constitutive of a healthy community.
5.4. Power and vulnerability
Feminist thinking is particularly concerned with power re-
lationships and Kittay's work on dependency is only one of the
ways in which power inequalities have been highlighted. Iris
Marion Young has talked about the “structural injustices ”that
systematically pervade society [89,90] . Even if they are not inten-
tionally malevolent, these injustices subject certain individuals and
communities to the “systematic threat of domination or depriva-
tion of the means to develop and exercise their capacities ”[90:p .
114]. In a further illustration of the central concern with power in
feminist thought, Hilde Lindemann de ﬁnes gender itself as a
normative power relation [48]. Gender often rudely instructs
people on how to act in the world, containing strong social pre-
scriptions for what are deemed appropriate roles and behaviors.
Lindemann identi ﬁes feminism's concern with gender as being
about “understanding, criticizing, and correcting ”these power
moves and exposing the ways they make some people vulnerable
while empowering others.
As Kittay's examination of dependency illustrates, lack of power
is not always inherently bad; some power imbalances are simply an
ineradicable feature of a world riddled with complex and uneven
relationships. In these cases, power imbalances are simply some-
thing to pay attention to so that the imbalance does not system-
atically disadvantage some groups over others. Furthermore,
imbalances in power need not suggest a lack of agency or capability.
Feminist standpoint theorists draw attention to the possibility that
those who are structurally disadvantaged might end up having
particular insights available to them for critiquing the status quo
[33]. Recognizing a power dynamic can ensure that voices currently
missing from the political discourse are sought out and that hidden
structural effects of power imbalances are illuminated.
In the case of GM crops, the signi ﬁcance of power has already
been mentioned in the discussions of dependency and relational
ontology. However, there are additional aspects of relevance in the
unfolding of GM technology as an agri-food system. The adoption ofGM crops has in some cases created an uneven power balance and
set of burdens amongst different types of farmers. In Europe, for
example, there is a general commitment to the importance of
maintaining separation between GM and non-GM agri-food pro-
duction and consumption chains. However, the burdens of up-
holding these “co-existence ”regimes are typically unjustly
distributed. Since gene ﬂow can occur between certain crops
through cross pollination, and contamination can occur through
unintentional mixing during seed and grain production and along
transport and processing chains, maintaining separation between
GM and non-GM crops requires preventative actions. This can, forexample, include implementing crop separation distances in the
ﬁeld. Implementing such distances is, however, typically voluntary
(leaving non-GM farmers reliant on the good will of those culti-
vating neighboring ﬁ
elds) and extremely dif ﬁcult for small-scale
and subsistence farmers (since it signi ﬁcantly reduces the
amount of land that can be farmed with that crop). Furthermore,
conducting consistent monitoring of seed and grain samples
throughout different stages of the agri-food system is also required
to assure separation of GM and non-GM crops. Currently, the costs
of monitoring for GM contamination and mixing must be born by
those choosing not to adopt the technology, i.e. it is those that do
not wish to be contaminated with GM material that bear the
burden of monitoring [9].
Power issues are also in play over the issues of labeling. Con-
sumers in countries such as the United States are currently pre-
vented from avoiding GM foodstuffs by the lack of a requirement
for labeling. Efforts to impose mandatory GM labeling at the state
level are repeatedly thwarted by expensive advertising campaigns,
manipulation strategies by GM interests and by national author-
ities. These interests exert their power to deny choice to consumers
who are at present unable to determine whether a certain productcontains GM crops or not. Lack of labeling clearly undermines not
only the power of consumers to exercise control over the food they
consume, but also their ability to invest in and express support for a
certain type of agri-food system through their purchases.
The way in which GM agri-food systems have come to dominate
particular contexts and sectors can also been seen as a relevant
issue when scrutinizing the potential creation of vulnerabilities. For
example, in the US in 2014, 93% of all corn, 96% of all cotton and 94%
of all soybean acreage was GM [76]. Such a high level of depen-
dence on GM crops rather than a broad range of agricultural
biodiversity, and therefore also on the select few powerful actors
that control them, can clearly leave people highly vulnerable to
economic/ecological change. Resilience in socio-ecological systems,
and particularly in agri-food systems, is a character trait linked to
diversity and ﬂexibility. Should a particular disease or problem
befall these crops, or a particular disease or problem emerge as
linked to cultivation or consumption of these crops, then this sys-
tem of heavy dependency will quickly create extensive challenges
and be revealed in all its fragility.
It is also worth highlighting that the dominance of risk based
approaches for assessing emerging technologies already makes
particular power moves, e.g. by granting power over questions of
public acceptability and what counts as relevant knowledge to a
select group of scienti ﬁc experts [86]. As shown, however, these
methods do not provide any mechanism for detecting power dis-
tributions and vulnerabilities created by new technologies. There is
simply no way for a utilitarian risk-assessment frame to account for
issues such as a consumer's freedom to choose or the question of
whether the dominance of one type of system creates unacceptable
vulnerabilities. A similar challenge arises with the problem of the
additional burden on subsistence, organic, or conventional farmers
for monitoring their crop against GMO in ﬁltration and patent
infringement. A feminist care ethics approach comes to the prob-
lem already sensitized to the way power operates in relationships
and is particularly attentive to the needs of the most vulnerable.Using this lens in an appraisal of the technology would therefore
ensure that these types of burdens are less likely to escape notice.
5.5. Affect
One of the most widely articulated features of feminist care
ethics is its emphasis on the affective dimensions of moral expe-
rience. Where ethics has previously been characterized as essen-
tially rational, the efforts of feminist care ethicists have created aC.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 53
growing appreciation that moral decision-making has a signi ﬁcant
emotional core [35]. Morality is lived and experienced by ﬂesh and
blood individuals who respond to real world situations both
rationally and emotionally. It is not lived by abstract and fully
autonomous rational agents, who make decisions according to logic
and formula. As a result, responses to situations need not exclu-
sively focus on reason. Action may be legitimately motivated by the
affective demands of a situation, for example, by the emotional
importance of the personal relationships comprising it and resis-
tance to their potential loss and transformation.
This emphasis on affect does not mean that reason is excluded
from moral decision-making. Matters of justice, for example, have
both emotional and rational dimensions [27]. It does mean, how-
ever, that a signi ﬁcant part of the process of responding to a situ-
ation perceived to contain moral dimensions involves emotions,
which can be shaped by personal, historical, and cultural context.
This emphasis on emotions is consistent with the possibility of
partiality. An emotional connection is likely to be stronger when a
relationship is more intimate or direct. This partiality might be
directed towards a family member, a farmer that supplies a com-
munity with food, a crop that has important cultural signi ﬁcance, or
even a landscape identi ﬁed as home and for which a person has a
particular attachment. A feminist sensitivity does not dismiss an
affective response as irrational but recognizes it as a core compo-
nent of morality.
The GMO debate has clearly had a very strong affective
dimension, with people often reacting emotionally to either the
transgenic element of the technology itself or the transformation it
threatens. The very thought of GMO's create in some people a kind
of “yuck ”response, often connected to the perceived “unnatural-
ness ”of the technology [39]. The emotional and intuitive nature of
this response can often leave those who have it unable to fully
explain it [26], even though, as theorists such as Mary Douglas [18]
and Martijntje Smits [68] have argued, such reactions relate to the
transgression of important ordering concepts and cultural cate-
gories that people use to orient their understanding of the world
and their action within it. While some are quick to reject these
types of worry as irrational or ill-informed [59,73] , public engage-
ment exercises have found that those gut reactions or moral doubts
are highly important and often “act as a veto irrespective of peo-
ple's views on use and risk ”[21: p. 845]. It is also notable that affect
in the debate over GM crops is not restricted to members of the
general public; it is powerfully apparent within the scienti ﬁc
community as demonstrated by the way various scientists pub-
lishing potential harmful effects from GM crops have come under
vicious and vindictive attack from supporters of the technology.
These attacks have been described as being emotional, personal
and crossing over into a form of harassment [81]. Although typi-
cally ignored by decision-makers, affect drives a signi ﬁcant portion
of the GM debate.
Within the realm of technology governance, the call has
consistently been for rational decision-making based on sound
scienti ﬁc evidence, with emotions sidelined as having no place in
the assessment process. This is despite the clear role that they
continue to play in people's own assessments of the technology and
its acceptability. This has often forced opponents of GM agri-food
systems to campaign on the basis of spurious risk-based concerns
when their position actually stems from other considerations and
issues, particularly ethical concerns, questions over the proposed
purpose of the technology, or commitments to competing visions of
the good life [46]. This has been necessary because other consid-
erations are permitted no place within a risk assessment frame
[88]. Many of the aspects of GM technologies that people react
emotionally to, such as the loss of traditional identities and prac-
tices (such as seed saving, subsistence farming, polyculturalcropping), the challenge to established ordering concepts (such as a
species, a plant, a farmer), or the perceived “unnaturalness ”of GM
crops (whatever its philosophical merits or demerits), are
extremely hard to quantify but are a type of gut level reaction to an
infringement of a worldview rather than a response to an empiri-
cally demonstrable risk to human or environmental health. These
affective dimensions are excluded by risk assessment frames but
could potentially ﬁnd a place for articulation through a feminist
lens that takes such elements of moral experience seriously.
5.6. Narrative
A number of care ethicists have proposed narrative or story-
telling as an appropriate mechanism to employ for unpacking
moral situations. Karen Warren suggests that narrative is a useful
tool that can be employed to highlight issues “often lost or
underplayed in mainstream philosophical ethics ”[82: p. 134].
Stories also have the potential to “entertain, explain, connect, and
emancipate ”[74] and can be particularly effective at unearthing the
detail that matters for an individual or community. In addition to
the capacity for expanding the moral imagination [56], narratives
can open the door to power considerations by providing room for
the voice of those who might ordinarily be excluded, e.g. those who
may not comprise the dominant majority and/or may be vulnerable
to a transformational change. Narratives can not only help capture
certain ineffable and very personal features of moral experience,
they can also help capture the emergent nature of certain moral
challenges. Narrative illuminates “the location of human beings'
feelings, psychological states, needs, and understandings as nodes
of a story (or of the intersection of stories) that has already begun,
and will continue beyond a given juncture …”[78: p. 18]. This could
be particularly important for new and transformational technolo-
gies where shifts in relationships may not be visible in advance but
start to emerge over time.
A narrative mode would arguably be well suited for revealing
issues connected to each of the ﬁve themes already highlighted.
Narrative can bring attention to particularity and context, empha-
sizing the importance of allowing individuals to control their own
story. It can make connections between actors and events clear and
generate questions about how relationships might unfold. Narra-
tive can also serve as a prompt for the moral imagination (i.e.
expanding our horizons to include the plight of others) and can be
used to recognize and af ﬁrm affective experience. Furthermore,
given the way narrative articulates interconnections and views of
relationships, narrative could also help reveal the underlying
worldviews, socio-technical imaginaries and future visions that
inform and shape the development of technological trajectories.
Research on the psychology of risk perception for emerging
technologies has clearly demonstrated not only the importance
of gender [15,65,66] ,b u ta l s ot h es i g n i ﬁcance of worldviews,
values and beliefs [67]. Competing worldviews and visions are
arguably central in the debate over GM crop acceptability, e.g.
disagreements concerning what is a desirable model for the
future of agriculture, what is an appropriate relationship withthe natural world, what is the basis or cause of the challenges we
face in feeding a growing population, etc. Understanding,
analyzing and addressing this dimension is, however, neverformally a part of decision-making conducted within a risk
assessment frame. Opening up space for narrative and paying
attention to storytelling would arguably allow this signi ﬁcant
dimension of moral consideration to become a legitimate part of
the assessment process. Permitting different actors to frame and
tell their own stories in a technology appraisal and policy making
context would allow both the political deliberations and the
social debates more broadly to take place not just in terms of theC.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 54
scienti ﬁc risks involved with using a particular device, but
importantly, to also engage with and illuminate questions around
how the technological system relates to and/or advances con-
cepts of the good life, the good community, and appropriate re-
lations between humans and nature.
The problems that have arisen for GM crops as highlighted in
this paper tend to surface most clearly through the stories people
tell about their own lived experience with GMOs. Applying a
feminist ethics lens to technology appraisal in this case would allow
the appraisal to pay particular attention to the (often competing)
stories being told by various actors about what GMOs are, where
they have come from, what they offer, and where they are leading
us. This would be highly instructive and revealing of underlying
beliefs and motivations and allow these to become a transparent
component of the appraisal process.
6. Conclusion
The six features associated with a feminist perspective and care
ethic described above are neither exhaustive nor exclusive. There
are other features of feminist care ethics that might have beenidenti ﬁed and other feminist approaches and ethical frameworks
that might have also highlighted them. What the feminist ethics
lens clearly provides, however, is an illumination of issues that
appear particularly relevant when attempting to approach the
governance of new and emerging technologies from a socio-
ecological systems-based perspective. Through this paper we
have sought to demonstrate that if technology appraisal were to be
conducted with these features of care ethics in mind, different
impacts would be noticed and made legitimate, different questions
would be asked, and different conclusions potentially drawn. In this
article we have focused on how a care ethics lens can be used to
broaden technology appraisal. However, it could be argued that the
lens could also be used to improve governance through informing,
shaping and guiding the actual development of emerging tech-
nologies (rather than just their regulation). In this case, the features
of a relational ontology and attention to particularity, context, de-
pendencies, power and narrative would become important con-
siderations incorporated into the imagination and development of
future agricultural biotechnologies. This means that although
existing GM crops may not necessarily meet a favorable appraisal
when viewed through a care ethics lens, this need not be the fate of
all agricultural biotechnologies. How the lens may be used to shape
more ‘caring ’technologies and socio-technical systems in the
future (and what these would look like in practice) is arguably a
topic worthy of further research and another paper. It is also worth
noting here that although agricultural biotechnology provides a
particularly useful illustration of the potential bene ﬁt of adopting a
care ethics lens, the lens will also likely be of value for the appraisal
of emerging technologies more generally, as well as for complex
global challenges such as climate change.
The advantages of the care ethics lens that we have highlighted
should not be taken to suggest that a traditional risk assessment
frame misses everything of moral signi ﬁcance about a new tech-
nology. Scienti ﬁc and statistical assessment of the risk of harm has
an important role to play in the governance of emerging technol-
ogies. However, it is clear from feminist science studies that the
relevant impacts of a new technology reach far further than phys-
iological or environmental harm. They also in ﬁltrate the “embodied
sociality ”of the technology [43]. The feminist care ethics lens
seems well suited to identify impacts that not only can be missed by
traditional risk assessment, but which can also turn out to repre-
sent some of the most salient dimensions of technological change.
The care ethics lens therefore helps to bring focus to these trans-
formations and does it in a way that illuminates aspects thatactually matter to real people in their daily lives.
Would such an approach ever be adopted in practice though?
While it is beyond the scope of this paper to engage in a detailed
analysis of the political obstacles and challenges facing the adop-
tion and use of a care ethics lens for the governance of emerging
technologies, one argument often touted in favor of traditional
quantitative risk-assessment is that it can offer a clear numerical
answer to complex questions. In contrast, care ethics is often
accused of lacking both precision and normativity. However, we
would argue that the science of risk assessment is falsely de ﬁnitive,
narrowly de ﬁning risk as the only relevant element for consider-
ation of a technology's public acceptability and often failing to ac-
count for the ambiguity of risk-based research. Since care ethics
does not tend to see moral dilemmas as math problems, the an-swers it gives to moral situations may not always be de ﬁnitive and
indeed this may be the point. While it is clear that the process may
be messy and decision-making not always clear, this seems to
better re ﬂect the social reality that surrounds emerging technolo-
gies. Feminist care ethics may therefore be seen to provide the kind
of“plural and conditional ”policy advice that is being called for in
this domain [70]. Indeed, the new European resolution now creates
room for a more pluralized and context speci ﬁc approach to GMOs,
enabling individual Member States to take decisions based on
factors such as socio-economic impacts, agricultural policy objec-
tives and cultural traditions [19]. Such an opening for alternative
appraisal criteria could be leveraged for the exploration of a care
ethics lens in the governance of agricultural biotechnologies. This
may see different socio-ecological and cultural contexts yield
diverse assessments of GMOs, some favorable and others not. More
broadly though, the increasing emphasis within science policy on
the need to advance ‘responsible research and innovation ’, and the
conceptions of responsibility as care within this [69], also open a
crack for a care ethics lens to be further developed and applied.
While our focus in this paper has been on providing an argument
for the potential bene ﬁts and value of a care ethics lens, political
obstacles to uptake clearly remain and, we suggest, offer a fruitful
area for further research and work should our argument of the
advantages prove convincing.
To quell any concerns about normative vagueness, it is clear that
guidance from other ethical frameworks can easily be brought in to
supplement the care frame. For example, policy-making can be
guided by the norm of sustaining healthy relationships between
(social and ecological) community members and curtailing those
relationships that are destructive. It might seek to protect the most
vulnerable and avoid situations where concentrated power is used
tostructurally disadvantage certain segments of the population. It
might embrace caring forms of distributed dependency and avoid
types of dependency that foster exploitation . It might take more
note of negative affective responses and seek ways to ensure posi-
tive ones. It could seek to give people control of their own stories and
their unfolding and try to avoid forms of life being imposed from the
outside . Certainly, the practicalities of implementing a care ethics
approach and the alliances it will demand remain to be articulated
in greater detail in future work. However, the worry about
normative vagueness does not appear to be debilitating.
The important socio-cultural dimensions of technological
innovation that have been concealed by the device paradigm and
the reliance on risk assessment seem to provide a clear and sig-
niﬁcant opening for a better assessment frame. If Donna Haraway
was right about the need to realign the technical and political so
that “questions about possible livable worlds lie visibly at the heart
of our best science ”[30] then we need decision-aiding tools that are
better suited to the task of technology appraisal. We hope that this
article might spur additional exploration of what could be a new
and important role for the care ethics approach.C.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 55
References
[1]Annette Baier, Postures of the Mind: Essays on Mind and Morals, University of
Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, 1985 .
[2]Karen Barad, Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning, Duke University Press, Durham, NC,2007 .
[3]Ulrich Beck, Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, SAGE Publications,
London, 1986 .
[4]Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of care in technoscience: assembling
neglected things, Soc. Stud. Sci. 41 (1) (2011) 85 e106.
[5] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, Making time for soil: technoscienti ﬁc futurity and
the pace of care, Soc. Stud. Sci. (2015) 1 e26, http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0306312715599851 .
[6]S. Benhabib, The generalized and the concrete other: the Kohlberg-Gilligan
controversy and feminist theory in feminism as critique, Prax. Int. 5 (4)
(1986) 402 e424.
[7]Rosa Binimelis, Coexistence of plants and coexistence of farmers: is an indi-
vidual choice possible? J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 21 (2008) 437 e457.
[8]R. Bleier, Science and Gender: a Critique of Biology and its Theories on
Women, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1984 .
[9]Anne-Katrin Bock, Karine Lheureux, Monique Libeau-Dulos, Hans Nilsgård,
Emilio Rodriguez-Cerezo, Scenarios for Co-existence of Genetically Modi ﬁed,
Conventional and Organic Crops in European Agriculture, European Com-
mission Joint Research Centre, Seville, 2002 .
[10] Albert Borgmann, Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life, Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1984 .
[11] Susan Carr, Les Levidow, Exploring the links between science, risk, uncer-
tainty and ethics in regulatory controversies about genetically modi ﬁed crops,
J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 12 (2000) 29 e39.
[12] L. Code, Epistemic Responsibility, University of New England Press, Hanover,
NH, 1987 .
[13] J.J. Cohrssen, V.T. Covello, Risk Analysis: a Guide to Principles and Methods for
Analyzing Health and Environmental Risks, National Technical Information
Service, Spring ﬁeld, 1989 .
[14] V.T. Covello, M.W. Merkhofer, Risk Assessment Methods: Approaches for
Assessing Health and Environmental Risks, Plenum Press, New York, 1993 .
[15] D.J. Davidson, W.R. Freudenberg, Gender and environmental risk concerns: a
review and analysis of available research, Environ. Behav. 28 (1996) 302 e339.
[16] S.R. Davis, M. Horst, Crafting the group: care in research management, Soc.
Stud. Sci. 45 (3) (2015) 371 e393.
[17] Ana Delgado, Kamilla L. Kjølberg, Fern Wickson, Public engagement coming of
age: from theory to practice in STS encounters with nanotechnology, Public
Underst. Sci. 20 (6) (2011) 826 e845.
[18] Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger, Routledge, London, 1966
.
[19] European Parliament. 2015. European Parliament legislative resolution of 13
January 2015 on the Council position at ﬁrst reading with a view to the
adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
amending Directive 2001/18/EC as regards the possibility for the Member
States to restrict or prohibit the cultivation of genetically modi ﬁed organisms
(GMOs) in their territory. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?
pubRef ¼-//EP//TEXT þTAþP8-TA-2015-0004 þ0þDOCþXMLþV0//EN (last
accessed 09.04.15).
[20] Wendy Faulkner, M. Lohan, Masculinities and technologies, Men Masc. 6 (4)
(2004) 319 e329.
[21] G. Gaskell, Europe ambivalent on biotechnology, Nature 387 (26 June) (1997)
845e847.
[22] Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA,
1982 .
[23] A. Grinbaum, C. Groves, What is “responsible ”about responsible innovation?
understanding the ethical issues, in: Richard Owen, John Besant,
Maggie Heintz (Eds.), Responsible Innovation: Managing the Responsible
Emergence of Science and Innovation in Society, John Wiley &Sons, Ltd.,
Chichester, Sussex, 2013, pp. 119 e142.
[24] Christopher Groves, Future ethics: risk, care and non-reciprocal responsibility,
J. Glob. Ethics 5 (1) (2009) 17 e31.
[25] G. Gru /C18ere, D. Sengupta, Bt cotton and farmer suicides in India: an evidence-
based assessment, J. Dev. Stud. 47 (2) (2011) 316 e337.
[26] Jonathan Haidt, The emotional dog and its rational tail: a social intuitionist
approach to moral judgment, Psychol. Rev. 108 (4) (2001) 814 e834.
[27] Reza Halwani, Care ethics and virtue ethics, Hypatia 18 (3) (2009) 161 e192.
[28] Donna Haraway, Situated knowledges: the science question in feminism and
the privilege of partial perspective, Fem. Stud. 14 (3) (1988) 575 e599.
[29] Donna Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women: the Reinvention of Nature,
Routledge, New York, 1991 .
[30] Donna Haraway, Modest /C0Witness@Second /C0Millennium. Female-
Man/C0Meets/C0OncoMouse: Feminism and Technoscience, Psychology Press,
New York, 1997 .
[31] Donna Haraway, When Species Meet, University of Minnesota Press, Minne-
apolis, 2008 .
[32] G. Harding Sandra, The Science Question in Feminism, Cornell University
Press, Ithaca, NY, 1986 .
[33] C. Hartsock Nancy, The feminist standpoint: developing the ground for a
speci ﬁcally feminist historical materialism, in: Sandra Harding,Merril Hintikka (Eds.), Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Episte-
mology, Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science, Springer,
Dordrecht, 1983, pp. 283 e310.
[34] Martin Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essays,
Harper Torch Books, London, 1977 .
[35] Virginia Held, The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, Global, Oxford University
Press, New York, 2006 .
[36] Sarah L. Hoagland, Some thoughts about caring, in: Claudia Card (Ed.),
Feminist Ethics, University Press Kansas Press, Lawrence, KS, 1991, pp.
246e263.
[37] Alan Irwin, The politics of talk: coming to terms with the ‘new ’scienti ﬁc
governance, Soc. Stud. Sci. 36 (2) (2006) 299 e320.
[38] Sheila Jasanoff, The songlines of risk, Environ. Values 8 (1999) 135 e152.
[39] Leon R. Kass, Wisdom of repugnance: why we should ban the cloning of
humans, The New Republic (June 2) 32 (1997) 17 e26.
[40] Evelyn F. Keller, A Feeling for the Organism: the Life and Work of Barbara
McClintock, Henry Holt &Company, New York, 1984 .
[41] Abby Kinchy, Seeds, Science, and Struggle: the Global Politics of Transgenic
Crops, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2012 .
[42] Eva Kittay, Love's Labor: Essays on Women, Equality, and Dependency,
Routledge, New York, 1998 .
[43] Bruno Latour, Aramis, or the Love of Technology, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1996 .
[44] Bruno Latour, Why has critique run out of steam? from matters of fact to
matters of concern, Crit. Inq. 30 (2004) 225 e248.
[45] Amalia Leguizam /C19on, Modifying Argentina: GM soy and socio-environmental
change, Geoforum 53 (2014) 149 e160.
[46] Les Levidow, Susan Carr, How biotechnology regulation sets a risk/ethics
boundary, Agric. Hum. Values 14 (1997) 29 e43.
[47] Les Levidow, Karin Boschert, Coexistence or contradiction? GM crops versus
alternative agricultures in Europe, Geoforum 39 (1) (2008) 174 e190.
[48] Hilde Lindemann, An Invitation to Feminist Ethics, McGraw-Hill, San Fran-
cisco, 2006 .
[49] Terry Marsden, Agri-food contestations in rural space: GM in its regulatory
context, Geoforum 39 (2008) 191 e203.
[50] Aryn Martin, Natasa Myers, Ana Viseu, The politics of care in technoscience,
Soc. Stud. Sci. (2015) 1 e17,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073 .
[51] Michael Mascarenhas, Lawrence Busch, Seeds of change: intellectual property
rights, genetically modi ﬁed soybeans and seed saving in the United States,
Sociol. Rural 46 (2) (2006) 122 e138.
[52] Andrew D. Maynard, Robert J. Aitken, Tilman Butz, Vicki L. Colvin,
Ken Donaldson, Gunter Oberdorster, Martin A. Philbert, John Ryan,Anthony Seaton, Vicki Stone, Sally S. Tinkle, Lang Tran, Nigel J. Walker, David
B. Warheit, Safe handling of nanotechnology, Nature 444 (2006) 267 e269.
[53] Kathleen McAfee, Neoliberalism on the molecular scale. Economic and genetic
reductionism in biotechnology battles, Geoforum 34 (2003) 203 e219.
[54] Monsanto, Technology Use Guide, 2014. http://www.monsanto.com/
sitecollectiondocuments/technology-use-guide.pdf (last accessed 08.04.15).
[55] Nel Noddings, Caring: a Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education,
University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1984 .
[56] Martha C. Nussbaum, Love's Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and Literature,
Oxford University Press, New York, 1990 .
[57] Pavone Vincenzo, Joanna Goven, Riccardo Guarin, From risk assessment to in-
context trajectory evaluation eGMOs and their social implications, Environ.
Sci. Eur. 23 (3) (2011) 1 e13.
[58] Christofer P. Rodgers, Coexistence or con ﬂict? a European perspective on
GMOs and the problem of liability, Bull. Sci. Technol. Soc. 27 (2007) 233 e250.
[59] Bernard Rollin, The Frankenstein Syndrome: Ethical and Social Issues in the
Genetic Engineering of Animals, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,1995 .
[60] Ronald L. Sandler, Character and Environment: a Virtue Oriented Approach to
Environmental Ethics, Colombia University Press, New York, 2007 .
[61] Daniel Sarewitz, How science makes environmental controversies worse,
Environ. Sci. Policy 7 (2004) 385 e403.
[62] Astrid Schrader, Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: how (not) to
care about deformed leaf bugs in the aftermath of Chernobyl, Soc. Stud. Sci.(2015) 1 e26,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0306312715603249 .
[63] Susan Sherwin, The importance of ontology for feminist policy-making in the
realm of reproductive technology, Can. J. Philos. 32 (Suppl. 1) (2013) 273 e295.
[64]
Vandana Shiva, Biopiracy: the Plunder of Nature and Knowledge, South End
Press, Boston, MA, 1999 .
[65] Michael Siegrist, Belief in gene technology: the in ﬂuence of environmental
attitudes and gender, Personal. Individ. Differ. 24 (1998) 861 e866.
[66] Michael Siegrist, The in ﬂuence of trust and perceptions of risks and bene ﬁts
on the acceptance of gene technology, Risk Anal. 20 (2) (2000) 195 e203.
[67] Paul Slovic, Trust, emotion, sex, politics and science: surveying the risk
assessment battle ﬁeld, Risk Anal. 19 (4) (1999) 689 e701.
[68] Martijntje Smits, Taming monsters: the cultural domestication of new tech-
nology, Technol. Soc. 28 (2006) 489 e504.
[69] Jack Stilgoe, Richard Owen, Phil Macnaghten, Developing a framework for
responsible innovation, Res. Policy 42 (9) (2013) 1568 e1580 .
[70] Andy Stirling, Keep it complex, Nature 468 (2010) 1029 e1031 .
[71] Glenn Davis Stone, The anthropology of genetically modi ﬁed crops, Annu. Rev.
Anthropol. 39 (2010) 381 e400.
[72] D.M. Strauss, Feast or famine: the impact of the WTO decision favouring theC.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 56
U.S. Biotechnology Industry in the EU ban of genetically modi ﬁed foods, Am.
Bus. Law J. 45 (4) (2008) 775 e826.
[73] Paul Thompson, Food Biotechnology in Ethical Perspective, Blackie Academic
and Professional, London, 1997 .
[74] Joyce Trebilcot, Ethics of method: greasing the machine and telling stories, in:
Claudia Card (Ed.), Feminist Ethics, University Press of Kansas, Lawrence, KS,1991, pp. 45 e51.
[75] Anna Tsing, Unruly edges: mushrooms as companion species, Environ.
Humanit. 1 (2012) 141 e154.
[76] United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Adoption of Genetically
Engineered Crops in the U.S., USDA Economic Research Service, Washington,
2014 .
[77] Ana Viseu, Caring for nanotechnology? being an integrated social scientist,
Soc. Stud. Sci. (2015) 1 e23,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0306312715598666 .
[78] Margaret U. Walker, Moral Understandings: a Feminist Study in Ethics,
Routledge, New York, 1998 .
[79] Judy Wajcman, Feminist theories of technology, Camb. J. Econ. 34 (1) (2010)
143e152.
[80] Judy Wajcman, TechnoFeminism, John Wiley &Sons, 2013 .
[81] Emily Waltz, GM crops: battle ﬁeld, Nature 461 (2009) 27 e32.
[82] Karen Warren, The power and promise of ecological feminism, Environ. Ethics
12 (1990) 125 e146.
[83] Fern Wickson, Frøydis Gillund, Anne Myhr, Treating nanoparticles with pre-
caution: recognising qualitative uncertainty in scienti ﬁc risk assessment, in:
K. Kjølberg, Fern Wickson (Eds.), Nano Meets Macro, Pan Stanford Publishing,
Singapore, 2010, pp. 445 e472.
[84] Fern Wickson, The ontological objection to life technosciences, in:
A. Guimaraes Pereira, S. Funtowicz (Eds.), Science, Philosophy and Sustain-
ability: the End of the Cartesian Dream, Routledge, Oxford, 2015, pp. 61 e77.
[85] Fern Wickson, Brian Wynne, The angler ﬁsh deception: the light of proposed
reform in the regulation of GM crops hides underlying problems in EU science
and governance, EMBO Rep. 13 (2) (2012) 100 e105.[86] Langdon Winner, The Whale and the Reactor: a Search for Limits in an Age of
High Technology, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1986 .
[87] Brian Wynne, Uncertainty and environmental learning: reconceiving science
and policy in the preventive paradigm, Glob. Environ. Change 2 (2) (1992)
111e127.
[88] Brian Wynne, Risk and environment as legitimatory discourses of technology:
reﬂexivity inside out? Curr. Sociol. 50 (3) (2002) 459 e477.
[89] Iris M. Young, Justice and the Politics of Difference, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1990 .
[90] Iris M. Young, Responsibility and global justice: a social connection model,
Soc. Philosophy Policy 23 (1) (2006) 102 e130.
Christopher J. Preston is a professor of philosophy and fellow at the Mans ﬁeld Cen-
ter's Program on Ethics and Public Affairs at the University of Montana in Missoula.Author of Grounding Knowledge :Environmental Philosophy ,Epistemology ,and Place
(2003) and Saving Creation :Nature and Faith in the Life of Holmes Rolston III (2009) his
research centers on environmental philosophy, the ethics of emerging technologies
(including, most recently, climate engineering), and the Anthropocene.
Fern Wickson is a scientist and program coordinator for the Society, Ecology and
Ethics Department (SEED) at GenØk Centre for Biosafety in Tromsø, Norway. Working
as a cross-disciplinary scholar, her research interests include ecophilosophy, the envi-
ronmental governance of emerging technologies, and the development of sustainable
agri-food systems. She publishes her academic work for both natural and social scienceaudiences, participates in policy development and enactment through a range of na-
tional and international committees, and actively reaches out to publics through social
media avenues including YouTube, Twitter (@FernWickson) and a project blog www.
agriculturesproject.org .C.J. Preston, F. Wickson / Technology in Society 45 (2016) 48 e57 57
