
Care in Technology 
  
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
 
  
 
  
To Bernadette Bensaude-Vincent, who taught me a lot 
In testimony of friendship 
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Innovation and Responsibility Set 
coordinated by  
Robert Gianni and Bernard Reber 
Volume 7 
Care in Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Xavier Guchet 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
 
  
 
 
First published 2021 in Great Britain and the United States by ISTE Ltd and John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or pri vate study, or criticism or review, as 
permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, th is publication may only be reproduced, 
stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the pr ior permission in writing of the publishers, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms and licenses issued by the  
CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms shou ld be sent to the publishers at the 
undermentioned address: 
ISTE Ltd  John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  
27-37 St George’s Road  111 River Street 
London SW19 4EU Hoboken, NJ 07030 UK  USA  
www.iste.co.uk  www.wiley.com 
 
 
© ISTE Ltd 2021 
The rights of Xavier Guchet to be identified as the author of t his work have been asserted by him in 
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
Library of Congress Control Number: 2020951011 
 
British Library Catalogui ng-in-Publication Data 
A CIP record for thi s book is available from  the British Librar y  
ISBN 978-1-78630-559-6 
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
Contents 
Acknowledgments  ..................................  i x  
Foreword  .........................................  x i  
Bernard R EBER  
Introduction  .......................................  x v i i  
Chapter 1. Care and Technology: An Anthropological  
Question  .........................................  1  
1 . 1 .  F r o m  m a s t e r y  t o  c a r e  ..............................  1  
1.1.1. Making good use of technology, anticipating its  
potential risks: two possible examples of care in technology? . ......  1  
1.1.2. Do we need to learn to master our technological mastery?  .....  1 1  
1.1.3. The limits of the externalist approach to technological  
r e g u l a t i o n  ......................................  2 2  
1.2. In what sense can technol ogies be “inherently” caregiving?  .......  2 7  
1.2.1. Can there be an intrinsic morality of technology? ...........  2 7  
1 . 2 . 2 .  T e c h n o l o g y  a n d  c a r e :  a  d i f f i c u l t  a r t i c u l a t i o n  ..............  3 5  
1 . 3 .  T a k i n g  c a r e  o f  l i v i n g  b e i n g s  ..........................  4 9 
1 . 3 . 1 .  C a r e  a n d  t e c h n o l o g y :  f r o m  e t h i c s  t o  a n t h r o p o l o g y  ..........  4 9  
1 . 3 . 2 .  C a r i n g  a b o u t  v a l u a t i n g  l i v i n g  b e i n g s  ..................  5 6  
1 . 3 . 3 .  T h e  d i f f i c u l t y  o f  t h i n k i n g  t e c h n o l o g y  f r o m  l i f e  ............  7 2  
1.4. Transition .....................................  8 7  
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

vi     Care in Technology 
Chapter 2. Technology and Life: Analysis of a Divorce  .........  8 9  
2 . 1 .  B o d y ,  g e s t u r e s ,  t e c h n o l o g y ,  p r o d u c t i o n  ...................   89 
2.1.1. Work without skill .............................  8 9  
2 . 1 . 2 .  C o n t r o l  a n d  d i s c i p l i n e  o f  t e c h n o l o g y  ..................  9 9  
2.1.3. A rupture in the conception of technology: the divorce  
o f  t e c h n o l o g y  a n d  l i f e  ...............................  1 0 6  
2.2. The intellectualist conception of technology: the Kantian  
t u r n i n g  p o i n t  ......................................  1 2 3  
2 . 2 . 1 .  D i f f i c u l t y  i n  t h i n k i n g  o f  t h e  a r t i s a n ’ s  a c t i v i t y  .............  1 2 3  
2 . 2 . 2 .  T e c h n o l o g y  e x c l u d e d  f r o m  t h e  f i e l d  o f  a e s t h e t i c s  ...........  1 3 0  
2.2.3. Technology, a synthetic activity without representation  
a n d  w i t h o u t  r u l e ...................................  1 3 4  
2.3. Transition .....................................  1 5 0  
Chapter 3. The Conditions of Care in Technology  ............  1 5 1  
3 . 1 .  V i t a l i s t  a p p r o a c h e s  t o  t e c h n o l o g y  .......................  151 
3.1.1. The concept of technological evolution: contributions  
a n d  l i m i t s  w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  c a r e  ...........................  1 5 1  
3.1.2. Technology as an “organ projection”: contributions  
a n d  l i m i t s  w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  c a r e  ...........................  1 5 6  
3.1.3. The utopia of Erewhon: analysis of an aporia. First  
condition of care in technology .........................  1 5 9  
3.2. Philosophical anthropology, a promising way to articulate  
c a r e  a n d  t e c h n o l o g y ?  .................................  1 7 5  
3.2.1. Plessner’s biological anthropology: redefining the  
c o n c e p t s  o f  o r g a n  a n d  o r g a n i s m  .........................  1 7 5  
3.2.2. Industrialization, work, and life. Critique of modernity   
i n  G e h l e n  .......................................  1 8 3  
3.3. The organ-instrument. Second condition of care in technolo g y  .....  1 8 8  
3.3.1. From the organ as part of the organism to the organ  
a s  a n  i n s t r u m e n t  w i t h  u s e - v a l u e  .........................  1 8 8  
3.3.2. Putting the individual point of view first in the ethica l  
e v a l u a t i o n  o f  t e c h n o l o g y  .............................  1 9 3  
3 . 4 .  F r o m  a n t h r o p o l o g y  t o  a e s t h e t i c s  .......................  2 13 
3.4.1. Is it enough to recognize that humans “belong to nature”   
t o  o r i e n t  t e c h n o l o g y  t o w a r d s  c a r e  f o r  n a t u r e ?  .................   213 
3.4.2. Creating a new perception. Fourth condition of care  
i n  t e c h n o l o g y  ....................................  2 2 0  
3.5. Transition .....................................  2 2 4  
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Contents     vii 
Chapter 4. Design, Technology and Life  ...................  2 2 7  
4 . 1 .  A t  t h e  s o u r c e s  o f  d e s i g n  f o r  l i f e  ........................   227 
4 . 1 . 1 .  T h e  p r e m i s e s  o f  d e s i g n  ..........................  2 2 7  
4.1.2. Overcoming the conflict of arts and industry: the ration al  
a e s t h e t i c s  o f  P a u l  S o u r i a u  .............................  2 3 5  
4.1.3. Industry and the fragmentation of experience: anthropolo gy  
and instrumentality in Dewey’s work ......................  2 4 1  
4.1.4. Life as judge of technology. Lewis Mumford .............  2 4 6  
4 . 1 . 5 .  T o w a r d s  a  d e s i g n  f o r  l i f e :  L á s z l ó  M o h o l y - N a g y  .......... .   257 
4 . 1 . 6 .  O p e n i n g  ...................................  2 6 2  
4 . 2 .  T o w a r d s  r e s p o n s i b l e  a n d  c a r i n g  i n n o v a t i o n  ................ .   264 
4.2.1. Technical activities and ca re: practical lessons from an cient  
China and Greece ..................................  2 6 4  
4 . 2 . 2 .  T h e  s q u a r e  o f  c a r e  i n  t e c h n o l o g i c a l  d e s i g n  ...............  2 7 2  
Conclusion  ........................................  2 8 7  
References  ........................................  2 9 3  
Index  ............................................  3 1 1  
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
Acknowledgments 
Several colleagues were kind enough to re-read all or part of t his book and give 
me suggestions for improving it. I thank them very warmly: Bern ard Reber first of 
all, for his very careful reading and his advice, as well as Em anuele Clarizio whose 
comments are always invaluable. Charles Lenay and Pierre Steine r then, who 
enlightened me on the TAC thesis and its philosophical sources.  Dimitri El Murr 
who allowed me to see more clearly in certain terminological pr oblems linked to 
ancient Greek. 
My thanks also go to Rionne, for his support and encouragement.   
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
Foreword 
A good number of the works that combine innovation and responsibility1, 
science and society, or even ethics and new, emerging or contro versial technologies 
do not really take the technologies themselves seriously, nor t heir relationships to 
humans and the environment. To be more precise and less unfair,  they still base 
themselves upon dualisms: nature/technology, technology/life, t echnology/humans, 
humans/nature, subject/object. Wh at they are desperately lackin g is an informed, 
balanced, and plausible philosophy of technology. However, this  well-documented 
work by Xavier Guchet, who leads an interdisciplinary team at t he University of 
Technology of Compiègne, member of the Sorbonne University Alli ance, offers not 
only a strong thesis, but is backed up by a panorama as broad a s it is assembled to 
good use. I emphasize the fact that his immersion in a university of engineers gives 
even more credit and plausibility to his work. This book is not  only addressed to 
philosophers, but to engineers and any person who takes account  o f  o u r  
technological environments2, sometimes as threats, sometimes as sources of 
revelation and solutions, but al so with a role to play in our d efinition as humans. 
First of all, we have here a state of the art of the most inter esting approaches to 
the philosophy of technology, ranging from Greek philosophy, es pecially that of 
Aristotle, to contemporary work. Configurations of the debate w hich we have 
inherited from ancient times have not lost their relevance. Aga inst the Sophists who 
enthusiastically welcomed the development of technology conside red from the 
perspective of an infinite progress, Plato’s metaphysics alread y indicated this danger  
 
                                 
1 For a general overview see Sophie Pellé and Bernard Reber, From Ethical Review to 
Responsible Research and Innovation , ISTE and Wiley, 2016. 
2 One approach that strives to combine technology and ethics is  that of Armen Khatchatourov, 
with the collaboration of Pierr e-Antoine Chardel, Andrew Feenbe rg and Gabriel Périès, 
Digital Identities in Tension, Between Autonomy and Control , ISTE and Wiley, 2019. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xii     Care in Technology 
of unlimited variation of forms in the polis , by separating Being and becoming, and 
submitting the latter to the unchangeable order of the former. Even more, Aristotle 
had already domesticated technology in a quadruple principle of  limitation that 
prevents a collapse into excess: by form (formal cause), by the  “implicit forms” of 
the material (material cause), by the ultimate purpose (final c ause) and by the 
corporeal possibilities of the living being (efficient cause). 
Xavier Guchet therefore presents the broad progress of the biol ogical philosophy 
of technology, whose connecting thread is the concept of the ex ternalization of life 
in technology, with great names as Ernst Kapp, Alfred Espinas, Henri Bergson, 
Edouard Le Roy, André Leroi-Gourhan, Georges Canguilhem, and so me lesser 
known such as William Morris, John Dewey, Lewis Mumford, Laszlo  Moholy-
Nagy, Gilbert Simondon, whose co mmon feature is that they have considered 
technology from the point of view of its links with life, with the theme of projection 
of the organs or of externalization. This also concerns René De scartes, Karl Marx, 
Arnold Gehlen, Helmuth Plessner, Jose Ortega y Gasset, Paul Als berg, Francisco 
Varela, Pietro Montani and Bernard Stiegler. It is gratifying t hat the Innovation and 
Responsibility  set of books devotes several pages to the French philosopher o f 
technology Gilbert Simondon, quite unique in this field and lit tle known in the 
English language, at least in a f orm which is not solely exeget ic. 
One of the originalities of this discussion is the presentation  o f  t h e  K a n t i a n  
conception of technology as a decisive philosophical reading of  the divorce between 
technology and life, as it was emerging in the 18th century. Ka nt’s genius is to have 
endorsed this divorce, while indicating, as if in negative spac e, the conditions for it 
to be surpassed. Far from continuing to conceive technology, as  had been done 
before him, as organon , he proceeded to a split in the v ery concept of technology in 
parallel with another, that between organic life and the life o f any singular rational 
and moral person. Technology points toward the representation o f goals, but it also 
sinks into the depths of the body to the point of lodging in th e automatism of the 
living machine. It is somewhat m echanical and somewhat finalize d, between 
causation and purpose. We can understand this “somewhat” as “at  the same time”. 
Companionship with Kant allows Xavier Guchet to discuss the wor k of Dewey 
on the aesthetic experience as a perception of the relationship  between my action 
and its effects in the world, between the things I manufacture and the relations that 
these things will forge with other beings in the world, or rece nt research in bio-
aesthetics. This is the case for example with Montani who sketc hes a third way, that 
of the concept of institution, between the heteronomous constit ution of the subject 
and the forms of its experience through technology and the abso lute self-constitution 
of the subject. The concept of institution allows us to say tha t the subject is not self-
created and what brings it into e xistence is not a set of struc tures imposed upon it by 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Foreword     xiii 
a foreign authority. The subject does not belong to itself with out experiencing a sort 
of heteronomy. 
S i m i l a r l y ,  X a v i e r  G u c h e t ’ s  b o o k  c a s t s  a  c r i t i c a l  e y e  o v e r  t h e  p roject of the 
Encyclopédie,  following the historical philosopher Michel Foucault in his co urse at 
the College of France (1976), but which Kant might also have sh ared: far from being 
only a political or ideological opposition to the monarchy and to a form of 
intransigent Catholicism, the Encyclopédie is a political and economic operation of 
homogenization of technol ogical knowledge according to four mec hanisms for the 
disciplining of knowledge and technical know-how: a selection s eparating 
knowledge into legitimate and non-legitimate; standardization a nd hierarchization of 
dispersed knowledges and a pyramidal centralization which allow s control over 
them. If the Encyclopedists canno t be accused of having opened the way to 
industrial technology or even to the scientific organization of  labor, Diderot and his 
partners had already initiated, in some respects, the expulsion  of the craftsman from 
his know-how of experience, by a formalism that drew up an orga nization of 
knowledge and technological prac t i c e s  e n t r u s t e d  t o  t h e  c a r e  o f  a new category of 
experts, a certain type of l ogicians, as Diderot writes. 
These conceptions are only traces  of history; projects such as following the 
traces of Amazon employees, which Guchet describes and aptly de nounces, are of 
the same vein. 
In the relationships between ethics and technology, he is very interesting in the 
reconfigurations to which he invites us, through his assiduous and precise 
examination of philosophers of technology, including the “Const itutive/Constituent 
Anthropological Technology” curr ent, very well represented in h is laboratory at 
Compiègne, as well as the four currents of the biological philo sophy of technology 
which he discusses and distinguishes. 
One of the main theses is as follows. It is often and too readi ly admitted that 
there is, on the one hand, a positive technology oriented to ca re and, on the other, a 
negative technology, animated by the aim of mastery slipping in to predation toward 
all forms of biological as well as social and subjective life. However, according to 
him, a thought of care in technology includes two fundamental r equirements: 
understanding the technological relationship of human beings to  the world according 
to the category of insertion  and not that of mastery, and never forgetting the capacity 
of individuals for autonormativity3. His intuitions have a long history since these are 
the Greek analyses of medicine, with their “square of care” whi ch is designed to 
impose itself as the whole set of guiding principles for the pr actice of engineers and 
                                 
3 In the series Responsible Research  and Innovation  see the book by Marc Maesschalck, 
Reflexive Governance for Research and Innovative Knowledg e, ISTE and Wiley, 2017. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xiv     Care in Technology 
designers today. This square of care in the design of technolog y, which he will detail 
with the support of a large portion of the traditions of the ph ilosophy of technology, 
is based on the following principles: 
Care results from a double movement of incorporation and insert ion of natural 
processes into the operations of human action. 
The human being fulfils its nature as a living being in making a technician of 
itself. Technology repays its “debt to life”, to quote Simondon , by letting itself be 
guided by the goal of a fulfilment of life, that is to say of v alue-creating activity 
once we recognize the value of non-human living beings. Here he  is particularly 
indebted to Dagognet, Simondon and Dewey. 
The technological object gains a n aesthetic dimension when it i s no longer a 
detachable tool which is transportable everywhere, but a realit y inserted into both 
the natural and human worlds, and when it gives rise to a sense  of technological 
beauty. 
The imperative of knowledge.  
These practical principles do not allow us to determine in adva nce what is 
entailed by care in each situatio n. They are only regulatory, t o employ Kant’s 
terminology. In effect a thought  of care in technology is a mat ter of reflective 
judgement, and not of the faculty of determinant judgement. 
He convincingly shows a large limitation in the ethics of care4. Intending to “care 
for nature” without taking the fight onto the ground of the des ign of technologies 
and of the technical organization of chains of production, is t o fatally leave intact the 
distribution of the sensible which defines the social and polit ical order of the 
moment; even worse, it is to let carelessness flourish, where p roduction process is 
kept invisible. 
Against very superficial conceptions of the idea of responsible  innovation which 
do not question the ultimate goal of these policies and merely encourage and 
accelerate the passage of fundamen tal research toward industria l applications while 
ensuring in advance their “social acceptability”5,  t h i s  b o o k  g o e s  m u c h  f u r t h e r .  I f  
responsible innovation conceived in such a fuzzy manner does no t guard against the 
                                 
4 In a complementary way , see Sophie Pellé’s book, Business, Innovation and Responsibility , 
in which she interrogates conceptions of responsibility, availa ble in the Responsible Research 
and Innovation  set of books. 
5 For a more economic critique of this failing see Nikolova Bla govesta, The RRI Challenge . 
Responsibilization in a State of Tension with Market Regulation , ISTE and Wiley, 2019. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Foreword     xv 
creation of new vulnerabilities, and if the human remains outsi de nature, one may 
understand that some advocate surpassing this conception throug h an innovation 
which is oriented by care. Yet h is critique, inspired by Dewey,  in some way takes 
the opposite tack to this critique: the human is an instrument for the improvement of 
the natural world. Care thus consists of acting technologically  i n  s u c h  a  w a y  t h a t  
nature is fulfilled, improved, and optimized according to its o wn potentialities, and 
not by reference to the interests of a subjectivity cut off fro m the world. 
 
Bernard R EBER  
December 2020 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

 
Introduction 
Humanity by itself creates much devastation. A highly technolog ized 
humanity, intelligently technologized through a network, which has a 
geographical sense, is much less dangerous for nature than huma nity 
by itself. 
Gilbert S IMONDON  
A nagging question haunts our era: can we yet avoid the major e cological 
disruptions that more than two centuries of industrialization b ased on fossil energies 
seem to have rendered inevitable? It is in fact more and more w idely recognized that 
these disruptions, which there is every reason to believe will have disastrous 
consequences for all of life on Earth (including humans), will occur no matter what 
we do today to prevent them. We may, at best, limit their magnitude somewhat, 
provided however that the major industrialized countries take d rastic measures 
without delay – which seems unfortunately not to be the most pr obable option as 
evidenced by the tepidity of the (at best, modest) advances mad e by the international 
conferences on the environment th at have been held for many yea rs. 
Should we consider the question as definitively closed, and thi nk that our 
technological choices have comple tely committed us on an irreve rsible path to 
planetary ecological disaster? Must we even go as far as to con sider, with François 
Jullien for example (Jullien 2004), that the technological rela tionship with the world 
as it has been conceived and developed in the western world, an d whose model we 
have inherited from the ancient Greeks, is essentially the expr ession of a will to 
mastery of nature, the outcome of which, to the extent that our  technological activity 
acquires more and more powerful means of action, could only be the predicted 
disaster which we must face today? 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xviii     Care in Technology 
This book aims to answer these questions in the negative, showi ng on the 
contrary that the western conception of technology is historica lly articulated with a 
genuine requirement of care for things and beings. It is true t hat with the Industrial 
Revolution, this requirement seems to have deserted our technol ogical action. The 
latter seems since then to have been controlled only by the pow er of calculation 
(metron ) and seems no longer subject to what should have yet remained the guiding 
principle of all technologi cal activity: the faculty of metrion ,  t ha t  i s  t o s a y  of  f a i r  
measure, of suitability and of care – which faculty precisely c annot be reduced to the 
rationality of calculation. How have we come to so radically di ssociate technology 
from care, metron  f r o m  metrion – and especially, how to reintroduce metrion , 
correctness and care, into our technological activity? Can we reforge the frayed links 
between technology and care? 
I.1. Care for nature 
The need to develop technologies which are more “respectful of nature” is very 
widely shared among the general public but also among engineers  and designers, 
who consider themselves more and more concerned by environmenta l issues 
(especially in the case of students who, notably in France, hav e over the last few 
years developed a growing awareness of their present and future  responsibility in the 
matter1). The effort to introduce the aim of protecting nature into th e activities of 
engineering and technological design has in fact a long history . The concepts of 
green  design, eco-design or sustainable  design also show a significant change in the 
openness of technological design to ecological issues in the 19 80s and 1990s, 
reflecting more exactly the fact that this openness has gone ha nd in hand with an 
increasingly radical and comprehensive understanding of the res ponsibility of 
engineers and designers in eco logical matters (Madge 1997). 
The links between technological  design and ecological thinking are older still. 
Thus, some of the great figures of the Bauhaus such as Walter G ropius (its founder) 
or László Moholy-Nagy in the 1930s had already forged contacts with 
representatives of the ecological  sciences in London, where the y had emigrated 
following the closure of their school in Germany by the Nazis ( Anker 2010). The 
reflection on design integrated e cological questions very early on. 
The current context is marked by the success of a new mobilizin g watchword, 
which is currently bringing together a growing number of initia tives intended to get 
the industrialized countries to adopt a less destructive relati onship to nature. This 
watchword is expressed in terms of a fairly simple imperative: we must take care of 
                                 
1 See for example the “Student M anifesto for an Ecological Awak ening” in French, https:// 
pour-un-reveil-ecologique.org/fr / (accessed Fe bruary 4, 2020). 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xix 
nature . The expression “take care of nature and of people [may indeed  appear as] a 
new watchword of late modernity. It responds to a social crisis  [as well as] an 
environmental crisis” without pr ecedent (Pierron 2013b). We wou ld thus be in the 
process of moving from a society whose priority is the search f or well-being to a 
care society (Rodotà 1995, p. 103). Businesses themselves compete in order to win 
the Grand Prize for Caring, as f ar as the most trivial acts of consumption – buying 
recycled toilet paper, for examp le (Puig de la Bellacasa 2012) – which now seems to 
relate to taking care of nature2. 
Beyond the excitement that it inspires in advertising executive s, care for nature 
has found important theoretical developments in moral philosoph y, more precisely 
in the so-called ethics of care (Laugier 2012). In opposition t o a long tradition of 
moral philosophy for which the subject cannot be moral unless r ecognized to be 
rational, autonomous and free, the ethics of care argue that hu mans constitute 
themselves as moral subjects in their vulnerability and in the relations of dependence 
which flow from it. Vulnerability and dependence are therefore not only accidents 
which may occur at certain critical moments of life (early chil dhood, old age or 
disease); they are our lot. Our moral life is based primarily o n our ability to attract 
attention to, and to pay attention to, everything that allows t he ordinary of our lives 
and which, literally, nourishes us (Pelluchon 2019a). The ethic s of care thus put the 
emphasis on what we do not generally see, on what is rendered i nvisible by denial of 
attention, that is to say on everything that makes our lives possible and supports 
them on a daily basis. However, as noted by Sandra Laugier, ind ifference, or even 
negligence and recklessness “in relation to the consequences of  our daily actions on 
the surrounding environment” is expressed more and more today i n terms of 
carelessness (Laugier 2012). In  making its irruption into envir onmental ethics, care 
does not however limit itself to adding, to the ethical issues centering on the 
“intrinsic value”3 of nature or on rational calculation of the consequences of ou r 
actions upon it, a generous and caring attitude. Environmental  care expresses more 
essentially the recognition of our dependence on nature – a dependence which, for 
                                 
2 Incidentally, it is not altoge ther new that human relationshi ps to nature, in industrial 
societies, should be envisaged by the standard of care, as evid enced for example by the 
curricula of education on nature in the elementary schools of W estern Europe, which have 
combined at least two ways to teach nature to children througho ut the past century: although 
the scientific and instrumental conception of nature has massiv ely infused the curricula of 
secondary education, in contrast  the primary schools have never  really abandoned leading 
children, by observation, to create an experience and a concept ion of nature oriented by caring 
concerns (Postma 2006, p. 3). 
3 Catherine Larrère thus emphasi zes the existence of an incompa tibility between, on the one 
side, the environmental ethics which proclaim the concepts of i ntrinsic value and wild nature 
(wilderness), still dominant on the North American continent, a nd on the other side the ethics 
of care for nature (Larrère 2012). 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xx     Care in Technology 
most authors, primarily has a contextual4 meaning which, moreover, is in no way a 
characteristic specific to the ethics of care. 
For all that, the meaning and ev en the relevance of the injunct ion to take care of 
nature are debated (Gaille 2013; Hess 2013). Thus, can we unify  care for humans 
and care for nature in one and th e same concept of care, or are  there several kinds of 
care (Pierron 2013b)? Can we export “concepts explored in relat ions with humans to 
relations with nature” (Pierron 2013a), by so doing deriving co ncern for nature and 
for the world, in its widest extension, from care as it is depl oyed in inter-human 
relations, and not the reverse5? There is no unambiguous and consensual response to 
these issues. We must state in fact that extending care beyond individual 
interactions, toward a care for the world in its entirety, does  not necessarily lead to 
care for nature. Thus, in a book devoted to examining the condi tions of care for the 
world, Elena Pulcini (2013) explains that only a transformation  in our concept of the 
subject can allow us to overcome the “pathologies” of the globa lized world 
(exaggerated individualism, communalist temptations). We must d o away with the 
self-referential and sovereign subject of modernity, dominated by Promethean 
hubris  a n d  n a r c i s s i s m ,  t o  c o n c e i v e  a  s u b j e c t  t h a t  i s  r e l a t i o n a l ,  v u l n erable, and 
dependent on others, but also assuming its responsibility with respect to the 
vulnerability of others. However, Pulcini says nothing with reg a r d  t o  h o w  t h i s  
relational subject relates with non-human natural beings, and w ith nature in general. 
Care for the world certainly im plies, as a basic condition, the  preservation of life. 
However, the object of care is not, according to Pulcini, life as such, and even less 
nature, but the world of human intersubjectivity. 
Based on these difficulties some argue that even the idea of ca r e  f or  n a t ur e  i s  
suspicious and that upon consideration, it is based on very wea k philosophical 
grounds. French philosopher Aliénor Bertrand (2013a, 2013b) thu s points to the 
distortion of principle which exists between the “type of philo sophical 
anthropology” that und erlies care and the “naturalism” which gu ides the relationship 
with the nature of industrial societies. By naturalism, Bertran d here understands 
naturalist ontology as defined by anthropologist Philippe Desco la (2005): it is a 
mode of identification of the existing beings which rests on th e attribution to all of 
the same “physicality” (meaning that all beings in the world, l iving or not, are held 
to be dependent on the same physico-chemical laws, their behavi or can always be 
explained with reference to these laws) but on the attribution of different 
“interiorities” between all the existing beings: thus, only hum ans are assigned a soul, 
a consciousness or a spirit, all the other existing beings depr ived of this. The very 
                                 
4 ”The theme of care allows a pragmatist and particularist trea tment of environmental issues, 
beyond the major principles and incentives to moralise or to (u n)assign guilt” (Pelluchon 
2019a, p. 14). 
5 Pierron J.-P. 2019, pp . 104–105, citing F. Worms. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xxi 
concept of “nature” is, in fact, unknown to all human groups wh ich distribute 
ontological attributes among existing beings according to other  identification 
schemes. The concept of nature therefore has only meaning in re ference to a 
particular ontology, naturalism, suspected of having served as a foundation for so-
called modern science and technology, and consequently of havin g paved the way to 
a mode of development based on t he depredation of the environme nt. How could the 
concept of “nature” in these conditions become the reference te rm for an attitude to 
care with regard to the living an d the environment? Naturalist ontology has led us, 
we Westerners of the industrial era, to conceive in a very impo verished manner our 
possible relationships with nature; it is inevitable that the c oncept of care for nature 
inherits this poverty and in no way allows us to reorient our a ttitude towards it. In 
sum, “the problems raised by natural resources are subsidiary i n relation to the issue 
of values … they only arise, in fact, from within a generally a nthropocentric 
conception of the relations hip of humanity to nature6”. “To enact all the changes that 
would put us on the good path, whether on the level of the figh t against global 
warming or as regards animal welfare… it is important to change  our representations 
of animals and of the place of the human in nature…” (Pelluchon  2019b). The 
anthropocentric conception classi cally situates the human outsi de nature, and assigns 
to the latter only an instrumental value, which tends to justif y the behavior of 
unlimited exploitation7. For us to show more care in regards to nature, we would 
first of all have to deal with this conception of humanity isol ated and cut off from 
nature, that we replace the human being within the entirety of relations that it has 
with its environment, and that we cease to consider nature simp ly as a “background 
in front of which we perform our activities” (Pierron 2013a). 
To assume that human beings are not cut off from nature is equi valent to 
remembering that this being, who likes to define itself above a ll by its reason, its 
intelligence and its freedom, doe s not yet cease to be a living creature among living 
creatures. If societies that have chosen industrialization have  ransacked nature, it is 
because the humans in these societies have ceased to think of t hemselves as living 
beings and have made of themselves, in the words of André Leroi -Gourhan, a 
“dematerialized image”. They have imagined themselves as separa ted from the 
community of beings that they form with all living creatures on  Earth, and have 
assumed the right to exercise over these, and over nature in ge neral, unlimited 
domination. As Claude Lévi-Strauss also said, “We started by cu tting man off from 
nature and establishing him in an absolute reign. We believed o urselves to have thus 
erased his most unassailable characteristic: that he is first a  living being. Remaining 
                                 
6 Hess cited by Pierr on (Pierron 2013c). 
7 It should be noted however that anthropocentrism does not nec essarily imply a predatory 
attitude in respect to nature. “Weak” anthropocentrism may only  assign to nature an 
instrumental value, without jus tifying its exploitation: this v alue may be aesthetic, cognitive, 
etc., which requires a protective rather than destructive attit ude. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxii     Care in Technology 
blind to this common property, we gave frein rein to all excess es” (Lévi-Strauss 
1976, p. 41). To reconnect with a conception of the human being  as a living being 
among other living beings should in sum lead us, in a way logic ally, to put care in 
our relationships with nature.  
The question of how to get out o f naturalistic ontology, if tha t is indeed what it is 
all about, while retaining the term that it has posed in relati on to humans, namely 
“nature”, remains at this point. The question of how it is poss ible, concretely, to 
“change anthropology”, as by decree, also remains entirely open . 
However, apart from these thorny questions, would this planned change in our 
conception of the human being suffice to make the very notion o f a care for nature? 
Nothing is less certain. 
I.2. The two-layered model of care 
That there is a close link between, on the one hand, the fact t hat the human is a 
living being – which makes it dependent on various conditions t o meet its vital 
needs – and, on the other hand, the fact that it has an essenti al relationship to the 
care applied to the maintenance and provision of these conditio ns, has been widely 
stressed by the ethics of care8. This link is highlighted, incidentally, in a fable which 
comes to us from a Latin author named Hygin, which Heidegger re lates in paragraph 
42 of Being and Time  (Heidegger 1962, p. 242): 
Once when ‘Concern’ [who is also care, Cura ] was crossing a river, she 
saw some clay: she thoughtfully took up a piece and began to sh ape it. 
While she was meditating on what she had made, Jupiter (Jovis) came 
by. ‘Concern’ asked him to give it spirit, and this he gladly g ranted. But 
when she wanted her name to be bestowed upon it, he forbade thi s, and 
demanded that it be given his name instead. While ‘Concern’ and  
Jupiter were disputing, Earth (Tellus) arose and desired that h er own 
name be conferred on the creature, since she had furnished it w ith part 
of her body. They asked Saturn [that is, Time] to be their arbi ter, and he 
made the following decision, which seemed a just one: ‘Since yo u, 
Jupiter, have given its spirit, you shall receive that spirit a t its death; and 
since you, Earth, have given its body, you shall receive its bo dy. But 
since ‘Concern’ first shaped this creature, she shall possess i t as long as 
it lives. And because there is now a dispute among you as to it s name, 
let it be called homo , for it is made out of humus  (earth).  
                                 
8 And not only by them, by the way; many other philosophies hav e established this link, 
including those of the ancie nt Greeks, as we will see. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xxiii 
Commenting briefly on this fable, Heidegger notes that Concern or Care is not 
envisaged only as that to which the human Dasein  remains committed during its 
entire life and as that which constitutes it, but that “this pr iority of ‘care’ emerges in 
connection with the familiar way of taking man as compounded of  body (earth) and 
spirit” (Heidegger 1962, p. 243). 
 The meaning of the fable is that the human being will only be a composite of 
body and spirit at its death, and at this time only can the sha ring between Jovis and 
Tellus be made; before this, what  defines the human is the fact  that it lives, that it is 
a living being. As a living being, the human is one, not split,  care being precisely 
that which prevents the split between its natural and not-natur al parts. Care, in terms 
of the human being, means above all else refusing any form of s plit between the 
body and the spirit: there is not, on one side, care in the sen se of purely 
technological caregiving, with an objectivized body as its area  of intervention; and 
on the other side care in the sense of taking care, attentive t o the human being as 
spirit and free will. Care cannot be two cares, it is a unity o r nothing at all9. 
This requirement of unity in care, an indivisibility of caregiv ing and taking care, 
has been particularly pronounced i n the field of medical ethics , except however that 
these two aspects of care, althoug h not separate, are not so mu ch merged into a truly 
unitary care. There are two layer s of care and they are clearly hierarchical. It has in 
effect become a commonplace to recall that the therapeutic act in the technical sense 
of the term, that is to say caregiving (cure), is devoid of any moral value if it is not 
inserted into a more essential relationship of care which envel opes it. The greatest 
risk is that, while thus conceived according to a two-layer mod el, care becomes 
precisely two quite distinct and unrelated cares – and even wor se, that care within 
the meaning of caregiving will eventually prevail over care wit hin the meaning of 
taking care. As psychoanalyst Donald W. Winnicott deplored at t he beginning of the 
1970s, “Cure, in the sense of remedy, successful eradication of  disease and its cause, 
tends today to overlay cure as care” (Winnicott 2017, p. 192). However, as stressed 
by the preface writers of an Italian collective work (Donghi an d Preta 1995), the risk 
of splitting care and giving priority, as Winnicott deplored, t o cure as remedy  
over care, results specifically in an inability to properly pos e the problem of  
the relationships between body and spirit, and their unity. In other words, a 
relationship of reciprocal implication is forged here between, on one hand, the  
 
                                 
9 The reading that Warren T. Reich proposes of Hygin’s fable ce rtainly emphasizes the 
existence of a tension in care – tension between care as a burd en and care as solicitude. By its 
physical and telluric nature, car e is a load, a burden; by its spiritual nature, it is solicitude. 
This reading, however, does not affect the unity of care; it do es not mean that there is not one 
but two cares; there is a single care. However, any care implie s this internal tension (Reich 
1995). 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxiv     Care in Technology 
conception of the human as a living being – but in the sense of  a being composed of 
body and spirit unified by care – and on the other hand, a two- layer conception of 
care. 
However, this two-layer conception of care, well documented in the field of 
medical ethics, does not confine itself there: it is also found  in the invocation of care 
for nature and it leads to a blurring of its meaning. Not, inci dentally, that any idea of 
care for nature should invariably find its only possible model in medical care 
(Pierron 2019). Thus, van Rensselaer Potter, one of the theoreticians of the concept 
of bioethics, considered that medical bioethics, far from being  possibly the basis for 
a global concept of care by extension of the care due to humans  to the care due to 
nature, was on the contrary only a shrinkage of a broader conce pt of bioethics, 
linking human health and health of the environment (Gaille 2013 ). That being said, 
the need to establish a hierarchical relationship between cure and care now extends 
to the whole set of activities where care is required. The penetration of the ethics of 
care into environmental ethics illustrates this phenomenon of e xtension: we are 
required not only to interact in a prudent and careful manner w ith nature, but also to 
assume that these interactions are of a moral scope and that, t herefore, we are 
morally obliged to comply with the values of prudence and fair measure. 
In its most general sense, the idea of care for nature therefor e points towards the 
same two-layer conception of car e as that of medical ethics. It  is still a matter, here 
as there, of conceivi ng care as a single care; however, this ca re does indeed have two 
layers in a hierarchical relationship. On the one hand, there i s the properly technical 
level of care, which is the care that we must take of natural t hings if we are to 
succeed in our undertakings, in order to avoid the misfortunes of the man of Song. 
Mengzi, a Chinese philosopher of the 4th century B.C.E., a foll ower of Confucian 
thought, tells us that “a man of Song10, distressed to not see his plants growing fast 
enough, had the idea of pulling on them from above. Returning h ome in haste, he 
said to his people: “I am tired today, I have been helping the corn to grow long” 
(Mencius, 1970, p. 190). On hearing this, his son rushed to go to see, but the shoots 
had already dried. Here is an unwise technical act, harmful due  to lack of attention 
and care brought to the specific needs of the plants; but there  is also, on the other 
hand, the moral layer of care, which must provide technical act s of care with their 
guiding values. The two-layer conception of care extends to nat ure particularly when 
it is assigned an intrinsic and not only instrumental value11: moral respect for nature 
must regulate the technical  acts that are deployed. 
                                 
10 One of the Chinese states of  the so-called Spring and Autumn period. 
11 The concept of the intrinsic value of nature, as well as its  relationship to care for nature, 
will be discussed later. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xxv 
I.3. The intellectualist conception of technology 
There is moreover a conception of technology implicit in the tw o-layer model of 
care. This model is in fact underpinned by three assumptions af fecting the relations 
between human life, technology, and care. The first assumption is that human life 
can be summed up in two dimensions which are difficult to defin itively articulate: 
life is understood on the one han d according to the dimension o f the being-in-life, 
and on the other hand, as a life of the mind. We are “first of all” living beings 
according to Lévi-Strauss, which means that we are “subsequently”, also, something 
else than living beings. We are not cut off from nature, certai nly, but that does not 
mean that we have absolutely no exteriority in relation to it. 
The other two presuppositions of the two-layer model of care re late to the very 
concept of technology. On the one hand (and thus the second pre supposition), 
technology is defined as the whole set of means available to us  to be able to 
intervene in nature, both inert and living, from a point of vie w exterior to it. This 
conception of technology is intellectualist. Technology is the means by which 
intelligence intervenes upon nature as upon an external, recept ive material. 
On the other hand (third presupposition), technology as such, o r at least a certain 
type of technology, is considered to be incompatible with care.  The two-layer model 
of care, affirming the unity of all care, is certainly unequivo cal: no relationship of 
care cannot be conceived without technology. A negligent action , performed without 
precaution and devoid of any real involvement of the one who pe rforms it, is not in 
the service of care. A gesture t hat is not careful, that is to say which is not executed 
with the required technique (which is learned and requires trai ning) cannot be 
caregiving – such is the message of the parable of the man of S ong. Caregiving 
requires competence. That being said, when technology refers no  longer to modestly 
equipped know-how but to the innovations of chemical and mechan ical industry, for 
example, its relationship to car e appears less obvious, more ex ternal, and more 
conflicted. In sum, there are two conceptions of the relationsh ip between care and 
technology: a relationship of necessary implication on one hand – there is no care 
without the security of a controlled and properly equipped acti on, whether it is care 
for humans or care for nature; on the other hand, a relationshi p of exteriority in 
principle, making problematic the possibility of caregiving whe n the concept of 
technology signifies, to continue the example, the devices of m echanical industry 
and chemical products. 
The first assumption, affecting both contradictory meanings of the concept of 
life, is absolutely essential and commands the other two. Indee d, it is because life, in 
humans, is regarded as dual, consisting of a subject pole (inte lligence, the spirit) and 
an object pole (the body, the being-in-life), that technology m ust inevitably be 
understood according to the same division: it is an emanation o f the subject pole and 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxvi     Care in Technology 
it applies to the object pole from a point of view external to it. An intellectualist 
concept of technology is the result of a bifurcated conception of life in humans. In 
addition, to the extent that its intervention targets the objec t pole, that is nature as 
the theatre and support of the vital processes, technology has an ambivalent 
relationship to care: certainly there is no care without techno logy, but the risk of a 
dissociation between performing cure and taking care is widenin g as technologies 
become technosciences. 
I.4. From design of nature to care for “ordinary nature” 
These three presuppositions thus constitute the unthought-of di mension of the  
two-layer model of care. However, in the light of the foregoing  considerations, it 
appears more and more doubtful that this model can provide a sa tisfactory 
theoretical base for the idea of care for nature. The example o f permaculture 
illustrates quite well the difficulty of transposing this model  of care onto nature. 
Permaculturists12, however, explicitly put care for nature and for humans at the  heart 
of their system of values. They claim to have a holistic concep tion of the human 
being, refusing to separate “the  body, the affective and emotional sphere, the 
intellect, the spiritual13”. Therefore, they seem to exceed any bifurcated vision of 
care: care for the body is inseparable from care for the spirit , and care for human 
beings from care for the earth. “ Care for the earth. Care for people. Fair share ”: the 
motto of permaculture gestures toward a unitary vision of care,  and toward a non-
dual conception of human life. How ever, the continuum of care s eems to be 
contradicted here by the prioritization of the concept of desig n. Permaculturists 
speak in fact of a real change of paradigm. Their analysis is a s follows: historically, 
human groups have grown up in highly diverse habitats. This acc umulated 
                                 
12 Permaculture is a method of agriculture theorized in the 197 0s by the Australians Bill 
Molisson and David Holmgren. The initial motivation of Molisson  and Holmgren was to 
propose an alternative to intensi ve agriculture, in which the s earch for higher yields by the 
massive artificialization of envi ronments has resulted in the e xhaustion of microbiological life 
present in the soil and, eventually, the sometimes dramatic dec line of their fertility. The 
services that are normally rendered by these microorganisms (de gradation of the bedrock to 
create humus, input material nitr ogen, etc.) have thus had to b e substituted by other means, 
including by the provision of chemical inputs. In contrast to t hese artificializing industrialist 
approaches, permaculture proposes to return to bio-inspired agr icultural practices, capable of 
taking advantage of natural functions. Nature has in effect giv en birth over the long term to 
ecosystems that are extremely complex and robust, based on the existence of multi-level 
relations of interdependence between many elements, mineral as well as organic: a 
permacultural farm aims to reproduce this complex network of el ements in interaction at all 
orders of magnitude. See e.g. (Hervé-Gruyer 2018). 
13 See the website of the Bec Hellouin permacultural farm – htt ps://www.fermedubec.com/ 
la-permaculture/notre-philosophi e/ (accessed November 25, 2018) . 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xxvii 
experience is a wealth of which permaculture intends to take ad vantage, drawing on 
traditional knowledges and know-how. On the whole, however, the  growth of the 
human population on Earth was more like a fumbling adventure th an a conscious 
plan. In place of this globally b lind human expansion, the perm aculturists intend to 
substitute a planned habitation, supported by specific knowledg e relating to the 
environment and to the operation of living beings. It is now a matter of thinking of 
habitation from the viewpoint of design – to propose a “permacu ltural design”. 
However, if we can understand what permacultural design entails  at the level of the 
farm or even of the territory, what becomes of this vocation of  designer when the 
scale of intervention becomes th e Earth itself (care for the Ea rth)? Must we admit 
that the human must become the chief designer of global nature?  This would be a 
strange way to defend the idea of care for nature. It is hard t o see in any case how 
we would escape the ambition of becoming masters and owners of nature. “How can 
o n e  s e t  o n e s e l f  u p  a s  a  d e s i g n e r  o f  t h e  w o r l d  w h i l e  a c k n o w l e d g i ng that one is 
subject to it?” asked Vilèm Flusser (Flusser 1999). 
A dual conception of the human; an intellectualist conception o f technology; the 
idea that some technologies are i n essence contradictory to car e (permaculturists ban 
mechanization as well as chemical inputs from their farms): per maculture remains 
well and truly dependent on the two-layer model of care and its  assumptions, which 
leads to a difficulty in rendering robust the goal of care for nature or, in the terms of 
the permacultural philosoph y, care for the earth. 
In sum, Aliénor Bertrand sees clearly when she stresses how muc h the idea of 
taking care of nature risks surreptitiously returning to a dualistic anthropology – 
even that one which, in seeing humans as beings outside of natu re due to their 
reason or their spirit, has led t o the most predatory behaviors  in respect of the natural 
world. The sincerity of permaculturalists is of course not in q uestion here, and 
neither are the truly caregiving modalities of their relationsh ips with the cultivated 
land. That being said, they seem to continue to conceive of the  human according to a 
duality of perspectives, as living beings belonging to nature i n their organism, but 
not in their technological intelligence. Humans belong to natur e, but they remain 
designers of nature. They must simply create a better design fo r it. 
How to get out of this impasse in order to better understand th e conditions of a 
more caring technological action?  For what should this action b e caring, if not for 
nature taken globally? A possible answer comes from one current of environmental 
ethics, the ethics of so-called “ordinary” nature, whose diagno sis is almost that 
which we have just established: considering all of nature as an  object of care, 
especially by giving it an intrinsic value, in no way leads to escaping from the 
dualism of the human being and nature; on the contrary, it lead s to a hardening of 
this dualism because the human, despite the assertion that it r emains a living being  
 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxviii     Care in Technology 
among living beings, appears engaged in a confrontation with na t u r e  w h i c h  h a s  
nothing to do with the dialogue of the living being and its mil ieu. As emphasized by 
French philosopher Rémi Beau (2013), the shift of environmental  ethics toward the 
concept of care for ordinary nat ure (i.e. to care, not for natu re, but for natural things 
in our daily environment), could then allow us to dispense with  the double 
conception of a human being which despite everything remains ou tside of nature, 
and of a nature without humans. 
I.5. Technology, life and care 
L e t  u s  s u m m a r i z e .  T h e  c o n c e p t  o f  t h e  h u m a n  a s  c o m p o s e d  o f  b o d y  and spirit 
unified by care became closely li nked to the two-layer model of  care, as well as to 
an intellectualist conception of  technology. In this theoretica l framework, 
technological intelligence has a vocation to reconfigure the world – to design it. The 
only way in this case to guard against the excesses and ravages  of technology is to 
impose upon it a limiting framework, but from outside: ethics s eems to have today 
the function of providing this. Technology is in itself foreign  to the values of caution 
and modesty inherent in care: the imperative of care must neces sarily be imposed by 
an external and overhanging instance. 
What however of the relationshi p between technology and care, o nce abandoned 
not only the dualistic conception of human life, but also the t wo-layer conception of 
care and the intellectualist conception of technology? As a mat ter of fact, the 
philosophical literature on care is almost completely silent on  this subject. It still 
very often proceeds from an attit ude of foreclosure in respect of technologies: here 
these are, so to speak, never questioned in their possible rela tionship to care, even if 
some philosophers of care, as we will see, are moving in some r espects toward this 
questioning. 
The intellectualist conception of technology seems to act, even  today, as the 
common basis for debates on the relationship between care and t echnology – even 
though the non-intellectualist, rather vitalist, conception of technology as Organon , 
that is to say as an extension of a living body acting on its s urrounding environment, 
remained unchanged overall over a very long historical period, ranging from the 
ancient Greeks (who had rigorously established this definition)  until the century of 
the Enlightenment. In what conditions exactly, and why, did thi s transition occur? 
What have been the implications of this for the thought of tech nology, and for the 
conception we have of the relationship between humans and natur e? We will attempt 
in this book to make a chronology, exactly, of the historical m utations that have led 
us to make technology a kind of “unthought-of” of care. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Introduction     xxix 
We will thus clarify what conception of technology, breaking wi th the 
intellectualist framework within which it still very often rema ins defined, can orient 
toward a more careful and caring attitude in respect of nature.  What does it mean to 
think of technology otherwise than based upon intelligence, but  as we will see, 
based upon life? Does this not lead to a counter-intuitive, eve n disturbing, 
conception of technology? Does a vitalist conception not mean i n effect defending a 
purely and simply anti-rationalist position? We will show that this is not the case, 
and conclude by explaining the guiding principles, which are pe rfectly rational and 
capable of guiding the work of engineers, for a conception of t echnology alternative 
to its intellectualist definition. 
This book is therefore a book of philosophy of technology. More  precisely, it 
intends to demonstrate that the problem of knowing how to orien t technological 
design towards the care of all existing beings and of the world  cannot be solved only 
by choosing materials and processes that are more “respectful o f nature”. This 
problem engages a global philosophical reflection on technology , which French 
philosopher Jean-Yves Goffi emphasized at the end of the 1980s (Goffi 1988) that it 
had always gathered, since Plato, three inseparable dimensions:  a phenomenological 
or ontological dimension, consisting of a description of techni cal reality through its 
various manifestations (tools, instruments, machines, gestures,  practices, operations, 
etc.); an anthropological dimensi on signaling towards the idea that every technique 
finds its true raison d’être and its ultimate meaning in the ne cessity of satisfying 
vital needs; and finally an evaluative dimension. What characte rizes contemporary 
philosophies, Goffi wrote at the time, is a relative fragmentat ion of this approach. 
Evaluative, anthropological and ontological approaches are ofte n dissociated: few 
are the unitary philosophies of technology (Goffi 1988, 52-53).  According to Goffi, 
this situation could be explained by the gradual rise in import ance of the evaluative 
perspective, which has pushed the other two dimensions into the  background. The 
current philosophy of technical artefacts, to which we shall re turn later, undeniably 
strives to overcome this imbalance and to regain a unitary conc eption of the 
technical fact, by integrating th e ontological and evaluative d imensions to a greater 
extent. However, the anthropological dimension remains to this day the poor relation 
of philosophical analyses of contemporary technology. The prese nt work is intended 
to fill this gap. In sum, this book is a book of philosophy of technology, the 
objective of which is to respond to the following questions: in  what sense can we 
speak of “care in technology”? F or there to be care, is it not necessary for there to be 
a subject to dispense care? According to what concept of care t hen can we speak of 
technologies able to perform care by virtue of their very desig n ,  i f  t h a t  i s  i n d e e d  
what we mean? What meaning can b e given to the concept that see ms to emerge 
here, and which seems at best se lf-contradictory, at worst devo id of meaning: that of 
an objectified care, reified in technology – that is to say of a care which no longer 
operates through the activity of a subject who provides care? 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

xxx     Care in Technology 
One might object to the great naivety of this exercise, or even  to its profound 
ignorance of the real mechanisms  that have historically led to the depredation of 
n a t u r e .  C a n  w e  r e a l l y  b e l i e v e ,  w e  m i g h t  s a y  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  t h a t  i t is due to the 
persistence of a dualistic anthropology and a two-layer model o f care that plastic 
waste accumulates in hundreds of thousands of tons in the ocean s (Eriksen et al.  
2014), thus forming what we might call a new continent – a cont inent of waste? 
Behind this phenomenon, and many others of the same kind, lie n ot anthropological 
or philosophical postulates, but quite certainly actors, includ ing industrial ones, who 
have taken decisions based on their interests. French philosoph er Grégoire 
Chamayou (2019) has recently highlighted the role of brewery an d soft-drink 
industrialists of as early as the 1930s, in the United States, in promoting disposable 
cans and bottles which came to replace the old system of recove rable and reusable 
containers (a system based on deposits). The industrial lobbies  have worked very 
well and they certainly have a role in the explosion of astrono mical quantities of 
waste which must now, in fact, be recycled. Let us cease to bea t about the bush and 
point the finger directly at the problem – not in the heaven of  philosophical ideas 
about humanity and about care, but in the strategies of the maj or industrial players. 
This objection is unstoppable, and it must be clear: no miracle  recipe will come 
out of these analyses and, of course, it is above all through s truggles and the efforts 
of regulation that things will change. Bergson warned us: a mor e frugal mode of life, 
one therefore less detrimental to nature, would have to go thro ugh a very deep moral 
reform. However, such a reform being apparently unattainable, “ we must be content 
with shifts and submit to more and more numerous and vexatious regulations” 
(Bergson 1935, p. 274). 
There is always an aspect of our daily lives by which, whatever  our goodwill and 
our sincerity, we produce a defect  of care. Manufacturing and u sing a smartphone or 
a computer, taking a plane trip, turning on electricity inevitably involves a defect of 
care, since these technological ob jects or gestures depend upon  industrial clusters 
which are deleterious to natural environments and humans that a re sometimes very 
distant from us. There is no loophole, even if otherwise we pro mote low tech  
philosophy or agriculture without chemical inputs. We have buil t our habitation of 
the world upon the (de)predatio n of nature; we can without doub t be less 
(de)predatory, but we can hardly stop being so altogether. But this thought must not 
discourage us. It in no way prevents us from defining the theor etical conditions and 
practical principles of caring technological action, to impleme nt as much of it as 
possible in the aim of reducing the (de)predation exerted upon nature and upon 
living beings in general. This book has no other ambition than to indicate what these 
conditions and principles are. 
 10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781119821403.fmatter by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

