Article
Caring for waste: Handling
tailings in a Chilean
copper mine
Sebastian Ureta
Departamento de Sociologı ´a, Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Santiago, Chile
Abstract
How do we practically deal with the waste produced by industrial processes? Until now thisquestion has overwhelmingly been answered in one way: through the deployment of differentkinds of waste management programs, technology-based top-down actions for waste whoseultimate aim is to make it disappear both physically by leaving it in fully enclosed dumps andpolitically by eliminating it as a matter of concern that must be dealt with. Due to the multiple
setbacks that this approach has faced in terms of large spills and continual pollution, this paper
states the need to consider a parallel set of practices that have been enacted, that is, the practiceofcaring for waste. Based on current developments in science and technology studies, care is
presented as a way to deal with waste that, based on everyday practices and the inescapability offailure, proposes temporary and experimental ways to involve all the concerned parties in thesearch for alternative ways to live with our waste, in material, ethical and political terms. In orderto explore the challenges that such an approach entails this paper will present some examples ofcaring for waste developed by the personnel of a large copper mine located in central Chile.
Keywords
Waste, care, infrastructure, mining, waste management
Management and care
One of the most pressing questions of our time is how to deal with the waste produced by
human activity. From households that continually discard items that its members no longer
want to countries who ‘‘outsource’’ millions of tons of diﬀerent kinds of toxic wastes, theway we deal with waste is usually seen as one of most visible materializations of the ultimateunsustainability of our current production and consumption patterns. Among the diﬀerenttypes of waste, industrial solid waste (ISW) occupies the utmost central position, amountingto 97% of the total waste produced in countries such as the US (Liboiron, 2013).
Until now the heterogeneous set of practices and devices devoted to dealing with ISW
have been largely understood as diﬀerent materializations of Waste Management (WM)
programs. According to the editors of the eponymous journal, WM can be deﬁned as
Corresponding author:
Sebastian Ureta, Departamento de Sociologı ´a, Universidad Alberto Hurtado, Cienfuegos 46, Santiago 8340588 Chile.
Email: sureta@uahurtado.clEnvironment and Planning A
2016, Vol. 48(8) 1532–1548
!The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0308518X16645103
epn.sagepub.com

‘‘the generation, prevention, characterization, monitoring, treatment, handling, reuse and
ultimate residual disposition of solid wastes’’ (Anonymous, 2014). In practice WM has beenconceived largely as ‘‘a technical issue, a concern mainly for local authorities with a statutoryduty to provide’’ (Davies, 2008: 3), an emphasis that ‘‘circumscribes discussions to focus on
better WM technologies (longer serving landﬁll liners, better ways of disposing of incinerator
ﬂy ash, and so on) and diversion (primarily recycling), the latter being something for whichmembers of the public are largely held responsible’’ (Hird et al., 2014: 3). Although thisapproach has introduced important innovations in the way wastes are treated, recent yearshave witnessed several important setbacks. As aﬃrmed by a recent review of the literature onWM, ‘‘a number of serious and highly publicised pollution incidents associated withincorrect waste management practices led to public concern about lack of controls,inadequate legislation, environmental and human health impact’’ (Giusti, 2009: 2229).
However, the issues with WM, as growing social science literature on waste has explored,
are far from being solely due to ‘‘incorrect’’ WM practices. According to several authors, thelimitations of WM as an eﬀective way to advance towards higher levels of sustainability canbe found in the very basic notion that waste can be ‘‘managed’’ at all. As noted by Alvessonand Willmott (2012), the word management derives from the Italian word ‘maneggiare’,‘‘which means ‘to handle a horse’’’ (p. 20). Such a root is clear in the usual presentationof management as ‘‘a set of techniques and disciplines that promises to address problemsthat are deﬁned as soluble by the technical solutions that it provides’’ (p. 3).
The application of this notion to the issue of waste has led to a situation in which, ﬁrst,
‘‘waste is deﬁned by, and discussed in terms of, ‘disposal’ technologies, or—morecorrectly—waste treatments, and their connection to policy’’ (Gregson and Crang, 2010:1027). For this reason, any non-technical actor or entity is automatically excluded from itsmanagement, rendering the whole issue as utterly apolitical, as identiﬁed by Hird et al.(2014), or a particular kind of politics that ‘‘emerges from objects that are so naturalizedthey do not appear to raise issues’’ (p. 8). However, and as the relevance of waste incontemporary ﬁghts against global warming and for environmental justice shows, our
handling of waste in its ‘‘silent, ordinary, fully routinized ways ...are perversely the most
important aspects of what we mean by living together—even though no one raises hell aboutthem’’ (Hird et al., 2014). Waste, and its handling, must become political if we are going toseriously engage with the issues raised by our unsustainable patterns of production andconsumption, and the notion of ‘‘management’’ is a limit to such politicization.
Secondly, and as noted in the deﬁnition by Alvesson and Willmott, at the very center of
the concept of management is the notion that the problems faced in WM are ultimately‘‘soluble,’’ once and for all, if the right tools are applied. In practice such a notion engenders
the ‘‘illusion that solutions to all problems are to be found in a more determined application
of rationally organized expertise encapsulated in management theory and practice’’(Bavington, 2011: 116). In the case of WM, this implies that ‘‘the waste problem ispresented as not only manageable but already being managed, thus solved’’ (Gille, 2007:18). In most cases the solution is based on diﬀerent materializations of the ‘‘ultimate sink’’principle (Tarr, 1996), or the notion that the solution for the issue is to lock wastes in evermore sophisticated containers, in the hope that they will remain there forever. Therefore akey issue of WM is to prevent other entities (especially human beings) from engaging with
components labeled as ‘‘waste,’’ because of certain negative consequences and to stop some
(potential) relations. This means going against the redundant cycles of nature, freezing thecirculation and mutation of organic and inorganic matter for a certain amount of time.However in practice, and regardless of how much knowledge and how many technicaldevices are introduced, WM’s preference for sinks generates new wastes and their relatedUreta 1533
issues, given ‘‘the tendency of wastes to migrate and transform [that] is often overlooked in
the attempt to stow away wastes indeﬁnitely’’ (Gabrys, 2009: 668). Waste in sinks is alive; itleaks and permeates barriers, transforming into diﬀerent entities in the process: leachate,polluted water, dead soil, toxins, etc.
Beyond these critiques, this paper addresses a key point that is seldom mentioned in the
literature on ISW: there is much more happening with waste than WM practices. As soon asone starts paying close attention to the practices enacted in and around waste one realizesthat many of them do not remotely comply with the tenets of WM programs; rather theyemerge and develop in ways completely unexpected by them. To perceive everything thathappens with ISW as diﬀerent versions of WM programs is to radically simplify the uttervitality surrounding large waste dumps. More seriously, such a narrow focus limits thepossibility of politicizing our current ways of dealing with ISW only to arguments for and
against WM, as a signiﬁcant part of the literature on the issue has done until now.
In order to challenge this state of aﬀairs this paper will focus on another set of practices
that commonly emerged while carrying out ﬁeldwork about waste-related practices deployedby the personnel of a Chilean copper mine: care. In social theory, care has increasingly beenseen as a key component of our collective being in the world, especially regarding human andnon-human interrelations. Problematizing its traditional (and usually derogatory) pre-modern and feminine connotations, several authors have started to see care as engulﬁng awide range of ways to relate in which a concern for the wellbeing of some other (human,
animal, material, conceptual, etc.) occupies a central position. What these eﬀorts have
showed us is that care can, and generally is, many things at once, some of them evenquite contradictory: care can be ethical but also practical; intimate but also global.
As the recent encounters between care theory and science and technology studies (STS)
have highlighted, an important part of the value of care lies in this multiplicity, in itssuggestion of ‘‘diﬀerent political commitments, inspiring a range of diﬀerent ethics andforms of intervention’’ (Martin et al., 2015: 634). Thus our starting point in studying careshould be the recognition that ‘‘there can be no singular vision of what care is or what it
might become’’ (Martin et al., 2015: 634). For this reason, instead of oﬀering a singular and
well-rounded deﬁnition of care, in this paper I am interested in exploring three versions thathave occupied particularly salient positions in the STS literature on the topic and that appearespecially apt to challenge some of the assumptions behind WM: care as tinkering practices,care as a form of aﬀective entanglement and care as a particular kind of power.
While doing research on the issue of patient choice, Annemarie Mol (2008) identiﬁed care
as a focal point for the understanding of the myriad of quotidian and humble practices anddiscourses through which patient’s health is dealt with in hospitals. In stark contrast with the
so-called logic of choice, and its managerial optimism, care ‘‘starts out from the ﬂeshiness
and fragility of life’’ (Mol, 2008: 11). Instead of always aiming for an ultimate solution, it isunderstood that ‘‘what characterizes good care is a calm, persistent but forgiving eﬀort toimprove the [problematic] situation ...or to keep this from deteriorating’’ (Mol, 2008: 20),
an eﬀort that she characterizes as ‘‘persistent tinkering in a world full of complexambivalence and shifting tensions’’ (Mol et al., 2010).
Care seen as tinkering practices appear as ‘‘a mode, a style, a way of working’’ (Mol et al.,
2010: 7) that is characterized as being non-linear, open-ended, recursive (‘‘Try, adjust, try
again’’, p. 20); never solely a transaction but a back and forth interaction. In them, the
cared-for entity is not a passive object but fully participant, along with a series of non-human entities, among them technologies. However (and in opposition to the ‘‘technicalﬁxes’’ that WM hold so dearly) technologies are understood as unruly entities that usuallyachieve ends that were never planned in the ﬁrst place. Given this, technologies are ‘‘not1534 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
asked to explain what the world is like, but asked to suggest what might be done. [They are]
made to answer practical questions’’ (Mol, 2008: 38). As a result care as tinkering is alwaysexperimental and tentative, reﬂexive of its own presence and limits. In care as tinkeringpractices, ‘‘nothing is taken to be entirely ﬁxed or entirely ﬂuid. Technologies, habits,
hopes, everything ...may have to be adjusted’’ (Mol, 2008: 53).
In her research on scientiﬁc practice, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa (2011, 2015; Latimer and
Puig de la Bellacasa, 2013) understands care as ‘‘an ethically and politically chargedpractice ....to care signiﬁes: an aﬀective state, a material vital doing, and an ethico-
political obligation’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011: 89). Then besides its practicalcomponent, care should be understood as an aﬀective entanglement with the world from
which political commitments emerge, especially when addressing the multiple ‘‘matters ofconcern’’ (Latour, 2004) attached to the entities we enter in contact with, a process from
which ethics emerge as a ‘‘the practical responsibility to take care of the fragile gathering
they constitute’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011: 90). In doing so we become aﬀected by them,they become matters of care to us. And because of this we have a commitment towards them,‘‘we are in obligation towards something that might have no power to enforce this obligation
upon us. In other words, actions of care are performed even if we are not forced to it by amoral order or policy’’ (Latimer and Puig de la Bellacasa, 2013: 170).
What is relevant to take into consideration is that caring is not only ethical but also
ontological. To become aﬀectively entangled with something is not only to valuate it in
certain way but also to enact it anew: ‘‘there is nothing before care that comes to be
determined by it: rather ontology has care hardwired in it’’ (Latimer and Puig de laBellacasa, 2013: 161). Such a process is not limited solely to enacting the object/s of ouraﬀect but several other entities, even the ones that we openly oppose or criticize. In thissense, and beyond developing attachments to particular things, ‘‘generating care meanscounting in participants and issues who have not managed or are not likely to succeed inarticulating their concerns, or modes of articulation’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011: 90), fromdisempowered communities to toxic components. To care is to enact a particular version of
the world, an ecumene populated by all kinds of entities, from the ones we feel most attached
to the ones we utterly despise.
Finally, there is caring as a particular form of power . The starting point here is the
recognition that caring ‘‘is political, messy and dirty, not an innocent category, and evenless so in technoscience’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015: 707). The fact that caring is practicaland, especially, ethico-aﬀective does not mean that it leads always to good, or more‘‘human,’’ results. After all, ‘‘care is a selective mode of attention: it circumscribes andcherishes some things, lives, or phenomena as its objects. In the process, it excludes
others’’ (Martin et al., 2015: 627). For this reason ‘‘we must be careful not to become
nostalgic for an idealised caring world: caring or being cared for is not necessarilyrewarding and comforting’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2012: 198–199). In evaluating care as aform of power it is key to keep in mind is that even ‘‘positive feelings, sympathy, and otherforms of attachment can work with and through the grain of hegemonic structures, ratherthan against them’’ (Murphy, 2015: 719).
This last point has been thoroughly explored by Miriam Ticktin (2011) in her study on
asylum policies in France. For her, care practices can also enact a particular ‘‘regime of
care,’’ a kind of government based on ‘‘a set of regulated discourses and practices grounded
on this moral imperative to relieve suﬀering’’ (p. 3). Such regimes can have positive eﬀects onthe aﬀected population but, quite commonly, they could also ‘‘work to displace possibilitiesfor larger forms of collective change, particularly for those most disenfranchised’’ (Ticktin,2011). When functioning in this second sense, the stabilization of care as the ultimate tenet ofUreta 1535
political action conﬁgures a kind of antipolitics that operates on two levels: ‘‘ﬁrst, those who
act in the name of the moral imperative generally claim to be apolitical—beyond or outsidepolitics; second, rather than remaining outside the system in their desire to not engage withpolitics, they work to reinforce the status quo, the established order’’ (p. 19).
Each one of these three versions of care oﬀer an alternative path to engage with the
complexities involved in dealing with ISW. First, care as tinkering practices forces us to
give a new centrality to all the humble maintenance and repair practices needed to keepthe infrastructural systems through which ISW is produced, mobilized and stored working.Although such practices have long been considered a component of WM, here the focus onthem is shifted. In contrast to top-down and triumphalist approaches, care as tinkeringforces us to acknowledge that in dealing with ISW ‘‘good’’ order is always precarious andtenuous, beset with ‘‘normal’’ accidents (Perrow, 1999) and, hence, needing continual
tinkering practices to be momentarily achieved. Such practices are characterized by their
intuitive and experimental character; always escaping (and challenging) WM set scripts andformal procedures. Finally, tinkering practices related to ISW are never solely focused ontechnical or material ﬁxes, but also on performing ‘‘social repair’’ (Henke, 2000), or thetinkering with the social relations that are intimately embedded in waste infrastructuresalong with technologies and other materials.
Secondly, the notion of care as an aﬀective entanglement with the world involves the
ethical command of taking into account all the entities involved in ISW, even the ones we
dislike or are opposed to. Such an approach is materialized, ﬁrst and foremost, in the dictum
that caring for waste necessarily means living with it , as Hird reminds us (2012, 2013).
Instead of WM’s ultimate aim of making waste disappear, caring for waste necessarilyrecognizes that waste is not going to go away, no matter how much we wanted it orplanned it. Therefore, caring for waste ‘‘requires knowledge and curiosity regarding theneeds of an ‘other’—human or not—and these become possible through relating, throughrefusing objectiﬁcation’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011: 98).
Finally, the notion of caring as a particular kind of power demands that those in charge of
dealing with ISW pay ‘‘attention and worry for those who can be harmed by an assemblage
but whose voices are less valued, as are their concerns and need for care’’ (Puig de laBellacasa, 2011: 91). Especially in a context of eﬀervescence about corporate socialresponsibility (CSR), the handling of ISW must be carried out in a reﬂexive fashion inorder to avoid enacting antipolitics in the name of care. To a certain degree this wouldmean to ‘‘unsettle’’ (Murphy, 2015) the practices enacted to care for waste, to explore their‘‘purposeful undoing and troubling of particular arrangements so that they might beacknowledged and remade in better, less violent, more livable ways.’’ (Murphy, 2015: 722).
All in all, caring for waste should not be seen as necessarily contrary to managing it but as
complementing some of its deﬁciencies to produce a more well-rounded way to deal with ourcontemporary wastes. In order to explore the challenges to our understanding of wastepractices that such an approach entails, the rest of the paper, based on a recentlycompleted ethnography,
1will explore the contrast between managing and caring for waste
through the analysis of some of the daily work practices of the WM department personnel ofEl Teniente, a large copper mine located in central Chile.
Not a single drop
El Teniente mine is located 100 km south of Santiago in the Andes Mountains. Its industrialoperation started in 1905 and it is currently owned by the state-owned companyCorporacio ´n del Cobre (CODELCO). It consists of more than 3000 km of tunnels and is1536 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
usually considered the largest subterranean mine in the world. It mainly produces reﬁned
copper (450,000 tons in 2013). Besides this valuable mineral there is something that ElTeniente produces in a much larger amount: waste.
Like in any other mine, mineral processing in El Teniente ‘‘is a segregative process by
which a relatively small amount of a valued substance is isolated from a much larger mass of
less valuable material’’ (Bridge, 2004: 210). A substantive part of this waste, usually reachingaround 50% of the whole material extracted, is technically known as ‘‘tailings’’ ( relaves or
colas in Spanish). Tailings are ‘‘a ﬁne-grained sediment water slurry ...consist[ing] of the
ground-up gangue from which most of the valuable mineral(s) or coal has been removed’’(Lottermoser, 2007: 153). Besides gangues, tailings include several chemical additives, someof them highly toxic, used to depurate the desired minerals. For this reason tailings areusually identiﬁed as the main environmental threat associated with mining operations,
especially given their huge volumes (in the case of El Teniente around 130,000 tons daily).
Their safe handling occupies a central place in the concerns of mining companies such asCODELCO. As in most mining operations worldwide this handling consists mainly oftransporting and storing tailings in very large sinks known as tailings dam. Usually suchdams are built to contain waste in an indeﬁnite way, and as such are the utmost example ofwhat Tarr’s (1996) has named ‘‘the ultimate sink.’’
Besides the complexities involved in storing them in a safe way, the management of
tailings in El Teniente has another layer of complexity: the location of its tailings dam.
More than a century of continual industrial operation has meant that every couple of
decades tailings ﬁll up the designated dam and a new one has to be devised, locatedfarther away from the mine. The current dam, known as Embalse Care ´n, was inaugurated
in 1987 in a mountainous zone known as Altos de Cantillana, located east of the mine acrossChile’s central valley, as can be seen in Figure 1. To bring the tailings there, it was necessaryto build an 87 km long canal (the green line), which includes several bridges and tunnels.Besides the geomechanic complexities involved in moving the tailings across such a distance,the canal passes through an area of intensive agricultural activity and several urban areas,
including the city of Rancagua, the regional capital with 240,000 inhabitants. Given this
situation, for most of the actors involved, the safe transport of tailings from the mine to
Figure 1. Outline of the tailings canal. Source: Google Maps and information provided by CODELCO
Chile.Ureta 1537
Care´n is much more critical than its storage and occupies the greater part of their daily
eﬀorts. In doing this, tailings and the infrastructures through which they travel from themine to Care ´n became a tightly coupled assemblage, usually taken as a singular entity.
The handling of El Teniente’s tailings is the responsibility of the Superintendencia de
Aguas y Relaves (Superintendence for Water and Tailings), SAR. Traditionally this task
meant removing tailings from the industrial area of El Teniente as fast (and cheaply) aspossible. This mandate remained more or less unchanged until April of 2006 when a massivespill occurred in the Care ´n area, with tailings heavily polluting 17 km of the river basin
downstream from the dam. This accident, which received ample coverage in the press andcaused demonstrations by residents of the area, besides costing CODELCO several millionin clean up and compensations, forced the mine to take seriously the issue of tailingsmanagement becoming properly ‘‘sustainable.’’
Given the SAR emphasis on transport above storage, for most of the involved actors the
sustainability mandate translated into one key dictum: that ‘‘ not a single drop ’’ of tailings
should fall from the canal during its transport from the mine to Care ´n, as several SAR
employees recalled during ﬁeldwork. If tailings remain inside the canal, if they reach Care ´n
without escaping along the way, then sustainability has been achieved, no matter whathappens with the tailings afterwards.
The adoption of this mandate was heralded by the arrival of a couple of young engineers
to head the SAR, replacing personnel who had been in charge for decades. This change
marked, using the terminology developed by Gille (2010), the shift from one waste regime
towards another. Such a change is visible in the words of Lautaro Rozas, one of theincoming heads of the division, when evaluating their current situation:
In general, and being myself quite critical, I believe we are now in a good standing, quite robust,
we are quite preoccupied about the issue [of having no spills], our costs have increased a lot as
well, before [the superintendence of] tailings spent a quarter of what it does today, it was just
people to deal with events, with holes, and nowadays it is maintenance which has triggered a nicestability, a nice reliability of the canal.
Making a distinction between terms that are usually taken as synonyms in the literature
(Graham and Thrift, 2007), Rozas understands repair and maintenance as two diﬀerent waysto deal with waste. On the one hand, repair is a waste regime focused mostly on dealing in aneﬃcient and fast way with occurring accidents and spills. On the other hand, maintenance isfocused mostly on avoiding such accidents through the continual surveillance of the system’scomponents, approaching the ideal model of a WM system.
Although both regimes have long cohabited in the daily action of SAR, the change in the
emphasis was not meaningless. In contrast to occurring events, possible ones constitute a
highly heterogeneous collective surrounded by high degrees of uncertainty. In the long runevery single component of a system can fail, so a maintenance regime necessarily has toexponentially expand the number of entities to be taken into account. Quite expectedly, thischange received resistance from several components of SAR, especially the so-called‘‘viejitos ’’ (old guys), the existing personnel of the superintendence. These employees, most
of them over forty years old and with several years (even decades) of experience in dealingwith tailings, were quite reluctant to adopt the new regime, as Juan Parra, another of the
incoming engineers, recalled.
For example today we ﬁnished checking one of the bridges, I have two canals on them, so every
month I divert [the tailings] through one of them to inspect the other. And they still question me
about why I do that. ‘‘But boss!’’ And they cannot understand that I make procedures just for1538 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
inspection, because they are accustomed to the ‘‘ cagazo ’’ [mess], not to making messes but to
repairing them. They are very committed and if they have to clean for three days without
sleeping, they stay for three days cleaning, shoveling, supporting, coordinating. But they aremore reactive, they are accustomed to that because that was the way they used to work.
What is key to note from Parra’s words is the contrast he makes between the maintenance
practices they have introduced and the ‘‘commitment’’ he notes on the part of the viejitos
regarding the former ways of dealing with waste, a perception that later in the interview heexplicitly connects with ‘‘caring:’’
Then my viejos really care about this thing, they love the canal, they are very caring, they have an
attachment. There used to be a small village for the people who operated the dams, and severalof them grew up there. They remember when they were little, that their fathers worked in the
dams, that they lived there, that they went inside the dams, that they were fooling around, that
they made a mess, they have an attachment.
We have a clear contrast here. On the one hand, we have traditional and eminently reactive
repair practices very much based on the viejitos ‘‘caring’’ for the canal. On the other there are
contemporary maintenance practices, based on prevention principles and planning, verymuch in the logic of WM. Tradition against modernity. Simple.
This contrast, however, was not so clear when studying the daily practices of safely
handling El Teniente’s tailings. In order to explore this point, I am going to present three
cases of care practices collected while following SAR personnel during their normal shifts.They were selected because each one of them materializes the kinds of care outlined above:as tinkering practices, as an aﬀective entanglement and as a form of political power.
Tinkering the bridge
To move several thousand hundreds tons of tailings from the mine to Care ´n daily is not a
small feat of engineering. As seen above, in doing so the tailings have to cross through
almost 90 km of highly uneven terrain including a large river and two mountain ranges, adensely populated area already crisscrossed by several other infrastructures. This movementwas greatly helped by the 2300 m of diﬀerence in elevation between the mine and Care ´n,
2
making it possible to move the tailings all the way using only the force of gravity. Quite
expectedly such continual movement causes a lot of wear on the canal’s components, aprocess that is greatly compounded by the chemical composition of tailings. Whenmoving from the mine to Care ´n, tailings are composed of around 50% water and the rest
ground-up gangue along with several reactives. In El Teniente’s case, this gangue was quite
sandy due to the geology of local soils, which had the kind of composition that mostcontributes to wear on hydraulic infrastructures due to being formed by relatively largeparticles.
The need to deal with the continual wear caused by tailings was quite evident one day in
November 2013 when I accompanied two viejitos , Lucas Zepeda and Carlos Albidon, on
their daily duties at one of the canal’s bridges, known as Cachapoal 1. Crossing over theCachapoal River, this bridge marks the border between the ‘‘ Zona alta ’’ (or High Zone) and
the ‘‘ Zona baja ’’ (or Low Zone) of the canal, with the steep ﬂank of a mountain on one side
and on the other a series of low-lying hills. Even though there are several hydraulic jumps
3
before it, tailings still enter the bridge at quite a high speed and with a signiﬁcant degree ofturbulence. For these reasons the individual components of Cachapoal 1 Bridge tend to wearquite rapidly and have to be maintained regularly. In order to help with this process, theUreta 1539
bridge was made with two canals on it, so each month tailings could be diverted to one of
them in order to check and maintain the other.
Although since the introduction of the new waste regime expert subcontractors have been
in charge of the whole process, there was one key task in which the experience of viejitos such
as Zepeda and Albidon was still valued: visually checking the inside of the canal looking for
components requiring maintenance. Although not formally stated, this practice was seen bythe subcontractors as a compulsory stage following a ﬁrst wave of repairs, as can be seen inthe following ﬁeldnotes.
We start crossing the bridge. Lucas and Carlos walk slowly, their eyes ﬁxed on the inside of the
canal, usually the ﬂoor. Every few meters they stop to check the rubber joints between themodules of the canal to see whether there are cracks or the material looks too worn, so as to
instruct the people from ...[the subcontractor] to repair or replace them. They also check
whether the rubber carpet that covers the inside of the canal presents any issue. A little bitfurther, in section 53, they detect a bump in the rubber carpet 30 centimeters in diameter. They
believe it formed because of heat. Then Lucas makes a circle around it on the ﬂoor with a piece
of chalk as a signal for the guy who will give the orders to the subcontractors to replace thissection. A little bit further they ﬁnd a rubber joint between two modules of the canal that is
partially broken, so it must be replaced. Another signal is made.
...At the other end of the bridge we meet with a subcontractor foreman, and return with him to the
other side, stopping from time to time to show him the places in which some repairs must be
made. We stop a little longer at the location of the bump, and a small discussion arises betweenLucas and the foreman about how repairs should be made, in particular about how much of thecarpet should be replaced. Then we continue and arrive to our starting point without further
stops.
All in all the process of checking the canal took more than two hours, mainly because of the
slow pace of Zepeda and Albidon while doing it. It was a diﬃcult task, in which someminimal visual signs (mostly invisible to me) like an uneven surface or a particular shape
made them stop and consider the need to do something about a particular joint or a section
of the plastic carpet covering the canal’s insides. In doing so they were clearly practicingwhat Grasseni has called ‘‘skilled vision’’ or a ‘‘a social activity, a proactive engagement withthe world, a realm of expertise that depends heavily on trained perception and on astructured environment’’ (Grasseni, 2011: 19).
In a similar way to the maintenance workers studied by Denis and Pontille (2015), such
practice goes beyond regular, ‘‘professional,’’ maintenance. Their skilled visions were at ‘‘thecenter of the care of things’’ (p. 356) and needed to ‘‘tinker’’ with the bridge’s failing
components. This is because its fragility was ‘‘not a clearly identiﬁable state of the world
with symptoms accessible and visible to everyone. The workers’ trained vision is needed tomake them appear’’ (Denis and Pontille, 2015). And this apparition depended on a lot offactors, not only technical issues but also ‘‘relevant aesthetic and moral sensibilities’’(Grasseni, 2004: 49) about how the bridge should be maintained in a ‘‘right’’ way, as wasdemonstrated in the argument they had with the subcontractors’ foreman about how bumpsshould be ﬁxed.
In their skilled vision and complaints we can see how maintenance work involves several
diﬀerent registers. At ﬁrst, there is maintenance as the conventional technical process done
by professional actors in accordance with pre-established and regular planning. However,maintenance would never achieve its aims if it rested solely on this approach. In practicesuch pre-set schemes ‘‘are rarely productive. Instead, local solutions to speciﬁc problemsneed to be worked out’’ (Mol et al., 2010: 13). On concrete pieces of infrastructure such as1540 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
Cachapoal 1 Bridge, being ‘‘professional’’ in a conventional, script-based way is never
enough to eﬀectively prevent things from deteriorating. The bridge needs other kinds ofmaintenance, especially that based on a constant tinkering that involves several non-formalcomponents, from previous experience to a particular attachment to an infrastructure,
‘‘loving the canal,’’ as Parra mentioned above, referring to the viejitos . For this reason
‘‘maintenance work is [also] a care practice ( ...) because it takes into account decay and
the vitality of matter ( ...), instead of denying or relegating these aspects to a secondary
dimension’’ (Denis and Pontille, 2015: 355). Then, instead of being solely a matter to bedevised through top-down, neat, interventions, maintenance practice ‘‘draws on a certainengagement with matter and objects, a bodily commitment, which is at the center of takingcare of things’’ (p. 356).
(Un)wasting dogs
Everyone at SAR seemed to have several stories concerning unexpected things falling intothe tailings canal, stories that usually came up shortly after our acquaintance. At ﬁrst mostof them involved human beings falling due to a variety of reasons and reappearing in badshape (almost drowned, bruised, even naked). Making a recollection there seemed to be nomore than three or four cases of people actually falling into the canal, but each one was toldto me in multiple diﬀerent versions, changing some parts here and there.
In contrast there were other kinds of things falling in that were much common: discarded
entities. However, and in contrast with the amusing tone of the ﬁrst stories, the attitudetowards them was quite critical, as a viejito called Pedro Alamos exempliﬁed one day in the
control room.
Then Pedro comments to me that ‘‘ people believe tailings are garbage ’’ and this is why they use
[the canal] as their dump. All kinds of things have been extracted from the canal, even a completeset of living room furniture, ﬁrst an armchair, then another, then a sofa and ﬁnally a stove, we
clean it and the people mess it up immediately, even dogs fall or are thrown in, pigs, chickens,
even a calf that arrived alive!
When speaking Alamos’ tone was quite annoyed, even exasperated. Tailings are not garbage.
Garbage is what people throw inside the canal, these unwanted animals and stuﬀ. Only whenthis garbage is put into the canal do tailings become waste in the form of a dump, anentanglement characterized not by WM’s intended clear demarcations but by ‘‘wastes thatdo not conform to a clear trajectory or network, but, rather, express more formless (andparasitical) geographies (Law and Mol, 2001)’’ (Gabrys, 2009: 667).
It is not strange, then, that to separate tailings from these discarded entities became a
central activity in the new waste regime enacted at SAR. At its core, the aim was to enforcethe existent buﬀer zone surrounding the canal through fencing and the introduction ofmultiple remote monitoring devices (a CCTV network, infrared sensors, etc.). In parallel,the top of the canal was covered with heavy concrete blocks in the areas nears populations.However, the success of these measures was only partial, in large part due to the ﬁnancialimpossibility of monitoring and covering the canal in its entirety. For this reason discardedthings still ended up inside the canal, forcing the SAR personnel to be constantly on the
lookout for them.
The most relevant node in this demarcation policy was called Quimavida station. Located
just one kilometer from the canal’s ﬁnal tunnel before reaching Care ´n, this station was the
last point at which the items thrown inside could be removed. For this reason one of the keytasks of the personnel stationed there was to constantly check the rake through which allUreta 1541
tailings had to cross at this point and in which all entities above 10 cm of diameter got stuck.
If something strange was detected, it had to be removed right away and thrown into a properdump located on the side of the station; tailings and discarded entities became diﬀerent kindsof waste at last.
However there were situations in which this process came to a halt: when the trapped
discarded item was alive. This aliveness challenges the notion of these items as merely refuseneeding to be disposed of, as recognized by a viejito called Marcos Sepulveda on our way to
Quimavida during a night shift in June 2014.
We have a lot of dogs [at Quimavida station] and we have to buy them food; we cannot just leave
them there. Sometimes we take them to the vet as well. Normally you leave them there and thedogs depart on their own; sometimes muleteers pass and as they pass with a lot of other dogs
they join them, but there are some that remain there for more than a year.
The aliveness of animals coming through the canal, mainly dogs, transformed them into
something that the SAR personnel ‘‘cannot just leave ...there.’’ On the contrary, they
became objects of care through a series of practices that usually took the following path.Firstly, and after being noticed, the dogs had to be removed alive from the ﬂow of tailings, acomplex operation involving the usage of several tools (and whose success was never fullyguaranteed). Once the dogs were extracted they must be carefully washed to remove tailingsfrom their bodies, a process in which they reemerge transformed from a uniform grey mass
into an animal who has a particular dog-like features: color, fur, etc. In some cases, as
Marcos recognizes, they even have to take them to the vet (especially if they haveswallowed tailings along the way). Finally, and if the dogs are well, the process becomes amatter of regularly caring for their wellbeing through the weekly collection of money amongseveral viejitos in order to buy them food.
Through all these practices the dogs are gradually (un)wasted, transformed from ‘‘matter
out of place’’ (Douglas, 1966) into a ‘‘matter of care’’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011), as theSAR personnel gradually became aﬀected by the dogs’ wellbeing. This aﬀection was
reciprocated by the dogs themselves, as I could witness that night when they started to
follow our truck barking when we were arriving to Quimavida, jumping happily aroundMarcos when he stepped out of it and then patiently waiting to be fed, as can be seen inFigure 2.
All in all, the arrangement between SAR personnel and the dogs in Quimavida constitutes
a particular kind of care that Latimer (2013) has called ‘‘being-alongside’’ or ‘‘a form ofrelations that preserves a sense of diﬀerence at the same time as it performs partialconnectedness and mutuality’’ (p. 99). These dogs were not pets. As Sepulveda
recognized, sooner or later they were going to suddenly disappear and no one seemed to
grieve over this, as they were replaced in due course by new dogs-as-waste arriving alongwith tailings. But while their relationship lasted they cared for each other, the SAR personnelthrough the practices described above, and the dogs reciprocating by accompanying themduring their long and lonely shifts, especially at night, and even playing a role in patrollingthe station against potential vandals.
4
However, the SAR bosses did not recognize caring for these dogs as valid, as Parra
conﬁded to me in one of our interviews:
Now we have much more sensors ...Naively we thought they [the viejitos ] were going to take
care of [the data produced by] them, but no. ...they say to me ‘this is too much,’ now they have
to concentrate on the little numbers and whether to make diversions [of tailings from the canal],but they are much more worried about the food for the dogs! In Quimavida, at the last barrier1542 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
[before Care ´n] some dogs have arrived and they have put them in a doghouse, now they are
worried all day about dog food!
He claims caring is a distraction, a problem, because it diverts the viejitos’ attention from
what they should be doing, from properly enacting the new waste regime in accordance withthe WM mandates, from overseeing up-to-date surveillance devices to making decisionsbased on data. In this arrangement the dogs seemed to have no place, and were only acuriosity to be reluctantly tolerated.
A good neighbor
However, and contrary to what would be expected based on the above cases, not all kinds ofcaring were considered irrelevant from the standpoint of the new waste regime. There wasone particular kind of care that everyone at SAR, even the new bosses, agreed was relevant:to care for the communities surrounding the canal. As expressed in a 2011 corporatemanifesto, ‘‘El Teniente’s sustainability commitment also involves communities located
nearby our facilities, taking care of the development and quality of life of their
inhabitants’’ (CODELCO, 2011: 71). In contrast to their former indiﬀerence, the newwaste regime included the aim of becoming ‘‘ un buen vecino ’’ (‘‘a good neighbor’’), as
claimed by CODELCO’s 2008 slogan for their new strategy towards communities in thewake of several damaging incidents, such as the tailings spill at Care ´n. In making this move,
Figure 2. The dogs of Quimavida waiting to be fed. Source: the author.Ureta 1543
CODELCO was taking part in the worldwide craze for CSR programs, a boom that has
been especially intense in the mining sector (Rajak, 2011).
In order to carry out this mandate El Teniente created a ‘‘Community Relations’’ unit
with the aim of working ‘‘in a close fashion with social organizations and establish[ing]
collaboration links with neighbors associations, local authorities and the community in
general’’ (CODELCO, 2011: 71). However, most SAR actors were quite critical of thisunit’s work, seeing its members as ‘‘people in a suit and tie’’ who do not really know howto deal eﬀectively with communities. For this reason they set up their own ‘‘communityrelations’’ unit, as told by Rozas:
I would not be able to tell you if half of [our work] ...but a lot of work is caused by people’s
actions—maybe they broke a gate, maybe a car crashed—this is the consequence of being rightin the middle of towns ...where we have people on both sides of the canal, and they are ones
who complain the most ...then there is a lot of that in the [ viejitos’ ] job, a role of homeowners, to
prevent people from causing damage, acting as the ﬁrst response to people’s demands. Therewere two viejitos who became famous after the earthquake [of February 2010] for the simple fact
that they brought them water and coordinated the work of the excavators to demolish [damaged]
houses, to clean up, so they are very well-known there, mainly in Don ˜ihue ...they are like really
our community management, in an informal and caring relationship, not in terms of thosecommunity dialogues or meetings with the mayor!
Clearly dismissing formal CSR activities (‘‘ ...those community dialogues and meetings with
the mayor!’’), the SAR has opted for an alternative approach based on the viejitos’ existent
ties with local communities. As mentioned above, most of them were born in the area and/orhave been working on the canal for several years, even decades, having as a result amassedan extensive knowledge of the local dynamics all along its route. Taking advantage of this,the bosses had empowered them to, in addition to their daily duties, take charge of dealingwith the community’s demands. Usually acting from a quite paternalistic standpoint (afterall their role is to be ‘‘homeowners’’ in each local area), they have enacted an idiosyncratic
version of the politics of care characteristic of CSR initiatives, even becoming minor
celebrities after the earthquake of February 2010.
At the center of this particular politics of care is Lucas Garces. In addition to being born
in the area, he has a naturally easygoing and friendly character, making it quite simple forhim to approach almost anyone in the canal’s surroundings, from authorities andlandowners to people living in the rough shantytowns near Rancagua. For these reasonshe was the obvious choice to carry out the new CSR approach, as he explained to me on oneof our excursions in July 2014.
I used to be in the operations [area] but they switched me to maintenance, and I have to oversee
the canal from Maitenes to Care ´n, I have a lot of diﬀerent tasks to do, and besides Don Lautaro
[Rozas] told me, ‘Listen man, you know this and that neighbor, the farmers, the neighborhoodassociations, so also oversee community issues there’, and I have no problem doing that ...we
don’t ﬁght with the neighbors any longer, instead we try to help them ...the thing is that before
they didn’t have the canal there, they just went to their houses, and the canal cut oﬀ all theirpassageways, so I have to understand them.
Clearly signaling how maintenance is always material and social (Henke, 2000), in his daily
routine Garces combines issues regarding the canal with ones emerging from the demands ofthe population surrounding it. In doing so, he recognizes the problems in the waycommunity issues were dealt with before and makes an eﬀort to always empathize withthe residents, given that the canal was introduced to an already populated area, not the1544 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
other way around. In doing so he has become the ultimate ‘‘good neighbor,’’ listening to
complaints and trying to provide solutions with the limited means available.
This work was not only recognized by his bosses, but also by the people living and/or
working in the vicinity of the canal, like Mario Peralta, whom we visited that day. Peralta
lives in the zone of Punta de Cortes 10 km west of Rancagua. Both his house and a little shop
he owns are located in the slim strip of land running between the canal and the localhighway, and for this reason he has constant contact with SAR personnel, especially withGarces, as he recalled.
I always tell the good and the bad things to Don Lucas [Garces] ...‘Don Lucas, listen, a Su ´per
Pollo truck crashed into the fence,’ ‘Don Lucas, listen, there is a guy who is going around insidethe [area enclosed] by the fence’ ...Then we have all these relationships with [SAR] ...we have
never had any problem with them since Don Lucas started coming here, not any longer, [he asks
me], ‘Is there any news?’ ‘No, no news.’ ‘Okay, ﬁne’ ...I have nothing to say against the way the
company has behaved so far, on the contrary, they help me, because they pass through my
backyard and let me know if there’s some ruﬃan there and I let them know if there’s someone
stealing their lampposts ...I’m glad to help them and glad that they sometimes help me to take
care [of my property], help me to take care.
As Peralta recounts, he has never had any problem with the canal or SAR personnel since
Garces started coming around. On the contrary the relationship between the two is quite
good, even close, as was demonstrated that day through their continual interchange of jokes,
the whole episode seeming to be a casual encounter of two good friends.
But in parallel to their mutual goodwill something else is being enacted: a particular kind
of political power where ‘‘increased policing ...takes place in the name of care and
compassion’’ (Ticktin, 2011: 21). As Peralta recollects, Garces is at his place constantly,asking if there is anything wrong, oﬀering solutions to past issues, a practice that isreciprocated by Peralta through informing SAR personnel as soon as there is an issueinvolving the canal. Due to their closeness and regular visits, Peralta would not even
think about dealing directly and/or through ways excluding Garces with issues regarding
the canal or CODELCO. As opposed to the disruptive practices that emerged in othersections of the canal, here Peralta is happy to leave everything in Garces’ hands,practically restraining from politicizing any issue further than letting him know what ishappening. In causing this eﬀect, Garces’ caring becomes an antipolitical force by‘‘render[ing] ...[its] receiver powerless or otherwise limit their power [by setting] ...up
conditions of indebtedness or obligation’’ (Martin et al., 2015: 627). In a way we couldconclude that through this form of politics local populations are entitled to be cared for
but not tocare. They are cared for in order for them not to care, so that they can leave all the
issues regarding the hundreds of thousands of tons of waste passing near their homes daily inthe hands of the experts.
Conclusions
From what we have seen here we can conclude that management and care cannot be easilydisentangled. Although WM aims for purity and clear demarcation, in practice care practices
are located at the very center of managerial projects such as the ones carried out by SAR. In
particular, in this paper we have seen caring as entangled with WM in three main ways.
The ﬁrst way is as tinkering practices needed to maintain an infrastructure such as the
Cachapoal 1 Bridge. This tinkering, resting on the skilled vision of the viejitos , takes into
consideration several non-formal forms of knowledge and devices, some of them derivedUreta 1545
from their personal attachment to the infrastructure, allowing the actors involved to better
deal with the wear caused by the constant passing of tailings. Second, care practices emergedin the eﬀorts made for the wellbeing of the dogs thrown into the canal. Through theiraﬀective entanglements, even going against their bosses’ wishes, not only were the dogs
eﬀectively (un)wasted but also the division between tailings and other refuse was achieved.
Finally, in the case of the informal CSR practices carried out by actors such as Garces wecould see care emerging as a form of power that is located at the center of contemporaryWM schemes. Through its antipolitical eﬀects this caring allowed the members of SAR toreinforce the security of the movement of tailings through populated areas, especiallyprotecting against the possibility of conscious interventions by individuals.
Such entanglements show us the dangers inherent in assuming WM as the only (albeit
frequently failed) way to deal with ISW, a notion that could easily lead to considering care
practices as belonging to truly diﬀerent practical, even ontological, realms. This stark
contrast blurs our capacity to understand large waste infrastructures like the one seenhere, given the inherent hybrid nature of the practices involved in maintaining it, usuallymoving back and forth from managing to caring. Also, and probably more worryingly,implicit in such a contrast is the choice of one set of practices above the other. Currently,and given the high demand for managerial interventions, care practices are the ones withmore to lose as they could easily become invisible, strengthening managerial fantasies oftotal rational control.
In the case of ISW this invisibility emerges as especially dangerous. As has been noted by
Hird, dealing in a safe and sustainable way with waste ‘‘requires ethical as well astechnological innovation’’ (2013: 119). It requires both technical innovations locatedinside the managerial frame as much as care practices, especially when things do not goas expected (as usually happens). However, if we perform a review of current literature onthe issue of the sustainable dealing with waste we can note quite clearly an almost exclusivefocus on managerial ﬁxes.
With the growing presence of technological mediations it becomes easier ‘‘not to care’’
about what is happening to industrial waste such as tailings, because if anything happens,
alarms would ring and some expert mechanism or actor would take responsibility. Thisexclusive reliance on such ﬁxes makes it quite easy, even for the involved personnel, to‘‘fall back to sleep’’ (Hird et al., 2014) and simply forget that we have certainresponsibilities for waste, that if we are to advance towards more sustainable wasteregimes we are forced to care about our wastes.
In arguing about the need to consider and value care practices in our current waste
regimes, I am not making an argument for the need to return to a more ‘‘human’’ or
inherently good handling of waste. As seen in the last case, care practices are not
necessarily better or more ethical than managerial ones. In reality caring is always ‘‘wet,emotional, messy’’ (Haraway, 2011: 102), taking into consideration some entities but alwaysat the cost of leaving others behind (Martin et al., 2015: 627). And even when considered, theconsequence for the entities being cared for could be less than positive, with the enactment ofantipolitical arrangements that could greatly reduce their freedom.
Forgetting their supposed inherent goodness, care practices are central to enacting waste
regimes because, and in clear contrast with managerial optimism, they force us to ‘‘give up
dreams of perfection or control, but keep on trying’’ (Mol, 2008: 93). Contrary to the usual
WM emphasis on ready-made ﬁnal solutions, from this perspective ‘‘there will be noperfection, but there can be ongoing and eﬀective care that stays alert to many sorts ofhistory’’ (Haraway, 2011: 107). When we care about waste we do not allow it to becameinvisible nor do we easily delegate it to automatic systems and experts, because we are1546 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
conscious of their continual failings in controlling the multiple and unconventional agencies
of waste. Thus care is relevant not because of its goodness but because once we start seeingan issue as a ‘‘matter of care’’ we cannot neglect it and neither can we simply embrace it ormerely feel attached to it. We must see it critically, continually ‘‘unsettling’’ (Murphy, 2015)
the practices through which we (do not) care for waste. Then we can conclude by stating a
simple dictum: if we are not willing to care for waste, it should not be produced at all. Theonly possible alternative to not caring is inexistence.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/orpublication of this article: This research was carried out with funding from Chile s National Councilfor Science and Technology, CONICYT, (grant number 1130156).
Notes
1. The fieldwork on which this paper is based was carried out by the author between October 2013 and
March 2015 and consisted mainly of participant observation and in-depth interviews with SARpersonnel. All the names have been changed to protect the anonymity of the actors involved.
2. The mine is at 2500 m MSL and Care ´n is at 200 m MSL.
3. Technical devices whose main purpose in hydraulic infrastructures is to help dissipate the excess
energy in flowing liquids.
4. Both Marcos and Richard, a subcontractor I met there another night, recalled a situation that
occurred some weeks ago in which some people wanted to enter the station at night and the dogsdrove them out, barking furiously.
References
Alvesson M and Willmott H (2012) Making Sense of Management: A Critical Introduction . London: Sage.
Anonymous (2014) Editorial board/aims and scope. Waste Management 34(3), IFC, p. 1.
Bavington D (2011) Managed Annihilation: An Unnatural History of the Newfoundland Cod Collapse .
Toronto: UBC Press.
Bridge G (2004) CONTESTED TERRAIN: Mining and the environment. Annual Review of
Environmental Resources 29: 205–259.
Corporacio ´n del Cobre (CODELCO) (2011) El Teniente: Minerı ´a del Futuro . Santiago: Corporacio ´n
del Cobre.
Davies A (2008) The Geographies of Garbage Governance Interventions, Interactions and Outcomes .
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Denis J and Pontille D (2015) Material ordering and the care of things. Science, Technology & Human
Values 40(3): 338–367.
Douglas M (1966) Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo . London:
Routledge.
Gabrys J (2009) Sink: The dirt of systems. Environment & Planning D: Society and Space 27: 666–681.
Gille Z (2007) From the Cult of Waste to the Trash Heap of History: The Politics of Waste in Socialist
and Postsocialist Hungary . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Gille Z (2010) Actor networks, modes of production, and waste regimes: Reassembling the macro-
social. Environment & Planning A 42: 1049–1064.Ureta 1547
Giusti L (2009) A review of waste management practices and their impact on human health. Waste
Management 29(8): 2227–2239.
Graham S and Thrift N (2007) Out of order; understanding repair and maintenance. Theory, Culture &
Society 24(3): 1–25.
Grasseni C (2004) Skilled vision. An apprenticeship in breeding aesthetics. Social Anthropology 12(1):
41–55.
Grasseni C (2011) Skilled visions: Toward and ecology of visual inscriptions. In: Banks M and Ruby J
(eds) Made to be seen: Perspectives on the History of Visual Anthropology . Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Gregson N and Crang M (2010) Materiality and waste: Inorganic vitality in a networked world.
Environment and Planning A 42(5): 1026–1032.
Haraway D (2011) Speculative fabulations for technoculture’s generations: Taking care of unexpected
country. Australian Humanities Review 50: 95–118.
Henke C (2000) The mechanics of workplace order: Toward a sociology of repair. Berkeley Journal of
Sociology 44: 55–81.
Hird MJ (2012) Knowing waste: Towards an inhuman epistemology. Social Epistemology 26(3–4):
453–469.
Hird MJ (2013) Waste, landﬁlls, and an environmental ethic of vulnerability. Ethics & the Environment
18(1): 105–124.
Hird MJ, Lougheed S, Rowe RK, et al. (2014) Making waste management public (or falling back to
sleep). Social Studies of Science 44(3): 441–465.
Latimer J (2013) Being alongside: Rethinking relations amongst diﬀerent kinds. Theory, Culture &
Society 30(7–8): 77–104.
Latimer J and Puig de la Bellacasa M (2013) Re-thinking the ethical: Everyday shifts of care in
biogerontology. In: Priaulx N and Wrigley A (eds) Ethics, Law and Society , Volume V. London:
Ashgate.
Latour B (2004) Why has critique run out of steam? From matters of fact to matters of concern.
Critical Inquiry 30(2): 225–248.
Liboiron M (2013) Modern waste as strategy. Lo Squaderno: Explorations in Space and Society 29:
9–12.
Lottermoser B (2007) Mine Wastes: Characterization, Treatment, Environmental Impacts . Berlin:
Springer.
Martin A, Myers N and Viseu A (2015) The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies of Science
45(5): 625–641.
Mol A (2008) The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . London: Routledge.
Mol A, Moser I and Pols J (eds) (2010) Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms .
Bielefeld: transcript Verlag.
Murphy M (2015) Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health
practices. Social Studies of Science 45(5): 717–737.
Perrow C (1999) Normal Accidents: Living With High-risk Technologies . Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2011) Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social
Studies of Science 41(1): 85–106.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2012) Nothing comes without its world: thinking with care. The Sociological
Review 60(2): 197–216.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientiﬁc futurity and the pace of care.
Social Studies of Science 45(5): 691–716.
Rajak D (2011) In Good Company: An Anatomy of Corporate Social Responsibility . Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Tarr J (1996) The Search for the Ultimate Sink: Urban Pollution in Historical Perspective . Akron, OH:
University of Akron Press.
Ticktin M (2011) Casualties of Care: Immigration and the Politics of Humanitarianism in France . Los
Angeles: University of California Press.1548 Environment and Planning A 48(8)
