Caring for water in Northern
Peru: On fragile infrastructures
and the diverse work involvedin irrigation
Carolina Domínguez-Guzmán
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Andres Verzijl
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Utrecht University, the Netherlands
Margreet Zwarteveen
IHE-Delft, the Netherlands
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Annemarie Mol
University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Abstract
The term control used to be central to the scholarship on modern water management. More
recently, however, scholars have remarked that the world is too unstable and capricious for control
to ever fully succeed. They propose that technologically facilitating water to ﬂow depends instead
oncare. Building on this, we here propose that holding on to a single catch-all theoretical concept,
even if it is ‘care ’, does not suf ﬁce. Instead, analytical terms are better adapted –and re-adapted to
local speci ﬁcities. T o exemplify this, we here present the case of the Huallabamba, a canal that
makes horticulture possible in the arid valley of Motupe on the Paci ﬁc coast of northern Peru.
In this case, while ‘control ’was hard to ﬁnd, ‘care ’took different forms: the tinkering that compen-
sates for the not-quite-modern character of the infrastructures; the adaptive managerial style
necessary given the absence of information; the watchful, hands-on cuidar of the men who walk
along the canal high up in the Andes, repairing what is broken, cautious lest they anger the spirits;
the listening to and singing for water in the catchment area; and the activism that resists the invasion
of mining companies. This open-ended list is not meant to travel as a theoretical grid, but rather to
Corresponding author:
Annemarie Mol, Department of Anthropology, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.Email: a.mol@uva.nlArticle
EPE: Nature and Space
2022, Vol. 5(4) 2153 –2171
© The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/25148486211052216
journals.sagepub.com/home/ene

inspire others to propose locally salient analytical terms to explore the sites and situations in
which they are involved.
Keywords
Water, care, analytic terms, speci ﬁcities, peru
Introduction
This article presents versions of and variants on care that we disentangle from an ethnographic
inquiry into a large-scale irrigation scheme in the desert of Northern Peru. Here, water keeps
ﬂowing downstream to the catchment area of the i rrigation system, even if all around there
are mismatches, cracks and threats. The term ‘water control ’,w i d e l yu s e db ye n g i n e e r sa s
well as social scientists writing about irrigati on, was not particularly salient in this situation.
As an alternative, we considered writing about ‘water care ’, in line with earlier work that
insists that water realities are too unstable a nd too capricious to ever be fully controlled.
However, as the four of us, in of ﬁces and on walks in the Netherlands, talked about the ﬁeld-
notes that Carolina had made in Peru, we started to doubt the salience of drawing diverse ways
of working and living with water together under a single cluster-term.1Yes, ‘care’is suitably
suggestive of adaptability, but the speci ﬁcities of its diverse versions merit further exploration.
Elevating a single term, any term, to the status of a solid, transportable theoretical concept, risks
hiding such speci ﬁcities –and some of them (marginal, harder to grasp for outsiders) more than
others (calling out for attention, written about befo re). This article, then, has two aims. For one,
it presents versions of water care that we learned about in Peru ’s Motupe region; and then two,
it advocates a scholarly style in which analyt ical terms are not imposed on ethnographic real-
ities but disentangled from them.
For some considerable time the term ‘water control ’has served as a boundary concept, a term
that allows people from different disciplines, including engineers, development scholars, and
their critics, to talk to each other about infrastructural variants, organizational formats, user partici-
pation, system performance, equitable distribution, and other concerns relevant to irrigation.
Originally, the term comes from engineering, where ‘water control ’depended ﬁrst and foremost
on huge irrigation infrastructures –storage reservoirs, lined canals, weirs –that all have to be
designed and built for an irrigation system to take shape. It then came to include the recurring mea-
surements that ensure the scheduling of water delivery in accordance with the water requirements ofvarious crops.
2Subsequently, social scientists pointed out that there is more to irrigation than tech-
nical provisions of a hydrological and/or agricultural kind. For one, as irrigation infrastructures are
huge and costly, building them also depends on the ability to mobilize money. In addition, for irri-gation schemes to work, appropriate social institutions are required.
3Someone has to take on board
the necessary operational tasks and the long-term maintenance –but who? Here, water bureaucra-
cies were inclined to hold on to their ‘administrative control ’, while researchers from the social
sciences showed that it usually makes more sense to shift ‘practical control ’from public agencies
to farmers.4
The social scientists who tried to convince development and cooperation organizations that irri-
gation warrants suitable managerial processes beyond material infrastructures, discussed how to
best achieve and share such societal ‘control ’. Other social scientists sought to widen the
meaning of the term and pointed out that infrastructures and institutions are pervaded by relations
of power that impact where water does and doesn ’tﬂow. To engineering and managerial2154 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
preoccupations with ef ﬁciency and productivity, they added political concerns to do with justice
and equity.5And then there were those who proposed that improving ‘water control ’is
hardly tantamount to improving life. They doubted the wonders of development and were sus-picious of the modernization that it promised. Som e of these even discarded all large irrigation
schemes as imperialist projects
6. In their writings the term ‘water control ’is still used, but this
time round it does not point to an ideal that is hard to achieve, but to a neo-colonial scandal. In
line with this, they understood the faltering of ‘control ’as a consequence of the savvy resist-
ance of smallholders and landless farmers, rev olting against being controlled along with chan-
nelled water.7Hence, as it ﬁgured in entirely different propositions, the term ‘control ’fuzzily
got transformed and took on different meanings, but it became ever more engrained as a bound-
ary concept.
At the same time, elsewhere, the salience of this term was being questioned. This was notably the
case in the ﬁeld of science and technology studies, where scholars blurred the contrast between
modern technology (designed to offer control) and the adaptive bricolage (making-do with whatis to hand) that used to be attributed to premodern Others. Those involved showed that even the
most impressive technological systems were put together in non-linear, tinkering, bricolage-kind
of way.
8Added to this, once in use technologies are not necessarily immutable. When they
travel, or when they are being used in intractable places, they may turn out to be surprisingly adapt-
able instead.9What is more, however seemingly durable the materials that technologies are made
of, give or take a few years, or a few decades, and their fragility shows. As technological systemstend to crumble in unpredictable ways, their ongoing functioning depends on persistent mainten-
ance and repeated repair.
10The materials involved are likewise capricious. Take water: it may
ﬂow forcefully, churn, seep through cracks: how could thatever be fully controlled?
As the term ‘control ’was called into question, other terms were sought. Out of feminist schol-
arship came the suggestion of importing the term ‘care’. While bricolage had designated the pre-
modern working style of others-elsewhere, care referred to the working style of others-within,
notably women. It was unusual to link care to technology as earlier theorists had de ﬁned care
as affective and hence standing in contrast to the functional style of engineering. The feminist
scholars involved pointed out that in typical care work –mothering, nursing, doctoring –emo-
tional attuning and technical skills go together11. Building on this feminist work, in the
present project we started out by writing about ‘water care ’. However, we quickly became appre-
hensive. We did not want propose ‘water care ’as the next catch-all-term, similarly salient every-
where. We did not want to suggest a successor boundary concept, allowing for communication
across disciplines concerned with irrigation. Un iversalising theories, or so it seemed to us,
unduly inherit a generalizing approach from engineering. As engineers moved their schemesacross the globe, irrigation infrastructures are quite similar from one place to the next. In line
with this, the models, guidelines developed by m anagerially oriented social scientists were
also meant to ensure proper water control anywhere.
12Critical social scientists, in their turn,
took ‘power ’,‘development ’and‘irrigation ’to be more or less the same, and similarly suscep-
tible to criticism, from one site to the next. This shared dream of a global reach, be it of concrete
or concepts, troubled us.13
Would it be possible, we started to wonder, to let go of the propensity to hold on to big container
terms, tasked with absorbing contradictory concerns? Would it be possible to do academic work
and yet hold on to the speci ﬁcities of a particular situation, a particular site? The present article
gives this a try. This means that our case is not simply an empirical example, an instantiation of
something of which it is the case. Instead, it forms a source of theoretical inspiration. Below, we
present stories about the Huallabamba, a canal that captures water high up in the Andes fromstreams that, left to themselves, would ﬂow out into the Amazon. Each of these stories inspires
us to outline another version of, or another variant on, ‘water care ’. The investigation of anotherDomínguez-Guzmán 2155
canal, even a proximate one, redirecting water from the Andes into another valley somewhere along
the coast of Peru, would have resulted in different stories, and inspired other analytical speci ﬁca-
tions. Hence, if we hold on to the term ‘care’here, it is not to come to a conclusion about what
this entails, but rather to invite a conversation. We present an open-ended list of care-s in the
hope that others, drawing on other cases from elsewhere, will add to it and propose further theor-
etical terms for addressing what is at stake in their particular site and situation.14
Here is a short overview of what follows. First, we talk about the tinkering invested in the overall
infrastructure of the Huallabamba canal and the Motupe irrigation system. These infrastructures do
not live up to the modernist ideal: there is no storage reservoir, only part of the system is canalised,
not all canals are lined and time has worn out the canal banks. Repair is repeatedly called for andtinkering is ongoing. Second, we present the adaptive ways of working we came across in the newly
built of ﬁce of the Motupe Water User Association (WUA). Here, well-educated engineers are in
charge of system operation, but their information systems falter so their managerial control isleaky. This means that the engineers are not able to steer the vigilantes working high up in the
mountains, but, crucially, have to trust them. The adaptive care of the engineers, then, includes
letting go . The vigilantes , in their turn, open and close gates to regulate intake, clear out debris
from the canal bed and try to repair whatever is broken. But they do more than just repairing.
They themselves call their work cuidar, which suggest watchfulness –and they insist that they,
in their turn, are being watched over by greater powers round about them, the mountains, thespirits .Do these care? An open question. Higher up in the Andes, ﬁnally, is the catchment area
of the canal, an amazingly beautiful landscape. A local elder who, after some resistance, was
willing to speak to us had no dreams of control. Instead, he talked about listening to, and
dancing for, the water. And, that too, about the urgency of activism against the invasion of
mining companies.
Huallabamba and the promise of irrigation
In the Peruvian coastal region of Motupe farmers do not just grow their own food and crops for local
markets, but also large amounts of fruit and vegetables for export –mostly mangos, avocados and
grapes.15This is an impressive achievement if only because Motupe is a desert where most years
there is hardly any rainfall. Fields are irrigated with water that comes down from the Andes. The
main river feeding into the irrigation system is the Chiñama, that in its turn receives water fromthe Huallabamba canal. The Huallabamba is a trans-basin conversion canal. It is located at
roughly 2.500 meters above sea level and receives water from the Totoras and Tambillo streams,
tributaries of the Amazon, that it transfers from the Atlantic basin into the Paci ﬁc basin through
22 km of mostly concrete infrastructure.
The Totoras and Tambillo streams rise in the paramo . This is a 140.000 hectares area of wetland
with bogs, wetland vegetation, pastures, lakes and centuries old shrubs and undergrowth that storewater. Even during the dry months from April to November, when there is no rain, water still ﬂows
into the Totoras and the Tambillo, thanks to the ability of the paramo vegetation to ‘harvest ’water
droplets from high altitude mist and clouds.
16Hence, the Huallabamba canal directs water to
Motupe all year round. At least it has done so far. Population growth, pine tree cultivation and
ever more grandiose mining ambitions put the paramo at risk –and Motupe agriculture along
with it.
The Huallabamba canal is located in the municipality of Cañaris. Cañaris people were resettled
here as part of the Inca mitimae strategy to pacify local chiefdoms. Throughout colonial and repub-
lican times their descendants have largely maintained their communal organization, traditions anddistinct Quechua dialect.
16During much of the 20thcentury roughly half of Cañaris was adminis-
tered by a large hacienda; while the rest of Cañaris was the territory of the indigenous community of2156 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
San Juan de Cañaris. After the Agricultural Reform of 1968, the hacienda lands were transferred to
former peons who formed their own community, Tupac Amaru de Cañaris. Today, Cañaris has
around 13.000 inhabitants who live in 106 hamlets divided over the two communities. During
the construction of the canal, in the 1930s, an encampment to accommodate civil engineers andsupervisors was built in the Tupac Amaru hamlet of El Sauce, the midway point of the
Huallabamba canal. It was used several times again during later repair projects in 1964 and
2008. The population of the hamlet also expanded due to the construction of the canal, asworkers were offered a piece of land to cultivate. Some of them stayed on and married into one
of the local families
The construction of the Huallabamba canal fell between two periods of massive water develop-
ment in Peru. In the 1920s the irrigated area on the coast was seriously extended, while later, from
the second half of the 1940s onwards, large public works were built that combined irrigation and
hydropower. In that later period, American engineers were ﬂown into Lima to instruct their
Peruvian colleagues on multi-purpose water development schemes.
17They brought with them
the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) model, a notoriously high modern project (and for this
reason used as a case in Seeing like a State , James Scott ’s book from 1998). In Peru, the adoption
of this model led to the formation of a large state water bureaucracy for the planning, regulation and
administration of water supplies. The Huallabamba plans, however, were made just a bit earlier, for
water to be used by the large haciendas of the valley. If the TVA model is taken to set modern stan-dards, the Huallabamba system does not quite meet these.
18For instance, it lacks a regulating res-
ervoir. Instead, it was designed as a deep trapezoid conveyance canal that assembles water from
incoming streams depending on availability. It diverts this water through a concrete canal bedand drops it into the Chiñama river down below. There are gates that may be opened to prevent
overﬂow, but there is no way to add extra water if supplies are scarce. Overall, it is dif ﬁcult to regu-
late water quantities going into the canal. Beyond the canal, water runs on a porous riverbed until itreaches the irrigation command area; while along the way it is used by people living along the edge
of the river –hence there are additional, variable losses. And even before water enters the canal, it
may locally have been diverted elsewhere, as the Andeans living in the catchment area have a longtradition of manipulating and transforming small streams and ﬂows in ways that are immeasurable
and invisible for, and largely misunderstood by, the engineers and bureaucrats working from and in
the coastal regions.
19
The measurement devices that were installed in the Huallabamba canal and near the beginning of
the command area are both broken. They no longer allow the engineers in the valley to know how
much water to expect. The years have taken their toll in other ways as well. There are cracks in theconcrete. In subsequent repair projects, different styles of brickwork and concrete lining have been
used. Altogether, the canal bed looks like a patchwork of cement, stones and stucco, interspersed
with unlined, vegetation covered, stretches. Worse, a landslide in 2008 took out a 50 meters longsection of the canal. Contractors hired by the regional government did not manage to restore the
stretch. Two years in a row, harvests of annual crops failed, while some farmers, to avoid losing
seed and effort, simply did not sow. Fortunately, the seasonal rains saved at least most of theorchard trees. Exasperated even so, several Motupe leaders mobilized material and machinery to
create a temporary aqueduct, made from giant plastic tubing. The maximum volume that may
safely pass this tube is 1,3 m
3per second. Hence, since 2010, of the 8 cubic meters of its
maximum original capacity, hardly more than 1 m3of water falls into the Chiñama river every
second. In this way, around 800 litres reach the command area.20
It is thanks to the Huallabamba canal that there is export agriculture in Motupe, but the term
‘water control ’doesn ’t quite ﬁt what is going on here. For a start, the original design of the
canal already demanded adaptive usage. Now, what with the broken measurement devices, crum-
bling canal walls and temporary plastic tubing ‘control ’is even more elusive. The materials thatDomínguez-Guzmán 2157
technologies are made of, tend to fall apart.21This they may do slowly, over the years, or speedily,
in an immediate response to excessive rain or landslides. Maintenance and repair are required to
ensure ongoing functionality. This means that, if the Huallabamba canal makes the irrigation of
Motupe valley possible, this is only true to the extent that it receives care. If ‘water control ’is a
matter of calculation and predictability, such ‘water care ’is adaptive and responsive. This, then,
is the ﬁrst version of ‘water care ’that we learned about when studying the case of the
Huallabamba canal. It takes the form of tinkering. It involves concrete, stones, tubes, rocks (andso on) as well as muscles, tools, skills, money, efforts (and so on). A lot of it has happened in
the past, but if it hadn ’t happened –if nothing had been built, if no repairs had been done, no
plastic pipe had been inserted and so on –there would, here, now, be no water ﬂowing out into
the Motupe valley. A lot of it, likewise, is happening now, day by day, ongoing. Without repair
and maintenance there is no irrigation.
22
Engineers managing the system
It is 8 o ’clock at the WUA of ﬁce in Motupe. A daily gathering of farmers is hanging out near the
front door. Some are talking and laughing, others seem more anxious. They are there because theyneed to ask for extra-ordinary water turns; to register their water rights; or to warn about the need to
repair broken bits of canal in and around their ﬁelds. Some farmers just come to meet and catch up
with each other and to talk about matters to do with farming and water in the wider Motupe region.The new building of the WUA is made of concrete and still under construction. It is more spacious
than the old mudbrick one and has several of ﬁces, though not all of these are furnished. In the
middle there is a meeting hall where water users gather to make decisions collectively. Untilrecently, irrigation was mostly presided over by local elites, which on the Northern coast of Peru
meant farmers with large landholdings. Now, at least in Motupe, at least on paper, all water
users are allowed to vote and be elected. Leading positions, however, tend to be ﬁlled by people
who do not just own farming land, but have also been trained as engineers. This is also the case
in Motupe. Here, ingeniero Fernandez, the president of the board of the WUA is an agricultural
engineer. Supported by several staff members, he also works as technical manager in charge ofoperations. The previous general manager of the WUA, ingeniero Santos, an agricultural engineer
as well, presides over the Local Water Authority (LWA) of Motupe; a subsidiary of the national
government agency in charge of water rights administration. The LWA of ﬁce is located at the
same crossroad as the new WUA of ﬁce.
The scheduling of irrigation turns depends on a combination of rights and operational practical-
ities. Like most others in Peru, the Motupe irrigation system does not provide a continuous ﬂow to
its users. Instead, water is rotated among secondary canals. There is a ﬁxed water rotation among
the subsidiary Irrigator Commissions (see Figure 1) and each sector receives water for several days
a month, depending on the size of their command area. However, since the water volume of theHuallabamba canal ﬂuctuates and monthly operational ﬂows are established with a wide margin
of uncertainty, there is often additional water to distribute. The Irrigator Commissions ’schedulers
debate with the president and board of the WUA on how to do this in monthly meetings at whichingeniero Santos is present as well, for this is quite a task. There is a lot to reckon with. Farmers
typically use only a part of their land for fruit orchards, sow another part with a seasonal crop,
and leave a third uncultivated. They change what and how much they cultivate from one year toanother, and in allocating water, schedulers take this into account. They consider the surface
area to be irrigated, the crops growing in the various ﬁelds and their stage in growth. Beyond
legally accorded water rights, they also keep an eye on potential crop failure (this is what someof the farmers at the door come to warn about). When surpluses of water are large enough, even
people without water rights are granted an irrigation turn. In the process of scheduling many2158 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
calculations are made, but added to this, there are negotiations, complaints, pressures, friendships,
empathy. There is a deeply felt sense that all involved should somehow be able to feed their
families.
Elsewhere, we have described how this distributive system affects those most marginal to it. We
did so by following the case of Cecilia, an excedente or water surplus irrigator on community land
who, even though she has no water rights , was still able to vocally point to her water needs . Using
the“cracks in the system ”as well as the benevolence of the engineers allowed her to sustain her
family by growing maize and mango.23Here, we will not reiterate this, but just note that allocating
water is not a matter of straightforward managerial control (of water), but rather involves a greatdeal of responsive care (for families, neighbours and the plants they grow). That said, rather
than going downstream to tertiary canals at ﬁeld level, we now move upstream. In order to allocate
water judiciously, the engineers of the WUA and the LWA would want to know how much waterthere is to allocate. But it isn ’t easy to ﬁgure out the quantities that arrive at the intake of the Motupe
irrigation system. This is a real problem. Ingeniero Fernandez of the WUA explains, somewhat
embarrassed, that they cannot make precise calculations due to the damaged state of the canal.Water is measured at the midway point of canal Huallabamba but: “the water loss after the meas-
uring weir can be huge. More may be lost than passed on to the valley ”. The measurement device in
the valley, situated near a place called Marripon that is located above the main intake structure ofthe Motupe Irrigation System, is broken. Hence, measurements are done by eye, phoned in, and
noted down in the notebook of the WUA secretary.
There are also dif ﬁculties in assessing the water volumes reaching the canal. Obviously, the
engineers cannot control rainfall high up in the Andes, but neither can they predict this. The fore-
casts of SENAMHI, the National Weather Service and Hydrology of Peru, are too vague says inge-
niero Fernandez: “There is one SENAMHI meteorological station in Cueva Blanca [a village in the
Figure 1. Motupe-Huallabamba irrigation system (drawing by the authors).Domínguez-Guzmán 2159
Paramo, the catchment area], you know. But the information is not trustworthy because there are no
personnel and the machines are not calibrated. The information we get is general: for the Northern
mountains of Peru, the probability that it will rain on Monday, Tuesday, etc, is this or that. But rain-
fall can be so speci ﬁc, it can be raining in Rumichaca and not in Totoras. ”The engineers only get
knowledge about rainfall from the vigilantes, the men who are employed by the WUA to monitor
the canal. In this way the information ﬂows in the wrong direction. The vigilantes, after all, are sup-
posed to be on the receiving end and taking orders from the engineers. According to ingeniero
Fernandez, the work of the vigilantes is most relevant during the rainy season, from December
to March. “We have identi ﬁed four to ﬁve critical points along the Huallabamba canal. They
[the vigilantes ] have to inspect these critical points, and then they report to us. Then we can
make decisions here. In times of the rainy season we have to communicate daily, already at six
in the morning we are calling. How much has it rained? Are there clouds? Do you think it is
going to rain or not? How much water is going through the measuring weir? Depending onwhether the water is too high or too low, we tell them [the vigilantes ] to discharge the water
into the gully below the canal, or to let it pass to Motupe. ”
This, then, is the of ﬁcial story: the decisions are made by the engineers in the of ﬁce.“After they
report about rainfall, the vigilantes wait for instructions on what to do. ”However, in practice this is
not what happens. Engineer Fernandez admits as much in the very same conversation. The problem,
he says, is that most of the time the engineers cannot phone the vigilantes; when the latter are
working close to the canal there is no phone signal. To communicate, the vigilantes have to
climb to the top of a nearby mountain. Hence, in practice, they are necessarily the ones to call to
the of ﬁce. Most days, they only get to this after their work, once they have done what urgently
needed doing. They have closed some gates and opened others with an eye on protecting the infra-
structure and assuring the water ﬂow to Motupe. They may also have attended to the collapse of a
canal bank or taken out a rock obstructing the ﬂow. They try to ﬁx problems when they encounter
them. If the vigilantes were to wait for instructions, gates would be opened or closed far too late and
problems would only exacerbate. Hence, whatever the of ﬁcial story, whatever the protocol, the
engineers don ’t engage in ‘water control ’. Instead, they ensure that the vigilantes are paid and
entrust them with the triple task of reporting on the weather, adapting the canal ’s intake and, to
the best of their abilities, keeping the water ﬂowing. They care, the engineers do, by being
modest rather than trying to unhelpfully impose orders. They care by letting go , by accepting
the limited reach of the technologies that were meant to accord them with power and oversight.
They care by bestowing trust on the vigilantes who are supposed to be their subordinates.
24
Walking the trail
‘Nosotros cuidamos el agua ’, Amancio told us, which here we translate as: “We take care of the
water. ”The wein point included Amancio (a bilingual speaker of Quechua and Spanish) and
Emilio (who prefers to speak Quechua while we don ’t, so this doesn ’t make for easy conversation
–hence we (that is to say, in this case, Carolina and Andres) mostly hung out with Amancio).
Emilio and Amancio are vigilantes : it is their job to monitor the Huallabamba canal. They were
both born and raised in El Sauce, the hamlet that, as mentioned above, is located halfway along
the Huallabamba canal. Houses here are made of mudbrick walls with roofs of corrugated iron
or straw. There has been rain-fed agriculture in this region for a long time; on gentle slopesbetween steep cliffs, farmers grow wheat, alfalfa and broad beans. Now, they also irrigate their
plots with water from Huallabamba canal. They are not allowed to open gates or divert the
stream using force. However, sometimes they may open one of the canal ’s over ﬂow-gates, pro ﬁt
from seepage losses or use a hose. As a vigilante , Amancio is in a position to take decisions
about such local water use. He wants to help his neighbours, but seeks ‘to keep things in2160 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
balance ’. Enough water should ﬂow down to Motupe: “It is important to be respected in your work.
I always tell them [the villagers] if you want water, just ask me. I will give it, even if it means I lose
my job. I know you have a family to take care of. I know that, like me, you are poor. But there has to
be respect. I am in charge of taking care of this water. This water is really precious to our brothers inMotupe. Even you [villagers] have work because of this water. ”And indeed, the villagers go down
to the valley to earn some cash in the harvest season and pick fruit for the downstream brothers (a
term Amancio learned to use in his church).
Next to supervising local water use, Amancio and Emilio have to ensure that the canal doesn ’t
overﬂow. As ingeniero Fernandez already told us, this is especially important in the rainy season. In
times of heavy rainfall the water from the incoming streams, combined with overland ﬂow along its
course, may exceed the capacity of the canal. This is all the more pressing since, after the 2008 land-
slide, as we mentioned above, one part of the canal has been replaced with plastic tubes that carry
only a fraction of what the canal was designed to do. When too much water comes in, Amancio andEmilio open the appropriate over ﬂow-gates to divert water into a gully. Sometimes it rains in the
headwaters of one stream and not in those of the other. The vigilantes know which stretches are
in critical condition, which over ﬂow-gates are operational and which others have been cemented
shut as they were so dilapidated that they were losing water permanently. In times of need, they
can reach Rumichaca (the Quechua word for stone bridge; the starting point of the canal) in
little more than an hour and a half. Both the Tambillo and Totoras streams are tricky: they mayturn into torrents that damage the intake structures and cannot be crossed. When this happens,
Amancio and Emilio get trapped between the two streams and have to stay out overnight.
However stormy the weather, they rest on the canal bank or sleep in nearby caves.
All year long, Amancio and Emilio walk the canal .This usually means that one of them walks
upstream, and the other downstream –eleven kilometres out, before they each turn to walk back
home again. As Amancio put it when we walked with him: “We walk the entire course of the
canal. Especially when if it rains, it is a twenty-four-hour job. The entire day, the entire night. ”
Amancio takes a ﬂashlight and a radio along. He walks on yankis, rubber sandals that people in
the Andes make out of discarded car tires. He considers these to be more comfortable than theclosed shoes that he puts on when he goes to the city.
25It helps that he enjoys walking in the
area, he tells. But the slopes are steep. And with the rains, the rocks get slippery and any
misstep can be your last Added to this, the runoff and debris coming from uphill, if not quicklydiverted, may ﬂood the canal very fast Over ﬂows risk destabilizing the canal ’s embankments.
As fast water carries debris along, Amancio and Emilio have to regularly remove stones and
rocks that might obstruct the water ﬂow. Sometimes there are small landslides to clear away. If
need be, the men descend into the canal, stand on its bottom, and remove accumulated obstructions
with their bare hands. If rocks are too large, they use a pickaxe to break them into smaller pieces.
Sometimes they have to ask other men from the village to give them a hand. Occasionally, they usedynamite to blow up rocks that are too hard to break with an axe. It is dangerous to work with dyna-
mite, it requires watchfulness. But Amancio doesn ’t mind, he says, he is proud to be entrusted with
the dynamite. And if he does not help the water to keep ﬂowing, who else will?
Caring for the water of the Huallabamba canal involves a lot of hard physical work. It always has
done. Amancio knows this from his parents. His father worked as a labourer in the construction of
the canal, his mother brought food to the work parties. She did this again during later rehabilitationprojects. During the construction, the supervisors hired musicians to play. The workers were led
down the slope with a rope around their waste to chisel the canal out of the rock. “You were
hung in mid-air, ”Amancio laughs, “but with your music ”. However, the hard work wasn ’t
always fun. When walking the canal with Amancio, we stopped at a rundown wooden cross,
erected in memory of a friend who, during the second canal-wide rehabilitation project, got hit
by a small stone avalanche. The material needed for the repairs was quarried, using dynamite,Domínguez-Guzmán 2161
from rocky slopes above the canal. This was easier than hauling rocks over many kilometres along
the canal course, but riskier. Amancio witnessed the tragedy: “We told him to move away, yelled
that there would be an explosion but José did not want to listen. He thought he was protected
because he was using a helmet, the rocks killed him immediately. There he was, like one ofthose chickens before dying. No one dared to pick up the body. Later I came with one of my broth-
ers and we carried him back to the encampment in a wheelbarrow. ”Some years before this accident,
Amancio lost his little sister to the canal. This happened during the rainy season, while his sister wascollecting fodder in a ﬁeld on the high bank of the canal, near El Sauce. “Suddenly, the water
increased while she was dragging a bunch of pasture that fell into the canal and pulled her in. ”
Her body was found ﬁve kilometres downstream by people from the neighbouring village. She
was wedged between the canal wall and a large rock that had fallen into the canal bed as a
result of those same rains.
The canal takes lives.
26And it affects people in other ways as well. Amancio tells that sometimes
people lose their minds or suffer from seizures after they drink water directly from the canal, or after
they enter nearby caves, or crawl into certain holes on the canal embankment. “One man, Valentin
Locero, appeared from the gully and drank from the canal. He then crouched and never came up. Hehad an attack, an epilepsy, and he died. That mountain, at kilometre seven. It is known to be bad. ”
Amancio speci ﬁes the location of each mountain, cave and hole along the canal in metric terms.
Even when talking about mysterious events. “At kilometer-thirteen-plus-650 there are a few
holes. One man, Laureano Zapata, who had worked on and off on the canal for 45 years got
into one of them ”. These holes, to the best of our knowledge, are formed when seepage or under-
ground run-off erodes the soil below the canal bed. We saw a few of them around kilometre 8: theyhad a small opening, just large enough for a human body to pass through, but after that there was a
chamber at least 4 meters deep that widened as it went deeper –like the shape of a drop of water.
Once inside this hole: “Laureano found something like a village, with streets and everything. He
was scared and afraid of not being able to leave the place. At the very moment he managed to
get out, water came gushing in. He lost his sanity. When we talked we had to yell into his ear …
many shamans have come to see him. Nobody could help him. ”
The Huallabamba canal has more than three dimensions. Cuidar el agua also includes relating to
spirits.
27Bad, like those of the mountain at kilometre seven, or good, as the case may be. At some
point, Amancio points to a face-like shape in the canal wall. He approaches it carefully and with awarm smile points out its features: “Look, those are his two eyes, there is the nose and the mouth. ”
He gently wipes the stone face with a piece of cloth. “I always clean it, ”he says, “He looks like he is
trying to come out of the stone …he is our patrón …and he is watching you ”.Patrón translates into
English as ‘boss’. This word was formerly used for the hacienda owners –who would humiliate the
workers, make them eat from dirty plates, rape girls or allow the workers in their hacienda to do so.
But the face is not thatkind of patrón, it rather resembles a village notable, who asks for respect and
obedience, but who, in his turn, provides support and protection to those under his guard. With such
apatrón one has a two-way relation: unequal but balanced. Hence, the face in the canal benevo-
lently watches over those who care for the canal. And Amancio, while vigilant and respectful, isnot afraid of walking the canal. The patrón is there to guard him and, what is more, he has been
baptised: “Others in the village, they tell me I am crazy, or that I work with the devil. I think
that the devil shakes when he sees me. I work here every day. I do my job. I have to take careof the canal! ”Or, as he puts it in Spanish: Tengo que cuidarle!
Thecuidar that Amancio and Emilio engage in is not of a motherly kind. Instead, it belongs to a
masculine care tradition: it includes opening heavy gates, sleeping in caves, braving bad weather,handling rocks, using dynamite and scaring off the devil. The water ﬂows that are being cared-for
are not ‘dependents ’, they are not made small in the process. Instead, they are to be respected. They
are forceful, they take lives. But they also give life. This turns the cuidar at hand into a matter of2162 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
reciprocity. At some point Amancio picks up a loose piece of concrete and crumbles it in his hand to
indicate its decay. He says: “This canal gives so much and now look at it. ”Diverting water to
Motupe, the Huallabamba canal allows an entire valley full of farmers to grow food for their
own tables and fruit for export. It even gives villagers from high up in the mountains jobs in thelowland in times of harvest Amancio walks the canal every day –doing his very best to allow
the water to keep on ﬂowing. He wonders what will happen after he stops, sooner, maybe later.
Next year, he says, he turns 65. His concern is that the canal that gives so much, while needy, isnot properly cared for.
Cuidar may be translated into English as care, and is similar in that both are unusual words to use
in relation to hydraulic infrastructures such as Huallabamba canal. However, as Amancio talksabout it, cuidar for Huallabamba is more than just managing and mending a hydraulic infrastructure
that turns water into a resource. Amancio and Emilio offer practical care that the canal reciprocates,
but beyond that, their cuidar involves an emotional attachment to the canal as a living companion.
28
While the engineers downstream mention vigilar andmonitorear when they talk about the work of
thevigilantes , Amancio ’scuidar , like that of fellow Cañariacos , is a matter of what in Quechua is
called uyway –areciprocal nurturing. Uyway tends to be translated into Spanish as crianza. In line
with that translation, researchers used to connect it to raising cattle. But people in the Andes use
uyway more widely: in connection to persons, notably children, and in connection to seeds and
other living beings, a category that includes water. It is a mutual relationship in which nurturingcalls for being nurtured in return.
29Overall, then, it might make sense to list cuidar as a kind of
care here –an observant, respectful, watchful kind of care. But the words do not quite ﬁt. The
world that is called up when Amancio talks about his ’and Emilio ’scuidar for the canal, is not
so easy to translate into English. For this is a world in which canals, damaged or dangerous, are
invariably needy. Mutuality rather than ef ﬁciency stands out as the ideal here. And in this world
water is not a resource, but a lively creature, giving as well as taking.30
Listen how the water speaks
Ingeniero Fernandez, the president of the Local WUA, told us about Silvano. Silvano, he said,
listens to water, he can hear it speak. No, the engineer wasn ’t making fun of indigenous people
and their superstitions. He actually hoped to have a chance to participate in next year ’s harvest cere-
monies in Cañaris. A few years ago, he had been up there, invited by local community leaders, whohad astutely contacted the water authorities on the coast as potential allies in their resistance to plans
to expand mining. After all, mining high up in the mountains contaminates all water, not just that
relevant to the communities living in the Cañaris, but also that of the Huallabamba canal. (Miningmesses up things in other ways as well: the landslide of 2008 mentioned above was due to the con-
struction of roads meant to allow for mining operations.) And yes, they had become allies.
Ingeniero Fernandez had travelled to Cañaris to defend the case of the community against explor-
ation for possible copper mining. His tone was still respectful. “Silvano says that he listens to water.
I don ’t know how he does it, but there is something about the wind that announces rain; about dif-
ferent kinds of wind that tell him what the weather will be in the days to come. There is also some-thing about the sounds of the waves hitting the edges of the lake, the whistle of winds through the
grasses, streams falling on stones. Hearing all this, he seems to be able to predict things. ”Having
said that, ingeniero Fernandez prudently put himself at a distance from these abilities by turning
them into a part of Silvano ’s‘culture ’:“Or at least that is the belief. ”
We (here this is, once again, Carolina and Andres) spoke with Silvano when he was visiting his
son, who works in an agro-export company processing mangos. After having said hello to us,Silvano started to talk in Quechua –knowing fully well we would not understand him. He
spoke Quechua for ﬁfteen minutes –making the point of our ignorance and the asymmetryDomínguez-Guzmán 2163
between the languages of those who had lived longest in the land and the language of the invaders,
the colonisers.31Then he came round and shifted to Spanish –remaining formal. Asked about the
paramo, he named the three lakes in his area. Then he started to list the Quechua names of the plants
growing there. These plants, he said, provide us with natural remedies, and they all have names, justlike you have a name. When asked about the waters feeding the Huallabamba canal, Silvano used
his body to explain their course (see Figure 2).
He started with his hand. “Up there, there are springs, from which little by little a small river is
formed. These small rivers are united by mountains. Like this hand. ”He raises his hand to make a
mountain. His head stands for a bigger mountain, the mountain where he lives, Cueva Blanca. From
there a river ﬂows (his arm) and meets the other mountain (his hand) and new rivers are formed (he
gestures below his torso). In this way, Silvano continues, three rivers are formed, Cueva Blanca,
Totoras and Cerro Solautana. These are the rivers that feed canal Huallabamba. The water
comes from above 4500 −5000 meters, from these three lakes (again his head). All this water
goes to the Huallabamba canal. And then Silvano adds: “The origin of these streams are the
lakes, these are not made by humans, only God left us these lakes …this no-one can make. ”
There is no ‘water control ’high up in the Andes: humans cannot make water. But if God pro-
vides the water we crave, humans still need to contribute. “When the river makes a sound, ”Silvano
says, “it says: cuídame (take care of me). When a river ﬂows from above into a pond, and when you
listen to this falling water, it says: cuídame . If you take care of me, I will give you life. If you take
care of me, I will be here all your life. But if you do not take care of me, I will stop ﬂowing. I will
soon come to an end. ”This, then, is what humans need to contribute: they need to give water care.
32
That is to say, once again we provisionally use the English word ‘care’here, but the cuidar Silvano
refers to does not quite ﬁt with English notions of ‘care’. It takes the shape of community rituals, of
festivities. People sing, play and dance for the water.33“We dance in a great circle, ”Silvano
explains. When asked what they sing, Silvano answers in Quechua. A friend later translated thisinto Spanish for us as De todo, de todo cuidemos al agua como a nuestra madre . Of which in
English we might make: “Out of everything, everything, we care for water as for our mother. ”
As words uttered in one tongue are translated twice into another there are losses, things transform.
Figure 2. Signalling silvano (drawing by authors).2164 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
Hence, we do not claim to faithfully represent Silvano ’s reality, there are equivocations all around.
But if cuidar is not quite care, it certainly isn ’tcontrol .
“The rains and the rivers, ”Silvano says, “are not quiet, not silent. They cry and scream, like us,
like human beings. ”And then he starts to complain about the people from the plains. Literate people
and politicians. “They trample the paramo and act as if they do not want to know it. They are deaf
for what it says. Those who are supposed to know about the paramo are the most ignorant. The
most unwilling to listen. But we, we who do not know how to write, how to read, we respect
theparamo . Care for it. ”Silvano insists that while he cannot read or write, he knows how to
listen to water in lakes, among rocks, in the wind. Politicians cannot do this, they don ’t live up
in the Andes. “They don ’t know reality. They are more interested in making money. But we are
not going to eat money, right? We are farmers. We live from our maca ,oca,maschka (Andean
tubers) cebada ,trigo (barley, wheat) quinua ,tauri ,chocho (Andean grains). This is our food,
meant for our subsistence. What will happen when there is no water? Who will suffer most? ”
Without water nothing will grow. Silvano goes on to explain: “The lakes are mothers of the
rivers. If a human being does not have parents, how he can be born? The lake is the mother ofthe river. The grasslands are its bed. The vegetation is its blanket, so that the river can sleep,
right? There we go: if you don ’t have a blanket how can you sleep? It is as if you left me alone
on my own, I wouldn ’t be able to live. ”At this point Silvano shifts to Quechua again and starts
singing.
After a while he adds in Spanish (here translated to English): “The sound that a river makes when
speaking is ch’aq. You have to listen carefully. Not everyone can listen when the water is talking,
you have to feel it here, ”and he touches his chest “What can people on the coast listen to, eh? Water
that is pumped around does not talk. Maybe people who come from somewhere else might learn tolisten to the water, if they concentrated, but for us, it goes quickly. We sit down on a rock next to a
stream and listen to how the water speaks. And the winds as well, all the winds of the mountains in
the watersheds. Have you not heard how the grasses whistle? The wind announces when it is goingto rain. It announces when it is going to rain or when it is not going to rain. When the wind is strong
it starts dancing: tssttt tstttttt. ”Silvano imitates the sounds of the wind on the paramo . The high
areas where the water that irrigates the Motupe valley comes from. But if high up in the Andescaring for water includes listening, singing and dancing, it also includes activism. Spreading
stones on the road so that the trucks of the mining companies cannot pass them. Gathering in meet-
ings to vote against mining permits
–even if the companies try to bribe voters; even if they offer
jobs in a setting where jobs are extremely scarce. It involves contacting water authorities down in
the valley who, although literate, might still be allies.34Ask them to come up and add their weight.
Asingeniero Fernandez put it: “The mayor of Cañaris is a friend, he always invites me to his meet-
ings, we have good relations ”.
Conclusion
In irrigation studies the term ‘water control ’used to ﬁgure as a boundary concept that allows people
from different backgrounds to talk to each other. More recently, the salience of this term has been
questioned. The term ‘control ’, after all, presupposes a world that allows for control. A world that,
with the aid of appropriate technologies and proper management, may be tamed. But where to ﬁnd
such a world? To underscore that in practice things tend to be fragile and processes non-linear,
various scholars have suggested that it makes more sense to set ‘control ’aside as a hubristic illusion
and to talk, rather, of ‘care’. This would be more adaptive, include mending, be not just skilful but
also affective. Building on that suggestion, we have here sought to take a further step. For the termDomínguez-Guzmán 2165
‘care’, in its turn, risks being turned into a catch-all concept, an analytical tool tasked as suitable
everywhere. Hence, we here ventured to let go of ‘care’, or rather used the term loosely, as the
heading for a heterogeneous list of versions of, or variants on ‘care’. For the efforts that we encoun-
tered in our ethnographic inquiries along the Huallabamba canal, took seriously diverse and inter-estingly speci ﬁc shapes. We wanted to attune ourselves –and you, reader –to these speci ﬁcities and
learn from them. We hoped to contribute to an academic style in which local realities are not
covered up by globally travelling terms, but are allowed, instead, to inspire new ways of thinking.
35
The list of care-s that ensued started with the demanding work done to build the canal and ﬁti ti n
the Andean landscape. This work involved a lot of adaptable tinkering : with the variable intake,
with differences in height to negotiate, with the effects of disasters due to dynamite, weather orroad construction. Where large concrete structures crumbled, patching these up remedied the pro-
blems –but never fully, only so far. The care of the engineers working in the of ﬁce of the WUA,
was different. While it was their task to regulate water ﬂows, they had come to trust the vigilantes
who were of ﬁcially their subordinates. They did not just trust them with practical tasks, but also
with making decisions. Their care, then, took the form of supporting thevigilantes while letting
go of control. For the viligantes in their turn, as they worked on the steep and slippery borders
of the canal, care involved hours and hours of hard physical work. They had to watch out and
guard themselves against dangers like falling rocks and currents that sweep people away. But
their watchful cuidar reached further. Their world was not just damaged and dangerous, it also con-
tained spirits –some benevolent, others not. They had to be vigilant, as the devil himself might be
out to take away their sanity. In the paramo, ﬁnally, there is wisdom in listening to water –to how it
speaks. Here, care is widened to involve singing and dancing. And, crucially, it requires counteringshort-sighted politicians, who are only interested in money. This care is long term, respectful of the
all too easily ‘forgotten ’fact that all life depends on water, not just today and tomorrow, but for
ever.
These variants of care cannot be reduced to one another, they move in different directions. They
engage with different materials, or immaterials . They have different time frames, payment schemes,
return gifts. Different hopes are invested in them. Ingeniero Fernandez cannot listen to water.
Silvano needs allies in ﬁghting mining companies. Amancio and Emilio live with layered memories
tied to every spot along the canal. The original designers of the canal are long since dead, and yet, so
far, water still moves downstream to irrigate agricultural ﬁelds. The speci ﬁcities of all these variants
of care deserve to be recognised on their own terms, because if they are not attended to, cherished,
differentiated, there is a risk that they will disappear. There is no need to add them up into a gen-
eralizable model. Why should scholarly work take the shape of forceful attempts to make termsstrong and stable enough to travel everywhere? We do not seek to make school with a catch-all
term. What would be grand, instead, is if our stories were to help widen the conceptual and the pol-
itical space to shape human-canal relations more attentively, better attuned to local speci ﬁcities,
more caringly. What would be grand is if youwere inspired and emboldened by them to attend
to the speci ﬁcities of the sites and situations relevant to your research.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Eating Bodies team at Amsterdam University for their comments and support and to
John Law for encouragements and edits. Furthermore, we thank friends and collaborators in Motupe, fortheir cooperation and contribution to our work.
Author ’s note
Andres Verzijl, IHE-Delft, the Netherlands.2166 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publi-
cation of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publica-
tion of this article: this works was supported by the European Research Council [AdG09 Nr. 249397] and the
Dutch Research Council [W01.65.338.00].
Notes
1. To specify the contribution of the various authors: Carolina Domínguez-Guzmán was the main researcher
on this project; she did parts of her ﬁeldwork jointly with Andres Verzijl; and was supervised by Margreet
Zwarteveen and Annemarie Mol. We all, in different combinations, discussed the points we sought tomake and participated in drafting and re-re-drafting the article.
2. See Mollinga (1998) for the suggestion that water control turned into a boundary concept; Plusquellec,
Burt, and Wolter (1994) for a seminal text; and Vos (2002) for an example of quantitative water
control on the Peruvian North Coast.
3. Some examples of early writings on irrigation are Harriss (1977), Wade (1979), Cernea and Meinzen-Dick
(1994), Coward (1980). Ostrom (1990 and 1992) also belong to this social engineering tradition.
4. Research into farmer managed irrigation systems challenged the assumption that centralized control
worked best (see Meinzen-Dick 1997). For the ﬁnding that practical work shifted ‘down ’, while
political-administrative control remained with water bureaucracies or ‘hydrocracies ’, see Wester et al.
(2009), Senanayke et al. (2015)b55.
5. For examples of this, see Zwarteveen and Boelens (2014), Joy et al. (2014), Hoogesteger and Verzijl
(2015).
6. Prominent examples here are Worster (1992) and Gilmartin (1994).7. For examples of this approach, see Boelens et al. (2010), Meehan (2014), Swyngedouw (2015), Barnes
(2017), Boelens et al. (2017).
8. For the way these terms were framed in science and technology studies, see e.g. Latour, 1996; Law, 2002;
and for examples of tinkering and bricolage in the domain of water technologies, see for example:
Benouniche, Zwarteveen and Kuper (2014) Kuper, Benouniche, Naouri and Zwarteveen (2017),Kemerink-Seyoum, Chitata, Domínguez Guzmán, Novoa-Sanchez and Zwarteveen (2019).
9. A case in point is the adaptable bushpump analysed in De Laet & Mol (2000).
10. The argument that irrigation depends on enduring maintenance already appeared in Sijbrandy and van der
Zaag (1993). And that this not just goes for irrigation, but also for the supply of drinking water, has more
recently been convincingly shown in Anand (2015, 2020).
11. For work in which technology and care are not contrasted, but related, see for instance Pols (2006); Mol
(2008); Mol, Moser and Pols (2010); and Puig de la Bellacasa (2015).
12. There were heated debates about how to best measure performance and compare irrigation systems across
different times and places and about the appropriate de ﬁnitions, categorizations and classi ﬁcations (see
Chambers, 1980; Coward et al., 1980).
13. For an inspiring example of a text that is infused by a similar concern to not repeat the globalising efforts of
the techno-science under study, but de ﬂect it, see Yates-Doerr (2015).
14. For a collection of articles defending the use of other terms, time and again –with authors using other
terms from the languages spoken in their ﬁeld that are (in most cases) also their ﬁrst languages –see
Mol and Law (2020).
15. We have explored the production and export of fruits and vegetables in relation to irrigation elsewhere.
See Dominguez Guzman et al. (2017).
16. For further details of this intricate process, see Buytaert et al., 2006.Domínguez-Guzmán 2167
17. For this and for the water issues implied, see Boelens (2015).
18. This is described in Hidalgo (2004).19. As per the analysis of Linton (2010).20. This is a long standing, recurring theme in the social science literature on Andean waters. See e.g., Lynch
(1988), Gelles (2000). Vera Delgado and Zwarteveen (2008), Verzijl and Guerrero (2013).
21. That things are fragile is not just relevant to irrigation systems, but also to other infrastructures. For the
case of Peruvian roads, see Knox and Harvey (2011).
22. At this point it is possible to say (with Jackson, 2014) that it makes sense to shift from taking the world to
be tameable and predictable, to ‘broken world thinking ’in which the world is always presumed to consist
of fragile entities that fall apart, so that care is needed to work against this. However, as we will see below,repair is just one of the variants of care relevant to the Huallabamba and the irrigation for which it allows.
23. The case of Huallabamba is speci ﬁc–and other cases reveal different speci ﬁcities. However, it is relevant
to not here that there is also tinkering care going on in allegedly modern sites. For a case in the UK, see
Buser and Boyer (2020) and for one in France, see Denis and Pontille (2015).
24. See Domínguez-Guzmán (2019), where, like in the present article, we turn against the use of ‘big words ’
and overarching narratives.
25. On the dif ﬁculties and rewards of letting go in situations where control is unhelpful, with the case of con-
stipation as an example of over-controlling, see Abrahamsson (2014).
26. Taking people ’s‘culture ’seriously involves both listening to their stories and taking heed of the practices
in which they are involved –such as here, walking on yankis and clearing out boulders (see also Radcliffe
and Laurie, 2006).
27. This means that the world evoked here is not simply ‘broken ’–and failing to function according to human
design. In their capriciousness, technologies like canals may also be dangerous: rather than failing to beeffective, they may have effects that are threatening to humans. For the shift between ‘effective ’and
‘having many effects ’, see Mol (2006, 2008).
28. Added to potentially being broken and/or dangerous, the canal here appears to also be animated. Similar
things occur elsewhere: far more often than was earlier registered by social scientists invested in modern/pre-modern distinctions, caring for infrastructures goes together with caring for spirits (for good examples,see Harvey and Knox, 2012; Ishii, 2017).
29. For the argument that in analysing what is relevant in the Peruvian mountain, social scientists and activists
should not stick to a lowland understanding of ‘politics ’, but pay heed to what matters to people living in
the Andes, including what she calls earth beings , see: De la Cadena (2015).
30. When alpaca herders in other parts of the Andes cleverly manipulate and make minute adaptations to water
ﬂows in order to improve their wetlands, this is also considered as uyway . Another speci ﬁc form of tinker-
ing care (see Verzijl 2020; see also ABA, 2014; Allen, 2019).
31. That water should not necessarily be apprehended as a ‘resource ’emerges from a lot of in-depth ethno-
graphic studies of human-water relations (see for example the cases in Hastrup and Hastrup 2015).
32. Disputes about land and language often intertwine (see for example Ferguson and Weaselboy, 2020;
Østmo and Law, 2018). The second of these articles, while discussing lakes, presents the Sámi term
jávredik šun–that might be translated into English as care –but also in other ways. The concern of its
authors, like ours, is with keeping ‘care’
ﬂuid and avoiding ﬁxing it into a standardized concept.
33. The ‘water ’at stake for Silvano, is not quite the ‘resource ’that water is in the irrigation canals. Just as there
are different kinds of ‘care’, there are different relevant versions of ‘water ’(see also Yates et al., 2017).
34. To bailar / dancing in point has little to do with choreographed or stylized movements. Silvano mentions
dancing in a circle. For another example of dancing with water, where villagers are jumping around in a
playful way while following water down from the mountain, see Verzijl (2020).
35. For a comparison between Andean and lowland politics, though in the case of Bolivia, see Perreault, and
Green (2013).
36. It is enough of a problem that to so called ‘international ’academic conversations are conducted in English,
and that a lot gets lost in translations from other tongues. For a series of attempts to attune to a larger rangeof speci ﬁcities by thinking with non-English terms, see again the contributions to Mol and Law (2020);2168 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
and, about the difference between chupar orcomer mangos and other fruits in Bahia Van de Port and Mol
(2015).
References
ABA (2014) Yakumama. Madre Agua: Lagunas de Lluvia y Comunidades Criadores del Agua. Lima:
Asociación Bartolomé Aripaylla.
Abrahamsson S (2014) An actor network analysis of constipation and agency: Shit happens. Subjectivity 7(2):
111–130.
Allen CJ (2019) Righting imbalance: Striving for well-being in the Andes. Science, Religion and Culture 6(1):
6–14.
Anand N (2015) Leaky states: Water audits, ignorance, and the politics of infrastructure. Public Culture 27(2):
305–330.
Anand N (2020) After breakdown: Invisibility and the labour of infrastructure maintenance. Economic and
Political Weekly 55(51): 52 –56.
Barnes J (2017) States of maintenance: Power, politics, and Egypt ’s irrigation infrastructure. Environment and
Planning D 35(1): 146 –164.
Benouniche M, Zwarteveen M and Kuper M (2014) Bricolage as innovation: Opening the black box of drip
irrigation systems. Irrigation and Drainage 63: 651 –658.
Boelens R (2015) Water, power and identity. The Cultural Politics of Water in the Andes . London: Earthscan,
Routledge.
Boelens R, Getches D and Guevara-Gil A (2010) Out of the Mainstream : Water Rights, Politics and Identity .
London: Earthscan.
Boelens R, Crow B, Hoogesteger J, Lu F, Swyngedouw E and Vos J (eds) (2017) Hydrosocial Territories and
Water Equity: Theory, Governance, and Sites of Struggle . New York (NY): Routledge.
Buser M and Boyer K (2020) Care goes underground: Thinking through relations of care in the maintenance
and repair of urban water infrastructures. Cultural Geographies 28(1): 73 –90
Buytaert W, Célleri R, De Bièvre B, et al. (2006) Human impact on the hydrology of the andean páramos.
Earth-Science Reviews 79(1–2): 53 –72.
Chambers R (1980) Basic concepts in the organization of irrigation. In: Coward EW (ed) Irrigation and
Agricultural Development in Asia: Perspectives from Social Sciences . Ithaca (NY): Cornell University
Press, pp. 28 –50.
Cernea MM and Meinzen-Dick R (1994) Design for water user associations: Organisational characteristics.
Irrigation Management Network Paper 30 . London: Overseas Development Institute.
Coward EW Jr (ed) (1980) Irrigation and agricultural development in Asia: Perspectives from the social
sciences. Ithaca (NY): Cornell University Press.
De la Cadena M (2015) Earth Beings. Ecologies of Practice Accross Andean Worlds . Durham and London:
Duke University Press.
De Laet M and Mol A (2000) The Zimbabwe bush pump: Mechanics of a ﬂuid technology. Social Studies of
Science 30(2): 225 –263.
Denis J and Pontille D (2015) Beyond Breakdown: Two Horizons of Maintenance Work. Working Papers
Series, 15-SES-08 . Paris: CNRS.
Domínguez-Guzmán C (2019) Grandes narrativas, pequeños agricultores: Explorando desbordes académicos
en el caso de los excedentes de agua en el valle de motupe, perú. Estudios Atacameños 63: 365 –381.
Ferguson J and Weaselboy M (2020) Indigenous sustainable relations: Considering land in language and lan-
guage in land. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 43: 1 –7.
Gelles PH (2000) Water and Power in Highland Peru: The Cultural Politics of Irrigation and Development .
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Gilmartin D (1994) Scienti ﬁc empire and imperial science: Colonialism and irrigation technology in the Indus
basin. The Journal of Asian Studies 53(4): 1127 –1149Domínguez-Guzmán 2169
Harriss J (1977) Problems of water management in hambantota district. In: Farmer BH (ed) Green Revolution?
Technology and Change in Rice-Growing Areas of Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka . Boulder (CO): Westview
Press, pp. 364 –376.
Harvey P and Knox H (2012) The enchantments of infrastructure. Mobilities 7(4): 521 –536.
Hidalgo M (2004) Santiago Antunez de mayolo: Vision de estadista. Revista de Red Electrica 2: 3–8.
Hastrup K and Hastrup F (eds) (2015) Waterworlds: Anthropology in Fluid Environments . New York:
Berghahn Books.
Hoogesteger J and Verzijl A (2015) Grassroots scalar politics: Insights from peasant water struggles in the
Ecuadorian and Peruvian Andes. Geoforum; Journal of Physical, Human, and Regional Geosciences
62: 13 –23.
Ishii M (2017) Caring for divine infrastructures: Nature and spirits in a special economic zone in India. Ethnos
82(4): 690 –710.
Jackson SJ (2014) Rethinking repair. In: Gillespie T, Boczkowski PJ and Foot KA (eds) Media Technologies:
Essays on Communication, Materiality and Society . Cambridge (MA): MIT Press, pp. 221 –240
Joy JK, Kulkarni S, Roth D, et al. (2014) Repoliticizing water governance. Exploring water re-allocations in
terms of justice. Local Environment 19(9): 954 –973.
Kemerink-Seyoum JS, Chitata T, Domínguez Guzmán C, et al. (2019) Attention to sociotechnical tinkering
with irrigation infrastructure as a way to rethink water governance. Water 11(8): 1670.
Kuper M, Benouniche M, Naouri M, et al. (2017) “Bricolage ”as an everyday practice of contestation of small-
holders engaging with drip irrigation. In Venot JP, Kuper M and Zwarteveen M (eds) Drip Irrigation for
Agriculture: Untold Stories of Ef ﬁciency, Innovation and Development . Londen: Routledge, pp. 256 –265.
Knox H and Harvey P (2011) Anticipating harm: Regulation and irregularity on a road construction project in
the Peruvian Andes. Theory, Culture & Society 28(6): 142 –163.
Linton J (2010) What is Water: The History of a Modern Abstraction . Vancouver & Toronto: UBC press.
Latour B (1996) Aramis, or, the Love of Technology . Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.
Law J (2002) Aircraft Stories: Decentering the Object in Technoscience . Durham (NC): Duke University
Press.
Lynch BD (1988) The Bureaucratic Transition: Peruvian Government Intervention in Sierra Small-scale
Irrigation . PhD Thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca (NY).
Meinzen-Dick R (1997) Farmer participation in irrigation –20 years of experience and lessons for the future.
Irrigation and Drainage Systems 11(2): 103 –118.
Meehan KM (2014) Tool-power: Water infrastructure as wellsprings of state power. Geoforum; Journal of
Physical, Human, and Regional Geosciences 57: 215 –224.
Mol A (2006). Proving or improving: On health care research as a form of self-re ﬂection. Qualitative Health
Research 16(3): 405 –414.
Mol A (2008) The Logic of Care. Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . New York: Routledge.
Mol A, Moser I and Pols J (eds) (2010) Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms .
Bielefeld: transcript Verlag.
Mol A and Law J (eds) (2020) On other terms: Interfering in social science English . Sociological Review
Monograph. London: Sage.
Mollinga P (1998) On the Waterfront. Water distribution, technology and agrarian change in a South Indian
canal irrigation system. PhD Thesis. Wageningen University, The Netherlands.
Østmo L and Law J (2018) Mis/translation, colonialism, and environmental con ﬂict.Environmental
Humanities 10(2): 349 –369.
Ostrom E (1990) Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action . Cambridge
(MA): Cambridge university press.
Ostrom E (1992) Crafting Institutions for Self-Governing Irrigation Systems . San Francisco, CA: Institute for
Contemporary Studies.
Perreault T and Green B (2013) Reworking the spaces of indigeneity: The bolivian ayllu and lowland auton-
omy movements compared. Environment and Planning D 31(1): 43 –60.2170 EPE: Nature and Space 5(4)
Plusquellec H, Burt C and Wolter HW (1994) Modern Water Control in Irrigation. World Bank Technical
Paper 246 . Washington DC: The World Bank.
Pols J (2006) Accounting and washing: Good care in long-term psychiatry. Science, Technology, & Human
Values 31(4): 409 –430.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 691 –716.
Radcliffe SA and Laurie N (2006) Culture and development: Taking culture seriously in development for
andean indigenous people. Environment and Planning D 24(2): 231 –248.
Scott JC (1998) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed .
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Senanayake N, Mukherji A and Giordano M (2015) Re-visiting what we know about irrigation management
transfer: A review of the evidence. Agricultural Water Management 149: 175 –186.
Sijbrandy P and Van der Zaag P (1993) Canal maintenance: A key for restructuring irrigation management.
Irrigation and Drainage Systems 7: 189 –204
Swyngedouw E (2015) Liquid Power: Contested Hydro-Modernities in Twentieth-Century Spain . Cambridge
(MA): MIT Press.
Van de Port M and Mol A (2015). Chupar frutas in S alvador da B ahia: A case of practice-speci ﬁc alterities.
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , 21(1), 165 –180.
Delgado V Vera and Zwarteveen M (2008) Modernity, exclusion and resistance: Water and indigenous strug-
gles in Peru. Development (Cambridge, England) 51(1): 114 –120.
Verzijl A (2020) Water Movements. Fluidity and visibility among Andean worlds. PhD thesis, Wageningen
University, The Netherlands.
Verzijl A and Guerrero Quispe S (2013). The system nobody sees: Irrigated wetland management and alpaca
herding in the Peruvian Andes. Mountain Research and Development 33(3): 280 –293.
Vos J (2002) Metric matters. The performance and organisation of volumetric water control in large-scale irri-
gation in the North Coast of Peru. PhD Thesis. Wageningen University. The Netherlands.
Wade R (1979) The social response to irrigation: An Indian case study. The Journal of Development Studies
16(1): 3 –26.
Wester P, Rap ER and Vargas-Velázquez S (2009) The hydraulic mission and the Mexican hydrocracy:
Regulating and reforming the ﬂows of water and power. Water Alternatives 2(3): 395 –415.
Worster D (1992) Rivers of Empire: Water, Aridity, and the Growth of the American West New York: Oxford
University Press.
Yates JS, Harris LM and Wilson NJ (2017). Multiple ontologies of water: Politics, con ﬂict and implications for
governance. Environment and Planning D 35(5): 797 –815.
Yates-Doerr E (2015) The world in a box? Food security, edible insects, and “One world, One health ”collab-
oration. Social Science & Medicine 129: 106 –112.
Zwarteveen M and Boelens R (2014) De ﬁning, researching and struggling for water justice: Some conceptual
building blocks for research and action. Water International 39(2): 143 –158.Domínguez-Guzmán 2171
