RESEARCH ARTICLECaring for Groundwater: 
How Care Can Expand and Transform Groundwater Governance
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Margreet Zwarteveen
Water Governance Department, 
IHE-Delft, Delft, and Geography, Planning and Inclusive Development, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
m.zwarteveen@un-ihe.org
KEYWORDS:
groundwater governance; care; care-control; tinkering; sharing
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Zwarteveen, M., Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Kuper, M., Saidani, A., Kemerink-Seyoum, J., Cleaver, F., Kulkarni, H., Bossenbroek, L., Ftouhi, H., Verzijl, A., Aslekar, U., Kadiri, Z., Chitata, T., Leonardelli, I., Kulkarni, S., & Bhat, S. (2024). Caring for Groundwater: How Care Can Expand and Transform Groundwater Governance. International Journal of the Commons, 18(1), pp. 384–396. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/
ijc.1350MARGREET ZWARTEVEEN 
CAROLINA DOMÍNGUEZ-GUZMÁN 
MARCEL KUPER 
AMINE SAIDANI 
JELTSJE KEMERINK-SEYOUM 
FRANCES CLEAVER 
HIMANSHU KULKARNI 
LISA BOSSENBROEK HIND FTOUHI 
ANDRES VERZIJL 
UMA ASLEKAR 
ZAKARIA KADIRI 
TAVENGWA CHITATA 
IRENE LEONARDELLI 
SEEMA KULKARNI 
SNEHA BHAT 
*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article
ABSTRACT
Efforts to measure and regulate groundwaters and irrigators are notoriously ineffective. The 
starting point of this article, therefore, is to question the continued faith in techno-managerial solutions to groundwater depletion. We discuss the potential of the conceptual vocabulary of ‘care’ to complement, refresh and expand ways of talking about and doing groundwater governance. Mobilizing a diverse range of examples from places where pressures on aquifers are particularly acute, we do this by exploring what care entails in everyday practices of groundwater use and management. We show that foregrounding care nuances and sometimes challenges stories of users unavoidably depleting aquifers when given the chance and means to do so. Irrigators may display concern about the longer-term sustainability of the aquifers on which their livelihoods depend, even when their own pumping practices are unsustainable. In spite of pressures to intensify and individualize, farmers sometimes do hold on to or creatively develop collective rules to fairly share groundwater and use it sustainably, complementing strategies to make do with what is available with investments in conservation and recharge. Attention to care, moreover, highlights the ongoing processes of tinkering that governing groundwater always entails. The ability to tinker hinges on intimate and often embodied knowledge of a watery place. Accepting the care involved in governing groundwater, our analysis therefore concludes, prompts a re-consideration of what is and who has water expertise, with important implications for the role of ‘outside’ experts. More than a new theory, we propose embracing care as an analytical sensibility, with the study of practices of care serving as one promising way to widen the conceptual and political space for understanding and doing human-groundwater relations.
385
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
INTRODUCTION
Groundwater overexploitation is a worldwide phenomenon 
with worrying consequences for social justice and the 
environment (Giordano, 2009; United Nations, 2022 ). 
While there are many definitions, in agriculture, which is the focus of this paper, over-exploitation usually refers to 
(some) farmers using so much water for irrigating their 
crops that other users, including future ones, become 
compromised (cf. Molle, L ópez-Gunn, van Steenbergen, 
2018). In addition to identifying often technologically advanced ways to increase supply (including forms of artificial recharge, (transbasin) transfers of surface water, 
re-use of treated wastewater or desalinization), planned 
efforts to halt depletion mostly focus on improving the 
governance of groundwater. Research in support of this 
goal mostly focuses on the identification, dissemination, 
or testing of instruments (or tools) to measure, account 
for and regulate the use and distribution of groundwater. 
As the editorial introduction to this Special Issue so 
nicely summarizes, governance actors’ (mostly public agencies) mobilize (a combination of) prohibitions, 
licenses, bans, sanctions, subsidies, or water prices to 
control groundwater behaviors ( Bruns and Meinzen-
Dick, 2024) . Such attempts to make groundwater 
amenable to institutional, technical, and economic 
forms of control
1 tend to be couched in a rather techno-
managerial language. A ‘tragedy of the commons’ kind of reasoning pervades the literature: the dominant storyline 
is that individual irrigators will use more water than is 
sustainable unless stopped from doing so by outside 
measures (Zwarteveen et al., 2021) .
Partly informed by recent reviews that conclude that, to 
date, most government efforts to govern groundwater are 
ineffective (Molle and Closas, 2020; Closas and Villholth, 
2020), this paper’s starting proposition is that governing 
groundwater is about more than techno-managerial forms 
of controlling capricious waters and greedy irrigators. 
Importantly, or so is our argument, it is also about care. 
After all, without attentive forms of care, that is: without 
actively investing in preservation, sustenance, conservation, 
or upkeep, aquifers will get depleted. Similarly, to prevent 
water infrastructures from crumbling and breaking down 
they require regular maintenance, occasional repair, and 
cautious handling and use. Also, the fair sharing of available waters across people and places requires something 
akin to care: care for each other, for relations, and for 
community. This paper sets out to contribute to identifying 
and recognizing what care in groundwater entails by 
complementing and refreshing currently dominant techno-
managerial languages of control with a more care-full and 
practice-based vocabulary.We do this by discussing diverse forms of caring for 
groundwater that we have collected through an extensive collaborative action-research project that documented 
grassroots initiatives of people who organize around 
groundwater in parts of the world – Algeria, Morocco, Peru, 
Zimbabwe, and India – where pressures on aquifers are 
particularly acute.
2 More in-depth details of the initiatives 
discussed here can be found in previously published articles 
(Chitata et al., 2021  and 2022; Mayaux et al., 2022 ; Saidani 
et al., 2022; Bhat et al, 2023; Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ; 
Cleaver et al., 2023 ; Kuper et al., 2023 ; Leonardelli et al., 
2023; Saidani et al., 2023 ). These articles document diverse 
experiences of individuals or communities consciously 
holding on to principles of frugality, solidarity or sharing, 
enacting those through wisely crafted institutions or 
infrastructures. Our analysis of these experiences shows that exploring groundwater governance as care not 
only expands the range of actors, behaviors, skills, and 
knowledges involved in using and sharing groundwater 
but also prompts a re-thinking of what good groundwater 
governance is or should be, and how it can be supported by 
outside experts.
The rest of the paper is divided as follows. First, we trace 
the legacy of scholarship on care, situating our intervention 
within a feminist transformational agenda. Second, we explore the possible meanings of collective care, frugality, 
and sharing in groundwater that the different case studies 
present. Finally, we show how foregrounding care draws 
attention to the importance of processes of tinkering and 
bricolage when solving groundwater problems. We and 
with a short conclusion, among others highlighting how 
care transforms the relations and collaborations between 
outside experts and communities of groundwater users and managers.
CARE-CARING
A SHORT GENEALOGY OF SCHOLARSHIP ON 
CARE
Foregrounding and thematizing care when understanding 
realities, relations, and behaviors is part of a long tradition 
of scholarship that is seeing a revival in the last decades 
(see Mol, 2008 ; Mol et al., 2010a; de la Bellacasa, 2011 ; Van 
Dooren, 2014; de la Bellacasa 2017; Harcourt, 2023). The 
term care can have different meanings and is used for a 
wide array of societal and theoretical objectives. Here, we 
present a brief overview (see also Lindén and Lydahl, 2021; 
Mol and Hardon, 2021; Harcourt, 2023).
Attention to care was inspired by feminist concern about 
the lack of recognition of care work, much of which is done by, associated with or attributed to women (Martin, Myers, 
386
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
and Viseu, 2015 ). Feminist scholars’ efforts to remedy 
this not only consisted in highlighting the importance 
of relations of reproduction and indeed care in making 
families, societies and economies function, but also showed 
that economics and politics happen in the private, domestic 
sphere as well. This prompted a re-thinking and nuancing 
of hitherto dominant understandings of social behaviour. 
It for instance suggested that politics need not just consist 
of clashing interests and disputes, as people can and do 
also relate to each other in more affectionate and caring 
ways. It also led to the development of care ethics, as an 
alternative to rule ethics (Tronto  2013 ; Mol and Hardon, 
2021 ). As Mol and Hardon explain: “Care ethics does not 
operate through weighing the relative value of general 
principles but by negotiating specific, situated concerns” 
(Mol and Hardon, 2021, p. 187 ).
The verb ‘to care’ draws together the emotional 
engagement of being concerned and the practical 
engagement of contributing to restoring, sustaining, or 
improving something (Mol and Hardon, 2021, p. 185 ). Even 
though the term is associated with something positive and 
good, what ‘good’ means in a particular situation is never 
self-evident, nor is it automatically agreed upon by those 
concerned (Mol and Hardon, 2021 ). It is therefore important 
to remain alert to how abilities and resources needed to 
either care or be cared for are unevenly distributed, and 
also to how not all have the same power to define what 
proper or good care is or should be (cf. Martin, Myers, and 
Viseu, 2015 , p. 636 ).
Many early studies on care and the ethics of care were 
done in places where care is more or less professionalized, 
such as in hospitals and (nursing) homes. In more recent 
years, also scholars interested in studying the ethics 
and politics of environmental problems have embraced 
languages of care. De la Bellacasa for instance proposed 
using the term ‘care’ in relation to soil ecologies (de la 
Bellacasa 2011 , 2017 ), while Ureta mobilized care to shed 
light on how people manage the waste generated by a 
copper mine (Ureta , 2016 ). Scholars studying farming 
have long recognized that farmers also use ‘care’ terms 
to make sense of their behaviors (see for instance van 
der Ploeg, 2023 ). More in-depth explorations of what 
it means to understand farming in terms of care have 
seen the light (Mol et  al, 2010a ; Singleton, 2010 ). Water 
governance scholars have likewise started experimenting 
with languages of care. They noted how indigenous 
people foreground relations of mutuality and reciprocity 
when engaging with water, considering water bodies 
(aquifers, lakes, or rivers) as living entities that demand 
respectful consideration (Weir, 2009 ; Wilson and Inkster, 
2018 ; Verzijl, 2020 ; Martuwarra RiverOfLife, 2021 ). This 
resonates with studies that show how people mobilize notions of justice and reciprocity when claiming water 
(Beresford et al. 2023 ). In our own recent work, we have 
mobilized ‘care’ both to help decentre the term ‘control’ 
in water policies and scholarship, and to emphasize that 
water infrastructures and institutions are often rather 
fragile and temporary. We suggested that ‘care’ helps 
recognize the adaptive and contingent character of much 
that goes on in water management and governance, and 
showed how foregrounding care creates appreciation 
for the hard and persistent work needed to maintain 
infrastructures and institutions (Kemerink-Seyoum et al., 
2019 ; Dom ínguez-Guzm án et al, 2022 ; Archidiacono 
et al., 2024 ).
Beyond drawing attention to hitherto neglected or 
undervalued activities, emotions, or relations, scholarly 
work on care has been important in critically re-thinking the 
pervasive oppositional dichotomies – between nature and 
culture; men and women; private and public; modernity 
and tradition – that structure popular as well as scientific 
ways of making sense of the world. By not automatically 
opposing care to either control, rationality, or technology, 
this scholarship helps acknowledge that care can also be 
rational or cold, while ‘cold’ technologies can help provide 
‘warm’ forms of care (Mol, et al., 2010 ; Mol and  Hardon, 
2021 ). Care can be part of, but also often eludes or overflows 
control; it tends to involve more than what can be codified 
or pinned down in generalizable principles or rules (Pols, 
2006 ; Mol, 2008 ; Mol, et al., 2010 ; de la Bellacasa, 2015 ; 
Mol and Hardon, 2021 ).
OUR APPROACH TO STUDYING GROUNDWATER 
CARE
Inspired by Actor-Network Theory (ANT), in this paper, we 
are interested in tentatively exploring what care/caring 
may mean in a range of places where groundwater is used 
and shared (cf. Mol et al , 2010a ). We do not use care as 
a new container term to denote a range of activities or 
moral beliefs around groundwater, nor do we propose 
care as a new grand explanatory concept to explain 
social groundwater dynamics. Neither are we interested 
in prescribing what good care is, as a way of normatively 
distinguishing care from not-care (or good from bad care) in 
groundwater. Instead, we note and follow those activities 
or behaviours that fit the broad characterisation of caring 
that we gave above (caring “draws together the emotional 
engagement of being concerned and the practical 
engagement of contributing to restoring, sustaining, or 
improving something”, Mol and Hardon, 2021 , p. 185 ) 
to explore and discuss the possible meanings care can 
have in relation to groundwater (cf. Mol et al ., 2010a ). We 
mobilize care, in other words, as an analytical sensibility; 
a combination of alertness to how people’s dealings with 
387
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
groundwater can be interpreted as forms of care, with 
curiosity about what such an interpretation can help make 
visible or imagine.
We do this by documenting practices  of water care, 
always situating these in the terms and contexts from 
which they emerge. Through our focus on practices , we shift 
attention from how realities are represented to how they are 
done (Domínguez-Guzmán et al., 2023 ). In (groundwater) 
practices, the social, the material (or natural), and the 
semiotic are intertwined (Law and Mol, 2020 ). This also 
means that hydrogeological information about aquifers or 
groundwater dynamics cannot be taken as the ‘natural’ 
foundation upon which differences emerge as cultural or 
social. Taking inspiration from Haraway’s idea of many 
naturecultures (Haraway, 2008 ), we therefore consider 
the relation between knowing, using, and governing 
groundwater as an entangled and recursive process, with 
the behavior of groundwater itself co-shaping how it is used 
and governed. This comes with an explicit acknowledgment 
that researchers are situated in, attached and connected 
to what is studied. (Haraway, 2008 ; Stengers, 2018 ; Law, 
2021 ). This more explicit navigation of the entanglements 
between science, society, and politics makes the answer to 
the question of what is, or how to do, good groundwater 
governance more pragmatic, political, and modest.
CARE-FUL(L) GROUNDWATER 
GOVERNANCE: BEYOND NARROW SELF-
INTEREST
The tools for governing groundwater that scholarly and policy 
texts identify mainly consist of ways to reduce the quantities 
of water that farmers extract from the aquifer, (Bruns and 
Meinzen-Dick, this SI). Perhaps inadvertently, this focus on 
the need to control extraction makes farmers appear (or 
indeed enacts them) as self-interested individuals who will 
inevitably pump more water than is allowed or sustainable 
if given the opportunity or means to do so. Foregrounding 
care when studying groundwater helps appreciate that 
groundwater users are not always, or not just, motivated by 
self-interest. In this section we present examples from our 
case studies, to illustrate: (a) That farmers can be worried 
or concerned about the depletion of the aquifers that they 
depend on, even when they themselves contribute to that 
depletion; (b) That there are farmers – sometimes helped by 
others – who voluntarily restrict their use of groundwater, 
either to share available quantities with others or to save 
some of it for future use; (c) That caring for groundwater 
inevitably entails (the crafting of rules for) sharing it, 
sometimes turning into processes of commoning (Gibson-
Graham, 2016 ; Bollier, 2020 ; Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ).CARE AS CONCERN
At first sight, the cases that we studied appear to support 
the widespread assumption of farmers’ groundwater greed. 
In almost all our study areas, the depletion of aquifers can 
be linked to farmers digging ever more and ever deeper 
wells. Often going against formal regulations, farmers 
mine groundwater reserves or pump more water than is 
recharged or sustainable. Yet, is this because farmers are 
greedy, or primarily motivated by individual self-interest as 
many scholarly and policy texts on groundwater imply?
Our case studies suggest other possible ways of 
explaining what is happening. Very few of the smallholder 
farmers with whom we engaged in the different countries 
were indifferent to the gradual decline of groundwater 
availability and quality. Even those who over-extracted 
expressed awareness and concern about it. For instance, 
in one village in Maharashtra (Ravangaon), those irrigators 
present at a workshop to discuss our study findings were 
quick to acknowledge that their current irrigation practices 
are unsustainable. Many agreed to the need to transition 
away from the monocropping of sugarcane, the most 
water-demanding crop. They accepted that a diversification 
of cropping baskets would be wise. They also displayed 
much interest in better understanding their aquifers and 
in finding ways to better align their irrigation and cropping 
patterns with the longer-term sustainability of soils and 
waters. Yet, farmers’ political and financial dependence on 
sugar factory owners, makes it almost impossible for them 
to grow anything else than sugarcane (Tozzi  et al., 2022 ; 
Bhat et al, 2023 ).
Likewise, in the deserts of Peru, Algeria, and Morocco, 
farmers were deeply worried about dwindling water 
availability (Dom ínguez-Guzm án et al ., 2017 ; Saidani et 
al., 2023 ; Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ), even when their own 
pumping practices were partly to blame. Many of them 
continue over-extracting not because of ignorance or 
greed, but because they operate in a political-economic 
environment that pushes them to intensify their production 
or shift to higher-value export crops, often prompting them 
to use more groundwater than is ecologically wise or just. 
Their stories suggest that in an economic context that 
externalizes the value of groundwater, over-extraction is 
the almost inevitable effect of planned policy efforts to 
intensify and modernize agriculture.
Recognizing this expands the search for ways to 
govern groundwater beyond efforts to control farmers’ 
groundwater greed to include critical engagement with 
models and policies of agricultural development that rely 
for their realization on quantities of groundwater that may 
not be available.3 The experiences and stories that we 
gathered in our case study areas suggest that there are 
farmers who are eager to support such engagements.
388
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
CARE AS FRUGALITY AND RE-PLENISHMENT
The fact that markets – together with taxes, pricing regimes, 
and subsidy schemes – actively pressure farmers to pump 
ever more water makes it all the more remarkable that 
there are irrigators who circumvent or resist such pressures 
by translating their concern for the sustainability of 
aquifers into practical conservation and protection efforts. 
Rather than rejecting or resisting ‘modernity’ altogether 
or withdrawing from the market, these are farmers 
who creatively combine new market and technological 
opportunities with logics of care, for each other and the 
watery environment.
Hence, in the oases in the M’Zab valley in Algeria, farmers 
insist on making do with the water that is available. They 
adhere to a system that can be called circular: it consists 
of collecting and then diverting the water from rare flash 
floods as well as runoff to the ancient oases through 
channels. Part of the derived water is used to irrigate the 
date palm gardens on the basis of proportional water rights, 
replenishing the rootzone but also (partly) the aquifer. 
The other part of the water is routed to recharge wells 
or recharge reservoirs. Some of these wells have a dual 
function: during flood periods, they allow to recharge the 
water table, while during the dry period, the water stored 
in the underground aquifer can be pumped for irrigation. 
Wells are not just used for irrigation, but also for watering 
livestock and domestic water uses. In the Beni Isguen 
oasis, for instance, 61 of the 300 wells in the community 
are specifically designed to be also suitable for recharge 
purposes. Storing floodwater in underground aquifers 
potentially ensures the availability of groundwater for 
about three years. Even when under pressure to intensify 
their farming enterprises, there are groups of farmers who 
invest considerable effort in preserving and holding on to 
this circular logic. They value it precisely because it is more 
equitable and sustainable. The hard work involved in storing 
limited quantities of water, in turn, encourages frugal use 
of this water (Saidani et al., 2023 ).
Also, on the desert coast of Peru, smallholders hold on 
to an ancient logic of groundwater care. They dismiss the 
advice of the government to use pumps and drip irrigation 
for watering their mango trees – trees that produce the 
mangos that can be found in Dutch or USA supermarkets 
– and instead prefer using pozas, a traditional irrigation 
method consisting of small ponds that store both canal and 
rainwater. Poza basins – either diked or excavated – capture 
water in times of abundance to prolong soil moisture 
availability and maintain groundwater levels after seasonal 
rains. Pozas are an age-old technology; early 16th-century 
chronicles already make mention of them. Smallholder 
farmers stay with these pozas because they consider them 
a more sustainable and reliable, or indeed care-full, way of making use of available waters. They use their pozas 
not just to grow mangos, but also for subsistence crops 
(Dom ínguez-Guzm án et al., 2017 ).
Groundwater care in Algeria and Peru is part of 
sometimes ritualized forms of respect for water and 
nature more widely and is embedded in cosmologies that 
emphasize mutuality and conviviality. Caring happens 
through sophisticated institutions and infrastructural 
designs, that irrigators continuously adapt to suit new 
circumstances. In some of the other cases we studied 
(Saidani et al., 2023 ; Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ), 
farmers (sometimes helped by outside experts or local 
authorities) only started inventing and developing forms 
of groundwater care after they became worried about the 
decline of groundwater tables. While inspired by existing 
moral-ecological rationalities, this entailed the crafting 
of new institutions and infrastructures in processes of 
commoning (Bollier, 2020 ).
In Randullabad, a community (of around 2000 people) 
in Maharashtra for instance, village members engaged in 
prolonged discussions and collective efforts to protect the 
aquifers on which their livelihoods depend. In the 1990s, 
they noted how the over-extraction of groundwater by 
deep borewells led to a gradual decline in the volume of 
water contained in shallow aquifers, the same aquifers 
on which they depend for drinking water. Perennial village 
wells turned seasonal and started running dry in drought 
years, threatening the community’s drinking water 
security. In addition, villagers noticed how, in surrounding 
communities, a sharp increase in borewells caused problems 
of equity and sustainability. The village council therefore 
called in BAIF, a Development Research Foundation, and 
ACWADAM, an NGO dedicated to promoting participatory 
forms of groundwater management, to help in protecting 
their groundwater. With ACWADAM’s guidance, community 
members mapped their groundwater sources as a starting 
point for managing these more sustainably. In 2000, the 
governing council of Randullabad village decided to put a 
ban on bore wells in the village. Instead of continuously 
trying to increase supply to meet growing demand, 
community members started jointly planning their 
agricultural activities according to the water available in the 
aquifer – which is a shallow unconfined aquifer system with 
annual recharge cycles. With the help of ACWADAM, the 
village also intensified and improved groundwater recharge 
(Saidani et al., 2023 ). Groundwater care in Randullabad did 
not happen automatically or spontaneously; it had to be 
nurtured and crafted and relied on outside support.
Another version of groundwater care happened in 
Zimbabwe, and was done by prospectors (diviners). These 
local groundwater experts consider their water-divining 
job not just as a means to earn a living, but also as 
389
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
providing an important societal service: they want to use 
their intimate knowledge of the aquifer to help safeguard 
its sustainable and equitable use. They do this among 
others by actively monitoring the drilling of boreholes by 
commercial companies, making sure that these do not drill 
deeper than the recommended depth. Prospectors even go 
as far as not disclosing the depth of different boreholes, 
to avoid those drilling new wells digging deeper than their 
neighbors. As one of the prospectors explained: “We do not 
tell this information to private borehole owners, lest it will 
be used for ill intent – to disadvantage others – as some will 
think of deepening their boreholes unnecessarily. If they 
drill deeper, it’s like building ten houses when you can only 
stay in one house; that is, wasting a resource and creating 
artificial shortage.” (Cleaver et al., 2023: 180 ).
These are stories that suggest that people’s 
engagements with groundwater can be inspired by logics 
of frugality and indeed care, with strategies to make do 
with what is available complemented by measures to 
avoid over-exploitation as well as conscious investments 
in conservation and recharge. In many of the cases we 
studied, forms of groundwater care emerged because of 
people’s strong sense of territorial belonging. Caring is 
indeed connecting, to places, waters, and to other people. 
Investments in infrastructures – for capturing, accessing, 
recharging, or distributing water – or in sustenance of the 
aquifer not just express a pre-existing sense of belonging 
and connection, but are also important in helping 
materialize or perform it. Through their financial and labor 
contributions to maintaining and governing shared water 
systems, irrigators together with their allies almost literally 
construct and keep alive their attachments to one another 
as well as to the aquifers on which they depend.
CARING AND SHARING
It is relatively well documented how new drilling and 
pumping technologies used to access and extract 
groundwater often drastically change existing patterns 
of water use and distribution. Also in our case study 
areas, many farmers embraced new and easier methods 
of pumping water. These offer a significant level of 
individual autonomy and water security to irrigators: as 
compared to surface irrigation systems, they reduce the 
need to coordinate with others for the sharing of water. 
The flip side of this, as some scholars predict, maybe the 
destruction of existing mechanisms of sharing and caring 
for water and each other. Shah for instance refers to the 
gradual replacement of the “irrigation community” by a 
“scavenging irrigation economy” (Shah, 2011, p. 80 ).
Yet, the already discussed cases of Randullabad, in 
Maharashtra, and the studies in the M’Zab Valley in Algeria 
suggest that the disappearance of irrigation communities is not inevitable. In both cases, collective investments of 
labor and sometimes of funds in the construction and 
maintenance of infrastructures to capture and store 
‘difficult waters’ (Saidani et al., 2023 ) or in the protection 
and recharge of aquifers help create and cement relations 
between irrigators, as well as between irrigators and the 
watery environment. How much people contribute (in 
terms of labor, or in other forms) often co-determines how 
much water they are allowed to access and use. Hence, 
there is often a relation between ‘caring’ contributions 
to capturing, storing, and restoring groundwater (e.g., 
actions to improve water quality, recharge of aquifers) and 
maintaining infrastructures and technologies on the one 
hand and ‘sharing’ on the other. Coward famously called 
this ‘hydraulic property’ (Coward, 1986 ).
Sharing hinges on agreements and rules. In addition 
to the ban on borewells and adapting crop choices and 
calendars to water availabilities, the Village Watershed 
Committee in Randullabad developed a set of protocols 
for water sharing in a process of negotiation between 
community members, represented both by the village 
council and the Village Watershed Committee, and between 
community members and outside experts. In Beni Isguen 
in Algeria, rules about how the work of maintenance and 
recharge as well as irrigation waters are to be shared stem 
from traditions that are upheld by the Umana Essayl, the 
customary water stewards who operate as a collective. They 
work in close collaboration with religious as well as secular 
authorities. The sharing of responsibilities and waters is also 
partly anchored in infrastructural designs. The width of the 
field intakes (kua) for instance expresses water rights in 
proportion to the number of palm trees in the garden to be 
irrigated (Saidani et al, 2023 ). Here, just as in Randullabad, 
the relation between investment (care) and benefit (share) 
is nevertheless not strictly calculated. This can be partly 
explained by how the caring for and sharing of groundwater 
is embedded in wider social webs of collaboration and 
exchange within and between households but is also linked 
to how sharing groundwater always hinges on forms of 
dealing with contingencies (see below).
Just as in Randullabad, also in the Dr âa Valley in 
Morocco, smallholder farmers only started developing rules 
for sharing water when realizing that the intensification of 
farming – here: the growing of watermelons – demanded 
ever larger quantities of groundwater. They noticed a 
gradual decline in groundwater levels, something that also 
started threatening their drinking water security. Some 
local farmers, as a result, became increasingly critical 
of outside investors using ‘their’ aquifer to irrigate new 
commercial watermelon farms. They started engaging in 
a process of crafting rules to limit watermelon cultivation, 
mainly aimed at limiting the pumping by ‘outsiders’ from 
390
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
their aquifer. This process of rule-making entailed long and 
difficult discussions about how to distinguish outsiders 
from insiders (Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ).
Where contributing to investments in maintenance or 
recharge provided a basis for rule-making in Randullabad 
and the M’Zab Valley, (tribal) identity and territorial 
belonging were important criteria to determine who can 
and who cannot access water in the Dr âa Valley. These 
criteria are far from easy, straightforward, or politically 
innocent. They are also not necessarily just or equitable. 
In the Dr âa Valley, women were for instance not at all 
involved in the process of rule-making, even though they 
also have clear interests and needs concerning the use of 
groundwater (Bossenbroek et al., 2023 ).
MORE THAN CONTROL: GROUNDWATER 
GOVERNANCE AS TINKERING CARE
Groundwater governance is often understood in terms 
of precise measurements and clearly defined and 
implemented rules the execution of which are properly 
monitored and accounted for. Yet, the fact that systematic 
attempts to regulate (the use of) groundwater often 
fail (Closas and Molle, 2020 ) suggests that groundwater 
governance is about more than control. Grappling with 
the complexities of dynamic real-world groundwater 
conditions also requires improvisation and experimentation 
and may involve negotiation, diplomacy, and compromises 
(Pols, 2006 ; Mol, 2008 ; Mol, et al., 2010 ; de la Bellacasa, 
2015 ; Mol and Hardon, 2021 ). The wider care literature 
has proposed the terms tinkering and bricolage to capture 
this.4 These are terms that are often used interchangeably. 
Even though they have slightly different scholarly legacies, 
both help re-think the classical distinction between non-
modern skills and modern forms of (scientific) expertise, 
by showing that also supposedly modern technologies and 
institutions rely on in-situ adjustments and hands-on forms 
of experimentation – those that may involve embodied and 
experiential forms of knowledge –, while supposedly local 
wisdom often evolve by creatively borrowing elements 
from other knowledges, including scientific ones (Cleaver 
2012 ; Benouniche et al., 2014 ; Verzijl et al., 2023 ). In 
water scholarship, the term tinkering is mostly mobilized 
to emphasize how technologies or institutions change or 
evolve in time, while bricolage tends to be used to refer to 
the new improvisational use of existing ideas and tools, 
something that may also happen when technologies or 
institutional models travel from one place to another 
(Benouniche et  al., 2014 ; Cleaver 2012 ; Kemerink-Seyoum 
et al., 2019 ; Leonardelli  et al., 2023 ).Attention to tinkering and bricolage helps recognize that, 
in practice, governing groundwater always requires the 
flexibility to deal with changes – in availabilities, qualities, 
needs, contexts – that are often difficult to precisely predict 
and anticipate. The fact that people tinker does not in itself 
mean that they care, but effective groundwater care always 
hinges on the ability of those involved to tinker. In the 
Algerian Sahara, young farmers for instance had to engage 
in a continuous process of social and technical tinkering to 
adjust to contingently changing social relations of owning 
water and infrastructure. They took over, first informally, the 
management of state-implemented boreholes of a small-
scale irrigation scheme. In a long process of learning to use 
and share these boreholes, the farmers devised a range of 
creative institutional and technological adaptations. In the 
process, they also re-negotiated their relationship with the 
state, eventually making the strategic decision to continue 
operating under its umbrella as this allowed them to secure 
further public investments. They eventually expanded the 
group to over 180 users, leading to the creation of a second 
irrigation scheme. These two irrigation associations put 
in place numerous rules to avoid over-irrigation and make 
sure that all users are equitably serviced with (just) sufficient 
quantities (Mayaux et al., 2022 ).
The need to tinker when caring for groundwater may be 
prompted by water itself. After all, water is capricious and 
seldom neatly follows techno-managerial directives. In 
Pravah, a relatively recent irrigation system (the Purandar 
system) brings untreated wastewater from the city of 
Pune to the village. This water makes the intensification 
of agriculture possible, something that has allowed many 
women to assume new farming roles. Yet, because of how 
the Purandar water mixes with groundwater in the shallow 
aquifer of the village – the source of water for drinking and 
other domestic uses –, it also forces women to assume 
new water quality management tasks at household and 
community levels. After the irrigation system became 
operational, women farmers started noticing how their 
animals got ill if they drank directly from the ponds that 
store the Purandar water. They also experienced how 
contact with groundwater triggered rashes and sores on 
their skin. Through their intimate relationship with water, 
but also by interacting with others (including field officers, 
doctors, NGO practitioners, and researchers) over water, 
women gradually learned to look at the color, smell, and 
taste of water at different water sources, thus developing 
an understanding of how qualities of groundwater 
differ depending on source or location. They need this 
understanding to decide on each specific moment – hence 
in a mode of tinkering care – which water to use for which 
purpose, and how to treat it (Leonardelli et  al., 2023 ).
391
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
Also engineers or scientists may engage in tinkering forms 
of care to make water systems work (Dom ínguez -Guzm án 
et al., 2022 ) or to accurately assess aquifer dynamics. 
A good example of this comes from the Kaveri Delta in 
Tamil Nadu. Here, the lack of trustworthy groundwater 
data complicates the task of assessing and predicting 
groundwater availabilities (Verzijl et al., 2023 ). Modelers are 
devising a range of creative ways to deal with this. They, for 
instance, engage in reverse engineering or trace geological 
maps based on older documents. They may also launch 
citizen science campaigns to record characteristics of wells – 
such as GPS locations, groundwater levels, salinity, soil types, 
and borehole depths – to help solve the granularity problem 
and allow the calibration of their models. Interestingly, 
this means that their models come to rely on locations 
and often borehole depths that were initially determined 
by water diviners, who use tools such as lemons, neem 
sticks, coconuts, rods, and pendulums to predict where to 
find groundwater. In this way, in the “prediction of what is 
underneath the earth” – a phrase from early Tamil to indicate 
what diviners do but also describing the work of modelers – 
scientific modelling and divining go together, with the first 
relying on the second (Verzijl et al., 2023 ).
Appreciating the importance of tinkering care means 
appreciating that being alert, supple, and versatile – or 
attuned attentiveness (Mol et al., 2010a ) – may be as 
important as rigorously setting and enforcing pre-defined 
extraction targets when governing groundwater. The 
examples suggest that frequent intimate and embodied 
encounters with aquifers, wells, and pumps help breed 
such attentiveness (Leonardelli , et al., 2023 ; Cleaver et 
al., 2023 ; Verzijl et al ., 2023 ). Acknowledging that this 
is so means that other than scientific forms of expertise 
and skills gain in importance. It also means that the 
search for generalizable codes, rules, models, tools, or 
technologies to do groundwater governance needs to be 
complemented with attentiveness to the processes that 
are always needed to translate and adapt these to diverse 
and changing contexts or circumstances. As care scholars 
have suggested, the flexibility to experiment, improvise, 
and adapt may indeed form the heart of care – constituting 
not just its kindness, but also its effectiveness, tenacity, 
and strength (Mol et al., 2010a ).
CONCLUSIONS
In scholarly writings, the overarching focus of efforts to halt 
or curb groundwater depletion is on methods (or tools) to 
control the pumping behaviors of individuals. This continued 
focus on measurement and regulation is surprising, given 
the overwhelming evidence of groundwater’s tendency to escape control. Indeed, it is well established that it is difficult, 
cumbersome and often expensive to determine and monitor 
availabilities (Zwarteveen and al, 2021 ) and that most 
government efforts to measure and regulate groundwater 
are not very effective (Molle and Closas, 2020 ). This paper 
started, therefore, by questioning the continued faith in 
techno-managerial interventions that rely on the possibility 
to measure and regulate both waters and irrigators. We 
used the rest of the paper to explore the usefulness of the 
conceptual vocabulary of ‘care’ to complement, refresh 
and expand ways of talking about and doing groundwater 
governance. To do this, we mobilised empirical studies of 
communities who care for and share their aquifers in India, 
Algeria, Morocco, Peru and Zimbabwe.
Our exploration first of all nuanced, and sometimes 
challenged, by now familiar stories of users unavoidably 
depleting aquifers and managers needing to control 
their greed. Our studies suggest that farmers’ uses and 
management of groundwater can also be inspired by 
logics of frugality and solidarity, with strategies to make 
do with what is available complemented by investments 
in conservation and recharge. Feeling connected to their 
waters is an important reason for irrigators to get involved in 
practical actions to sustain them. The reverse is also true: by 
jointly engaging in efforts to conserve waters or maintain and 
repair water infrastructures, irrigators build and strengthen 
relations between one another. This, in turn, may provide the 
basis for crafting effective rules for sharing waters.
Political-economic contexts that force farmers to 
intensify their agricultural production can compromise 
such efforts, especially when combined with cheap 
pumping technologies that individualize the access and 
use of groundwater. Our stories reveal how communities 
may engage in delicate strategies to side-step capitalist 
pressures to individualize, intensify and deplete. Rather 
than straightforward protest or withdrawal, these can take 
the form of the joint crafting of collective agreements and 
rules to share waters fairly and sustainably. By providing 
glimpses into alternative, non-exploitative, realities, these 
stories fuel inspiration for ways of doing groundwater 
otherwise. Yet, these experiences of caring and sharing are 
seldom unequivocally good or innocent: they always entail 
difficult compromises, and involve sometimes painful 
decisions about who can, but also about who cannot, make 
use of waters and infrastructures.
Foregrounding care helps recognize that groundwater 
governance is not just about measurement and optimization, 
but also about attuning to always changing circumstances in 
often meandering processes of tinkering. The ability to tinker 
hinges on being attentive to dynamic specificities, something 
that relies on intimate and often embodied knowledge of 
a watery place. ‘Outside’ experts interested in improving 
392
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
how groundwater is used and managed need to appreciate 
the importance of such knowledge. Doing this comes with 
suspicion of forms of theorizing or generalizing that place 
the researcher outside of that what is studied, to instead 
nurture situated forms of relation-making and carefully 
crafted attachments when doing research (Haraway, 2008 ; 
Stengers, 2018; Law, 2021) . Rather than teaching others 
what to do, ‘outside’ experts then engage in a process of 
joint learning about possible ways to understand and deal 
with groundwater dilemmas. ‘Tools’ for doing groundwater governance, then, become loose and playful devices to 
start conversations or processes of joint learning, rather 
than generic one-size-fits-all solutions to bring about good 
groundwater governance in a range of places.
Care-ful(l) groundwater research and recommendation 
importantly implies accepting that ‘caring’ for groundwater 
(or indeed good groundwater governance) may mean 
something else in each case. The different forms and 
versions of caring we presented here, therefore, must be understood in their own contexts and even in their own 
terms. How members of Randullabad in Maharashtra 
express and enact their concern for the longer-term 
sustainability of the aquifer cannot be straightforwardly 
transported to Algeria, Peru, or Morocco. This also 
means that making lessons about good groundwater 
governance travel from one place to another relies less 
on commensuration and generalization and more on a 
modest, situated, and always collaborative search for the translations (Callon, 1984), re-scriptions (Pols, 2015) 
or coordinations (Mol, 2002) needed to partially connect diverse contextual practices (see Domínguez-Guzmán et al 
2017; Domínguez-Guzmán 2019; also see Zwarteveen et 
al., 2021).
Investigating a broad variety of cases in detail, trying 
to learn from all of them on their own terms, while 
juxtaposing them comparatively, does not provide firm 
facts or normative conclusions (cf. Mol et al., 2010b). In this sense, care/caring is not a theory in itself, nor does it replace 
existing theories about society-groundwater interactions or 
groundwater governance. Yet, the vocabulary of care clearly 
has more affinity with some theories of (groundwater) 
governance than with others. Care positively resonates, 
for instance, with theories of ‘commoning’ (Bollier, 2020), 
critical institutionalism (Cleaver, 2012) and sociotechnical tinkering (Kemerink-Seyoum, 2019 ) while it also can build 
on the idea of hydraulic property (Coward, 1986). Our plea 
is to use care as an analytical sensibility, with the study of practices of care serving as one promising way to widen 
the conceptual and political space for understanding and 
doing human-groundwater relations (Domínguez-Guzmán 
et al, 2022 ; Archidiacono et al., 2024 ). The hope is that 
doing this will contribute to strengthening and improving groundwater care.NOTES
1 Some scholars suggest that modern groundwater science’s success 
in making groundwater visible may even have contributed to 
accelerating extraction (See Kulkarni and Shankar, 2014).
2 See Zwarteveen et al., 2021 for more information about this 
project, as well as the project website.
3 Examples of doing this from our project are Underhill et al., 2023; 
Kuper et al., 2023. Others who have critically engaged with models 
of development that generate groundwater over-exploitation for 
instance include Bossenbroek et al., 2017; Damonte and Boelens, 
2019; Kuper et al, 2017.
4 Other scholars have mobilized other terms – patchworks (e.g. De Coss-Corzo, 2021), calibration (e.g. Chahim, 2022), pressure 
(e.g. Anand, 2011) – to refer to similar observations of everyday 
engagements with and in-situ, often improvised, adjustments of (water) infrastructures and institutions.
FUNDING INFORMATION
This project on which this research is based have received 
funding: (1) through the WEGO project, which received 
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme under the Marie Sk łodowska-
Curie grant agreement No 764908; (2) through a French Institute of Advanced Studies (FIAS) fellowship in Montpellier 
(in 2021–22) co-funded by the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 research and innovation programme under the 
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 945408 and 
(3) through the project ‘Transformations to Groundwater Sustainability’ which was financially supported by the 
Belmont Forum and NORFACE Joint Research Programme 
on Transformations to Sustainability, which is co-funded by 
AKA, ANR, DLR/BMBF, ESRC, FAPESP, FNRS, FWO, ISSC, JST, 
NSF, NWO, RCN, VR, and the European Commission through 
Horizon 2020. We are also grateful to Future Earth and the 
Water and Development Partnership Programme. Frances 
Cleaver’s contribution was funded by the UK Economics 
and Social Research Council (ESRC) project ES/S008276/1. Finally, we would like to thank the three anonymous 
reviewers for their insightful suggestions and comments on 
earlier drafts. Support for article publication and editing of 
this special issue on groundwater governance was provided 
by the CGIAR Research Initiative on NEXUS Gains: https://
www.cgiar.org/initiative/nexus-gains/.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors have no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Margreet Zwarteveen  orcid.org/0000-0001-7169-1337 
Water Governance Department, IHE-Delft, Delft, and Geography, 
393
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
Planning and Inclusive Development, University of Amsterdam, 
The NetherlandsCarolina Domínguez-Guzmán 
 orcid.org/0000-0001-7843-6910  
IHE Delft, Department of Water Governance, University of Amsterdam, Anthropology, The NetherlandsMarcel Kuper 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-1240-0592 
University of Montpellier, UMR G-Eau/Cirad, Montpellier, FranceAmine Saidani 
 orcid.org/0009-0008-6344-4019  
Center for Research in Applied Economics for Development (CREAD), Algiers, Algeria; UMR G-Eau, CIRAD, Montpellier, France; Institute of Agronomic and Veterinary Institute Hassan II, Rabat, MoroccoJeltsje Kemerink-Seyoum 
 orcid.org/0000-0003-4182-6602 
IHE Delft, Department of Water Governance, University of Amsterdam, Governance and Inclusive Development, The NetherlandsFrances Cleaver 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-4208-1211 
Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, United KingdomHimanshu Kulkarni 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-7099-6988 
Advanced Centre for Water resources Development and Management, ACWADAM, IndiaLisa Bossenbroek 
 orcid.org/0000-0003-1310-619X 
iES Institute for Environmental Sciences, RPTU (Rhineland-Palatinate Technical University) Kaiserslautern-Landau, GermanyHind Ftouhi 
 orcid.org/0000-0003-0625-2279 
Institut National d’Aménagement et d’Urbanisme, MoroccoAndres Verzijl 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-1492-375X 
IHE Delft Institute for Water Education, Delft, the NetherlandsUma Aslekar 
 orcid.org/0009-0009-7709-1266 
Advanced Center for Water Resources Development and Management, ACWADAM, IndiaZakaria Kadiri 
 orcid.org/0000-0003-1156-7451 
Hassan II University of Casablanca, LADSIS Laboratory, MoroccoTavengwa Chitata 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-4938-1663 
IHE-Delft Institute for Water Education, Delft, The Netherlands
Irene Leonardelli  orcid.org/0000-0003-4219-4467 
Università della Calabria – ItalySeema Kulkarni 
 orcid.org/0000-0002-2373-9065 
Society for Promoting Participative Eco-system Management, SOPPECOM, IndiaSneha Bhat 
 orcid.org/0009-0006-4317-3843 
Society for Promoting Participative Eco-system Management, SOPPECOM, India
REFERENCES
Anand, N. (2011). Pressure: The politechnics of water supply in 
Mumbai. Cultural Anthropology, 26(4), 542–564. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2011.01111.x
Archidiacono, S., Kemerink-Seyoum, J. S., Leonardelli, I., 
Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Chitata, T., & Zwarteveen, M. (2024). Engineering as tinkering care: a rainwater harvesting infrastructure in Cochabamba, Bolivia. Engineering Studies, 
1–20. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/19378629.2024.2304176
Benouniche, M., Zwarteveen, M., & Kuper, M. (2014). Bricolage as 
innovation: Opening the black box of drip irrigation systems. Irrigation and Drainage, 63(5), 651–658. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ird.1854
Beresford, M., Wutich, A., Garrick, D., & Drew, G. (2023). Moral 
economies for water: A framework for analyzing norms of justice, economic behavior, and social enforcement in the contexts of water inequality. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 10(2), e1627. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1627
Bhat, S., Kulkarni, S., Deshmukh, R., Bhopal, S., Zwarteveen, M., 
& Sumbre, S. (2023). Conjunctive Use of Canal Water and Groundwater: An Analysis Based on Farmers’ Practices in Ravangaon, Maharashtra. Water Alternatives, 16(1), 65–86.
Bollier, D. (2020). Commoning as a transformative social 
paradigm. In Speth, J. G. and Courrier, K (Eds.), The new systems reader. New York and London: Routledge. pp. 348–361. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4324/9780367313401-28
Bossenbroek, L., Ftouhi, H., Kadiri, Z., & Kuper, M. (2023). 
Watermelons in the desert in Morocco: Struggles around a groundwater commons-in-the-making. Water Alternatives, 16(1), 87–107. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315537146-7
Bossenbroek, L., Kuper, M., & Zwarteveen, M. (2017). Sour 
grapes: multiple groundwater enclosures in Morocco’s Saïs region. In: Venot, J. P., Kuper, M. and Zwarteveen, M (Eds.), 2017. Drip Irrigation for Agriculture. Untold Stories of Efficiency, Innovation and Development. London and New York: Earthscan from Routledge: 105–121.
Bruns, B., &  Meinzen-Dick, R. (2024). Crafting Combinations to 
Govern Groundwater. Editorial Introduction for a Special issue of the International Journal of the Commons. Interim Draft.
Callon, M. (1984). Some elements of a sociology of translation: 
domestication of the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. The sociological review, 32, 196–233. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.1984.tb00113.x
Chahim, D. (2022). Governing beyond capacity: Engineering, 
banality, and the calibration of disaster in Mexico City. American Ethnologist, 49(1), 20–34. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/amet.13052
Chitata, T., Kemerink-Seyoum, J., & Cleaver, F. (2022). ‘Our 
humanism cannot be captured in the bylaws’: How moral ecological rationalities and care shape a smallholder irrigation scheme in Zimbabwe. Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 6(4), 2761–2780. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486221137968
Chitata, T., Kemerink-Seyoum, J. S., & Cleaver, F. (2021). 
Engaging and Learning with Water Infrastructure: Rufaro Irrigation Scheme, Zimbabwe. Water Alternatives, 14(3).
394
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
Cleaver, F. (2012). Development through bricolage: rethinking 
institutions for natural resource management. London and 
New York: Earthscan/Routledge.
Cleaver, F., Chitata, T., de Bont, C., Joseph, K., Börjeson, L.,  
& Kemerink-Seyoum, J. (2023). Knowing groundwater: 
embodied encounters with a lively resource. Water 
Alternatives, 16 (1), 171–192.
Closas, A., & Villholth, K. G. (2020). Groundwater governance: 
Addressing core concepts and challenges. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 7 (1), e1392. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/wat2.1392
Coward, W. E. (1986). State and Locality in Asian Irrigation 
Development: The Property Factor. In: K. C. Nobe (Ed.), 
Irrigation Management in Developing Countries . Current 
Issues and Approaches. New York: Routledge. pp 419–508.
Damonte, G., & Boelens, R. (2019). Hydrosocial territories, 
agro-export and water scarcity: capitalist territorial 
transformations and water governance in Peru’s coastal 
valleys. Water International, 44 (2), 206–223. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1080/02508060.2018.1556869
De Coss-Corzo, A. (2021). Patchwork: Repair labor and the logic 
of infrastructure adaptation in Mexico City. Environment and 
Planning D: Society and Space, 39 (2), 237–253. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1177/0263775820938057
De la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific 
futurity and the pace of care. Social studies of science, 45 (5), 
691–716. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851
De la Bellacasa, M. P. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: 
Assembling neglected things. Social studies of science, 41 (1), 
85–106. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312710380301
De la Bellacasa, M. P. (2017). Matters of care: Speculative 
ethics in more than human worlds. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/
S2753906700002096
Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Verzijl, A., & Zwarteveen, M. (2017). 
Water Footprints and ‘Pozas’: Conversations about Practices 
and Knowledges of Water Efficiency. Water, 9 (1),16. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/w9010016
Domínguez-Guzmán, C. (2019). Grandes narrativas, pequeños 
agricultores: explorando desbordes académicos en el caso de 
los excedentes de agua en el valle de Motupe, Perú. Estudios 
atacameños,  63, 365–381. DOI: https://doi.org/10.22199/
issn.0718-1043-2019-0029
Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Verzijl, A., Zwarteveen, M.,  & Mol, 
A. (2022). Caring for water in Northern Peru: On fragile 
infrastructures and the diverse work involved in irrigation. 
Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 5 (4), 2153–
2171. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486211052216
Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Zwarteveen, M., & Kuper, M. (2023). 
Transformation as practice: Learning from everyday dealings 
with groundwater. Water Alternatives, 16 (1), 1–12.Gibson-Graham, J. K., Cameron, J., & Healy, S. (2016). 
Commoning as a postcapitalist politics. In: Amin, A., 
and Howell, P (Eds.), Releasing the commons. New York 
and London: Routledge. pp. 192–212. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781315673172-12
Giordano, M. (2009). Global groundwater? Issues and 
solutions. Annual review of Environment and Resources, 
34, 153–178. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
environ.030308.100251
Haraway, D. J. (2008). When Species Meet. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Harcourt, W. (2023). The Ethics and Politics of Care: Reshaping 
Economic Thinking and Practice. Review of Political Economy . 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/09538259.2023.2241395
Kemerink-Seyoum, J. S., Chitata, T., Domínguez Guzmán, C., 
Silva-Novoa Sanchez, L. M.,  & Zwarteveen, M. Z. (2019). 
Attention to sociotechnical tinkering with irrigation 
infrastructure as a way to rethink water governance. Water, 
11(8), 1670. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/w11081670
Kulkarni, H.,  & Shankar, P. V. (2014). Groundwater resources in 
India: an arena for diverse competition. Local Environment, 
19(9), 990–1011. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.20
14.964192
Kuper, M., Amichi, H., & Mayaux, P. L. (2017). Groundwater 
use in North Africa as a cautionary tale for climate change 
adaptation. Water International, 42 (6), 725–740. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2017.1351058
Kuper, M., Mayaux, P.-L., & Benmihoub, A. (2023). The persistent 
appeal of the California agricultural dream in North Africa. 
Water Alternatives, 16 (1), 39–64.
Law, J. (2021). Form After method to care-ful research (a 
foreword). In C. Addey, and N. Piattoeva (Eds.), Intimate 
accounts of education policy research . London: Routledge. pp. 
xvi–xx. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0038026120905452
Law, J., & Mol, A. (2020). Words to think with: An introduction. 
The Sociological Review, 68 (2), 263–282.
Leonardelli, I., Kemerink-Seyoum, J., Kulkarni, S., Bhat, S.,  
& Zwarteveen, M. (2023). A Feminist Analysis of Women 
Farmers Navigating Groundwater Qualities in Maharashtra, 
India. Water Alternatives, 16 (1), 134–152.
Lindén, L.,  & Lydahl, D. (2021). Care in STS. Nordic Journal of 
Science and Technology Studies, 9 (1), 3–12. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5324/njsts.v9i1.4000
Martin, A., Myers, N.,  & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in 
technoscience. Social studies of science, 45 (5), 625–641. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073
Martuwarra RiverOfLife, Taylor, K. S., & Anne Poelina, A. 
(2021). Living Waters, Law First: Nyikina and Mangala water 
governance in the Kimberley, Western Australia. Australasian 
Journal of Water Resources, 25 (1), 40–56. DOI: https://doi.org
/10.1080/13241583.2021.1880538
395
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
Mayaux, P. L., Dajani, M., Cleaver, F., Naouri, M., Kuper, M., 
& Hartani, T. (2022). Explaining societal change through 
bricolage: Transformations in regimes of water governance. 
Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 6 (4), 2654–
2677. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486221143666
Mol, A. (2002). The body multiple: Ontology in medical 
practice. Durham: Duke University Press. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1215/9780822384151
Mol, A. (2008). The logic of care: Health and the problem of 
patient choice. New York: Routledge. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780203927076
Mol, A.,  & Hardon, A. (2021). Caring: A fluid concept for adaptable 
engagements. In J. R. Bowen, N. Dodier, J. W. Duyvendak and 
A. Hardon (Eds.), Pragmatic inquiry: Critical concepts for social 
sciences.  New York: Routledge. pp. 185–205. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781003034124-16
Mol, A., Moser, I.,  & Pols, J. (2010a). Care: putting practice 
into theory. In A. Mol, I. Moser and J. Pols (Eds.), Care in 
practice: On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms . Bielefeld: 
Transcript Verslag. pp. 7–27. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/
transcript.9783839414477.7
Mol, A., Moser, I., Piras, E. M., Turrini, M., Pols, J.,  & Zanutto, A. 
(2010b). Care in Practice. On Normativity, Concepts, and 
Boundaries. TECNOSCIENZA, Italian Journal of Science & 
Technology Studies, 2 (1), 73–86.
Molle, F.,  & Closas, A. (2020). Why is state ‐centered 
groundwater governance largely ineffective? A review. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 7 (1), e1395. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/wat2.1395
Molle, F., López-Gunn, E.,  & Van Steenbergen, F. (2018). The 
local and national politics of groundwater overexploitation. 
Water Alternatives, 11 (3), 445–457.
Pols, J. (2006). Accounting and washing: Good care in long-term 
psychiatry. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 31 (4), 409–
430. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243906287544
Pols, J. (2015). Towards an empirical ethics in care: Relations 
with technologies in health care. Medicine, Health Care and 
Philosophy, 18 (1), 81–90. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11019-014-9582-9
Saidani, M. A., Aslekar, U., Kuper, M., & Kemerink-Seyoum, 
J. (2023). Sharing difficult waters: Community-based 
groundwater recharge and use in Algeria and India. Water 
Alternatives, 16 (1), 108–133.
Saidani, M. A., Kuper, M., Hamamouche, F. M., & Benmihoub, 
A. (2022). Reinventing the wheel: adapting a traditional 
circular irrigation system to ‘modern’ agricultural extensions 
in Algeria’s Sahara. New Medit, 21 (5), 35–53. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.30682/nm2205c
Shah, T. (2011). Past, present and the future of canal irrigation in 
India. In India Infrastructure Report 2011. New Delhi: Oxford 
University Press. pp. 69–89.Singleton, V. (2010). Good farming: Control or care. In A. 
Mol, I. Moser and J. Pols (Eds.), Care in practice: On 
tinkering in clinics, homes and farms.  Bielefeld: Transcript 
Verslag. pp. 235–256. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/
transcript.9783839414477.235
Stengers, I. (2018). Another Science is Possible. A Manifesto 
for Slow Science . Cambridge: Polity Press. (First published 
in French (excluding chapter 4) as “Une autre science est 
possible! Manifeste pour un ralentissement des sciences”. 
Paris : Editions La Decouverte, 2013).
Tozzi, A., Bouzarovski, S.,  & Henry, C. (2022). Colonizing the rains: 
Disentangling more-than-human technopolitics of drought 
protection in the archive. Geoforum, 135 , 12–24. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2022.07.011
Tronto, J. C. (2013). Caring democracy: Markets, equality, and 
justice. New York and London: New York University Press.
Underhill, V., Beckett, L., Dajani, M., Oré, M. T., & Sabati, S. 
(2023). The coloniality of modern water: Global groundwater 
extraction in California, Palestine and Peru. Water 
Alternatives, 16 (1), 13–38.
United Nations, The United Nations World Water Development 
Report. (2022). Groundwater: Making the invisible visible. 
Paris: UNESCO.
Ureta, S. (2016). Caring for waste: Handling tailings in a Chilean 
copper mine. Environment and Planning A, 48 (8), 1532–1548. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0308518X16645103
van der Ploeg, J. D. (2023). The Sociology of Farming: 
Concepts and Methods. Taylor & Francis. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.4324/9781003313274
van Dooren, T. (2014). Care. Environmental Humanities, 5 (1), 291–
294. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3615541
Verzijl, A. (2020). Water Movements: Fluidity and visibility among 
Andean worlds. PhD Thesis, Wageningen University.
Verzijl, A., Vivek, M., Prayag, A., Srinivasan, V., Domínguez-
Guzmán, C.,  & Zwarteveen, M. (2023). From Divine to Design: 
Unearthing Groundwater Practices in Tamil Nadu, India. 
Water Alternatives, 16 (1), 153–170.
Weir, J. K. (2009). Murray River Country. An ecological dialogue 
with traditional owners. Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.
Wilson, N. J., & Inkster, J. (2018). Respecting water: 
Indigenous water governance, ontologies, and the politics 
of kinship on the ground. Environment and Planning 
E: Nature and Space, 1 (4), 516–538. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/2514848618789378
Zwarteveen, M., Kuper, M., Olmos-Herrera, C., Dajani, M., 
Kemerink-Seyoum, J., Cleaver F., Beckett L., Lu, F., 
Kulkarni, S., Kulkarni, H., et al.  (2021). Transformations to 
groundwater sustainability: from individuals and pumps to 
communities and aquifers. Current Opinion of Environmental 
Sustainability, 49 , 88–97. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosust.2021.03.004
396
Zwarteveen et al. International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1350
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Zwarteveen, M., Domínguez-Guzmán, C., Kuper, M., Saidani, A., Kemerink-Seyoum, J., Cleaver, F., Kulkarni, H., Bossenbroek, L., Ftouhi, H., 
Verzijl, A., Aslekar, U., Kadiri, Z., Chitata, T., Leonardelli, I., Kulkarni, S., & Bhat, S. (2024). Caring for Groundwater: How Care Can Expand and 
Transform Groundwater Governance. International Journal of the Commons , 18(1), pp. 384– 396. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/ijc.1350
Submitted:  10 September 2023     Accepted:  26 March 2024     Published:  26 April 2024
COPYRIGHT:
© 2024 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source 
are credited. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
International Journal of the Commons  is a peer-reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press.
