Citation: Liakos, L.; Panagos, P .
Challenges in the Geo-Processing of
Big Soil Spatial Data. Land 2022 ,11,
2287. https://doi.org/10.3390/
land11122287
Academic Editors:
Dionissios Kalivas, Christos Chalkias,
Thomas Alexandridis and
Konstantinos X. Soulis
Received: 7 November 2022
Accepted: 11 December 2022
Published: 13 December 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
land
Article
Challenges in the Geo-Processing of Big Soil Spatial Data
Leonidas Liakos *
 and Panos Panagos
European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC), IT-21027 Ispra, Italy
*Correspondence: leonidas.liakos@ext.ec.europa.eu
Abstract: This study addressed a critical resource—soil—through the prism of processing big data
at the continental scale. Rapid progress in technology and remote sensing has majorly improved
data processing on extensive spatial and temporal scales. Here, the manuscript presents the results
of a systematic effort to geo-process and analyze soil-relevant data. In addition, the main high-
lights include the difﬁculties associated with using data infrastructures, managing big geospatial
data, decentralizing operations through remote access, mass processing, and automating the data-
processing workﬂow using advanced programming languages. Challenges to this study included
the reproducibility of the results, their presentation in a communicative way, and the harmonization
of complex heterogeneous data in space and time based on high standards of accuracy. Accuracy
was especially important as the results needed to be identical at all spatial scales (from point counts
to aggregated countrywide data). The geospatial modeling of soil requires analysis at multiple
spatial scales, from the pixel level, through multiple territorial units (national or regional), and river
catchments, to the global scale. Advanced mapping methods (e.g., zonal statistics, map algebra,
choropleth maps, and proportional symbols) were used to convey comprehensive and substantial
information that would be of use to policymakers. More speciﬁcally, a variety of cartographic prac-
tices were employed, including vector and raster visualization and hexagon grid maps at the global
or European scale and in several cartographic projections. The information was rendered in both
grid format and as aggregated statistics per polygon (zonal statistics), combined with diagrams and
an advanced graphical interface. The uncertainty was estimated and the results were validated in
order to present the outputs in the most robust way. The study was also interdisciplinary in nature,
requiring large-scale datasets to be integrated from different scientiﬁc domains, such as soil science,
geography, hydrology, chemistry, climate change, and agriculture.
Keywords: harmonization; reproducibility; big data; open source; composite; indicators
1. Introduction
This study focused on soil geography and the processing of large-scale datasets and
complex multilayered interactions. It does not go into detail about the physical, chemical,
or microbiological composition of soil, or the phenomena and exogenous factors that affect
the composition, quality, or productivity and sustainable capacity of the organisms living
in soil. Instead, the geo-processing of big soil data takes place at a generalized macro level
and addresses the spatial aspects and dimensions of this valuable resource. This process is
approached through the prism of the modern digital age as expressed through the rapid
development of technologies, including information technology, remote sensing, and big
data. However, this digital advancement and the volume of data involved in soil research
are not without their challenges.
From the ﬁrst stages of human civilization, and the transition from food gathering and
hunting to the agricultural exploitation of the land, the importance of the spatial dimension
of soil has been clear [ 1,2]. During the Neolithic Period, the location of settlements was
guided by the productive capacity of the soil and the possibility of self-sufﬁciency that the
soil offered to the populations of these settlements [ 3,4]. Over the centuries, Maya, Chinese,
Land 2022 ,11, 2287. https://doi.org/10.3390/land11122287 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/land
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 2 of 24
Arabs, and Greeks have studied soil characteristics, irrigation systems, and the situating of
cities on fertile and well-irrigated soils, but they also identiﬁed the problems that still plague
soil scientiﬁc research, such as erosion [ 1,5,6]. Despite this, it was only relatively recently
(in the 19th and 20th centuries) that the foundations of modern soil science were laid by
the Russian school of landscape studies [ 7]. Soil geography—a branch of soil science that
includes geostatistics—deals with the spatial variability and distribution of soil properties,
the patterns and causes of soil distributions, and their relationship with humans [ 8]. It
also involves the identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of soils, the assessment of the human and
natural factors that impact pedogenesis and soil distribution, and uses soil mapping as a
basic methodological tool [ 7]. The tools used in soil science include quantitative methods,
sampling, forecasting, modeling, and, in general, the mathematization of the stochastic side
of soil properties as a continuum in space [ 9]. The scientiﬁc roots of soil geography derive
from the sciences of agronomy, botany, geology, hydrology, and, more recently, statistics
and informatics, but especially geography, testifying to its interdisciplinary nature and its
direct relationship with interconnected spatial phenomena.
Apart from the spatial approach from the science of soil geography, soil is distin-
guished by the political or agricultural economy applying to the factors of production
(in the broad sense of land), with economic properties that refer to the space. The ﬁrst
property—immobility [ 10]—concerns the inability of the soil to escape from the natural
environment and the climate, which both surround it because its geographical location
cannot be changed. The immovable nature of soil, and its constraints on the spatial distri-
bution and quality of natural resources, is an essentially important parameter in Alfred
Weber’s theory [ 11] that production units and cities are located close to production areas
and raw materials in order to reduce transport costs. So, soil, as a factor of production
based on economic geography, is a determinant for the form and location of land uses. In
addition, soil is indispensable with a ﬁxed supply [ 12]; that is, the usable area for humans is
ﬁnite due to the spatial occurrence of soil, making it a product of purchase and ownership.
Finally, the immortality of soil [ 13], due to its ability to remain unchanged (mainly in terms
of its physical substance, but, to a lesser extent, also its chemical or biological state) in the
human scale of time, makes it safe for capital investment.
The study of the spatial aspects of soil requires an approach through the concept of ab-
solute space—emptiness as deﬁned in geography and the space of Euclidean geometry [ 14].
Based on this principle, the discontinuities of soil’s properties and the relationship between
the soil and adjacent elements can be deﬁned in an absolute way.
Space in geography is also deﬁned as relative space, in the sense of being dynamic,
deﬁned by and interacting with its content. Thus, it follows that soil, as one of the earth’s
natural resources, depending on the scientiﬁc approach, can have a different composition
based on its spatial dimension.
By integrating soil research with the modern digital age, new tools have become
available from the ﬁelds of remote sensing [ 15], proximal sensing [ 16], spectroscopy [ 17],
advanced mathematics [ 18], artiﬁcial intelligence [ 19], and machine learning [ 20]. Remote
sensing is a way of receiving radiation data (reﬂected or emitted) from the earth’s surface
and the environment in order to record, monitor, and identify events or objects in the remote
target zone [ 21]. The recorded data can be either natural or anthropogenic phenomena.
Depending on the type of phenomenon being monitored, different channels in the spectrum
are used to provide information for further processing and analysis.
A typical example of remote-sensing technology is satellite systems. Some applications
of remote sensing include the monitoring of weather conditions, the assessment of natural
disasters (such as ﬁres, ﬂoods, and earthquakes), the identiﬁcation of agricultural or forested
areas on the earth’s surface, and the study of urban sprawl. Specialized remote-sensing
applications have also been developed for the analysis and mapping of soil properties or of
phenomena that affect the soil [15,22–24].
A rising trend in the use of remote sensing has also been recorded in recent years in
the geosciences (among other disciplines), as a result of rapid developments in telecommu-
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 3 of 24
nications and digital technology. This has created a continuous supply of large volumes of
data—big data. Big data is deﬁned through three basic components (3V)—volume, velocity,
and variety [ 25]. In order to resolve a scientiﬁc question, an appropriate subset must be
identiﬁed from a heterogeneous and huge amount of data. These heterogeneous datasets
can be combined in such a way as to solve speciﬁc research problems. All of the above
constitute some of the main differences between big data and classical data [ 26]. Along
with 3V , a new parameter (3V + 1) has been added to the deﬁnition of big data—the concept
of veracity [ 27]. This concerns not only the quality of the data but also the reliability of the
source and the methodology of the analysis. Big data must be accompanied by veracity in
order to conﬁrm their validity and correct interpretation.
Remote-sensing scientists realized the concept of big data very early, when the Landsat
satellite system began providing data worldwide in the early 1970s; these data being
disproportionately large for storage and mainly used for analysis and visualization. Now,
with the support of the European Copernicus Programme and the Sentinel satellites, it is
recognized that earth observation science has entered the era of big data, with the volume
of daily data exceeding 10 TB across multiple spatial, spectral, and temporal scales [28].
A new form of analysis that has stemmed from the availability of big data in research
has begun to emerge—big data analytics [ 29]. This is focused on revealing hidden patterns
and correlations within this vast body of data.
The main purpose of this article was to present the challenges associated with geospa-
tial soil data management, the opportunities for using a decentralized operation through
remote access, the progress in mass processing, and the attempt to automate processes
using modern open-source programming languages. The article also addresses the main
difﬁculties involved in geo-processing large-scale soil data, such as the reproducibility of
the results, the homogenization of complex heterogeneous data in space and time, and
in the standards of recording and indexing, as well as the presentation of the results in a
communicative way (e.g., accurate indicators, imaginative diagrams, maps, and aggregate
tables).
The article focused on the context of this new form of analysis (big or large data
analytics), as adopted and integrated by the Joint Research Center and the European Soil
Data Centre (ESDAC). In other words, the article is referred to the effort of managing,
decoding, controlling, modeling, evaluating, validating, and presenting results from an
analysis of the large-scale soil data of the ESDAC [30].
The article mainly focused on three modeling developments that address land degra-
dation both at the European and Global scale. The ﬁrst one addresses climate change and
its impact on rainfall erosivity and soil erosion. This research used 19 downscaled Gen-
eral Circulation Models (GCMs) simulating three Representative Concentration Pathways
(RCPs) for the periods 2041–2060 and 2061–2080. A second research question focused on
the estimation of the phosphorus budget in the European Union and the United Kingdom
for the period 2011–2019, which is linked to the sustainability of land resources. The third
topic addressed soil contamination and the integration of physical processes (soil erosion,
heavy metals diffuse pollution, and sediment ﬂuxes). The datasets and maps of the afore-
mentioned research topics were produced in a detailed spatial resolution (100 m, 500 m, or
1000 m).
2. Tools—Big Data Analytics Platform and Programming Languages
2.1. Tools—Big Data Analytics Platform
The Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission has developed the big
data analytics platform (BDAP) recognizing the necessity for a computing system tailored
to the modern needs of European or global big-data research.
The JRC BDAP provides petabyte-scale storage coupled to high-throughput computing
capacities to enable and facilitate the production of policy-relevant insights and foresight
within the JRC’s Knowledge Management and Production Units. The big data analytics
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 4 of 24
project was launched in January 2019, following the big data pilot project that was carried
out in 2015–2018 [31].
BDAP is an earth observation data and processing platform. The available infrastruc-
ture is suitable for large-scale data processing. The JRC big data platform is a distributed-
computing petabyte-scale datahub based on three pillars (Figure 1):
 JEO-desk, a remote data science desktop (based on Ubuntu);
 JEO-batch, a high-performance computing mechanism based on HTCondor;
 JEO-lab, a JupyterLab environment based on a custom Python kernel.
The platform is remotely accessible through a secure and encrypted communication.
In addition, critical geospatial data collections (Copernicus and US Geological Survey
base and project data) are available in the EOS data-storage ﬁle system, developed by the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN, from the French “Conseil europ éen
pour la Recherche Nucl éaire”) and in collaboration with the JRC, and tested in a pilot
installation. It was based on special hardware and designed to meet high requirements,
while also being immediately available to the end-user, being easy to use, and having a
relatively low acquisition cost [28].
One of the major advantages offered by this platform is the possibility of teleworking—
a form of work imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic that may continue in the fu-
ture [ 32]. In addition, a decentralized collaboration and support model has been created
through which users can share the projects they have developed as well as submit requests
to members of the support team.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 26 
 
The Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission has developed the big 
data analytics platform (BDAP)  recognizing the necessity for a computing system tai-
lored to the modern needs of European or global big -data research . 
The JRC BDAP provides peta byte -scale storage coupled to high -throughput com-
puting capacities to enable and facilitate the production of policy -relevant insights and 
foresight within the JRC’s Knowledge Management and Production Units. The big data 
analytics project was launched in January 2019, following the big data pilot project that 
was carried out in 2015 –2018 [31]. 
BDAP is an earth observation data and processing platform. The available infra-
structure is suitable for large -scale data processing. The JRC big data platform is a dis-
tributed -computing petabyte -scale datahub  based on three pillars ( Figure  1): 
• JEO-desk, a remote data science desktop (based on Ubuntu);  
• JEO-batch, a high -performance computing mechanism based on HTCondor;  
• JEO-lab, a JupyterLab environment based on a custom Python kernel.  
The platform is remotely  accessible through a secure and encrypted communication. 
In addition , critical geospatial data collections (Copernicus and US Geological Survey 
base and project data) are available in the EOS data -storage file system, developed by the 
European Organizatio n for Nuclear Research  (CERN, from the French “ Conseil européen 
pour la Recherche Nucléaire ”) and in collaboration with the JRC, and tested in a pilot 
installation. It was based on special hardware and designed to meet high requirements, 
while also being i mmediately available to the end-user, being easy to use, and having a 
relatively low acquisition cost [28]. 
One of the major advantages offered by this platform is the possibility of telework-
ing—a form of work imposed during the COVID -19 pandemic that may continue in the 
future [32]. In addition, a decentralized collaboration and support model has been cre-
ated through which users can share the projects they have developed as well as submit 
requests to members of the su pport team . 
 
Figure 1. Graphical representation of BDAP components  (Acknowledgement: JRC Big Data Ana-
lytics project) [31]. 
2.2. Programming Languages —Free and Open-Source Software  
One choice made both for the construction of the BDAP platform and for the con-
duct of the research was the use of free and open -source software (FOSS), as opposed to 
the proprietary or software -as-a-service (SaaS) solution. The downside  of choosing a 
proprietary or SaaS solution is the risk of vendor lock -in. Vendor lock -in means a busi-
ness or organization is dependent on a product, service, or software with no ability to 
replace it with different options due to high transition costs [33]. In addition, research 
organ izations assign to the owner company the right to store, access, analyze, and share 
their data, with all that implies for their security and confidentiality. The choice of a 
Figure 1. Graphical representation of BDAP components (Acknowledgement: JRC Big Data Analytics
project) [31].
3. Programming Languages—Free and Open-Source Software
One choice made both for the construction of the BDAP platform and for the conduct
of the research was the use of free and open-source software (FOSS), as opposed to the pro-
prietary or software-as-a-service (SaaS) solution. The downside of choosing a proprietary or
SaaS solution is the risk of vendor lock-in. Vendor lock-in means a business or organization
is dependent on a product, service, or software with no ability to replace it with different
options due to high transition costs [ 33]. In addition, research organizations assign to
the owner company the right to store, access, analyze, and share their data, with all that
implies for their security and conﬁdentiality. The choice of a proprietary and closed-source
software (“black box”) platform by an organization would also be in stark contrast to the
open-source software strategy 2020–2023 [ 34] for the promotion of FOSS in the European
digital space.
More analytically, for our geo-processing and spatial analysis needs, the GRASS GIS
software and its individual modules were used. Spatial information was mapped and
visualized using QGIS software, while European Space Agency (ESA) SNAP/gpt software
was used to pre-process Sentinel-1 images. In addition, for geo-processing, spatial analysis,
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 5 of 24
visualization, and process automation, bash scripts, and the R and Python programming
languages were employed, along with the respective integrated development environments
RStudio and Spyder. The job scheduler HTCondor, which creates a high-throughput
computing environment, was used for bulk and parallel data processing (Figure 1). Finally,
the Geospatial Data Abstraction Library and the specialized library pyjeo [ 35], created
to support the BDAP team, were adopted for image processing, data extraction, and
conversion.
4. Main Challenges in Soil Data Processing
The main challenges involved in geo-processing soil big data are (a) developing a
framework in which to reproduce the results (reproducibility); (b) harmonizing the different
input data (harmonization); (c) merging or mosaicking the high-resolution data parts into a
single dataset (compositing); (d) zonally representing and associating statistics (zoning);
(e) aggregating the results at different scales; (f) representing maps in geographically
coordinated systems; (g) plotting outputs for policy-makers; (h) developing indicators; and
(i) developing uncertainty algorithms.
Large-scale processes and datasets on soil erosion, rainfall erosivity, mercury contami-
nation, manure management, and phosphorus are the test cases to address the challenges
involved in soil geography.
4.1. Reproducibility—Developing a Software Model Framework for Replicating the Results
The reproducibility of a study refers to the possibility of it being repeated such that,
under the same conditions, and using the same data, software, and code, the results are the
same. Reproducibility is necessary both for the user conducting the study and wanting to
record its procedures and data, and for third parties needing to conﬁrm the ﬁndings and
their reliability. This should be an easy process that can proceed without mistakes [36].
The need for reproducibility is intensiﬁed by the availability of big data and the
requirements for its management, pre-processing, and analysis. The rapid availability of
big data necessitates a workﬂow schema that can reproduce the changing standards and
results in near real time [37].
To best achieve reproducibility, the processes were automated using R, Python, and
bash (where feasible). To ensure consistency and reliability of the results and easy repetition,
the sequence of execution steps was recorded using Snakemake software [ 38]. Snakemake
is a workﬂow engine that provides a readable Python-based workﬂow-deﬁnition lan-
guage and a powerful execution environment that scales from single-core workstations to
computer clusters without modifying the workﬂow [39].
Apart from ensuring study reproducibility, Snakemake may contribute to the adapt-
ability and transparency of the research project. Soil research is a timeless process that is
in constant ﬂux due to the conditions and factors that shape it [ 40,41]. Using a workﬂow
management system ensures the immediate adjustment or extension of the computing pro-
cedures to changing conditions (adaptability), or even a new research process. In addition,
the depiction of the workﬂows and correlations of the individual entities in Snakemake
ensures the technical and scientiﬁc accuracy of the procedures (transparency). Snakemake
offers automation in the form of rules that essentially describe the connections between
the procedures through input/output data, to and from each node of the process. These
connections are described using a directed acyclic graph.
Software, input data, routine interconnections, and algorithms are components that
must be available and documented for the scientiﬁc community. For this reason, the
distributed version control system Git, and an instance of the GitLab code repository
designed by the BDAP team, were used to record the change history, the ability to revert to
previous stages of the study, and the need to share code.
For example, the study on phosphorus plant removal from European agricultural
land [ 42] and the improvement of the phosphorus budget in European agricultural soils [ 43]
is a typical form of research in which, due to the large heterogeneity of data and analyt-
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 6 of 24
ical processes, the use of a workﬂow management system and a scalable approach was
particularly important. In addition to the data heterogeneity, a diverse set of software had
to be used for data processing, analysis, and presentation. Typically, more than 40 scripts
for processing and analyzing data need to be synchronized via a speciﬁc execution order.
Many times, small changes at one point in the analysis pipeline can produce multiple con-
sequences to the output of other stages of a study. All these procedures were harmonized
using adaptions of Snakemake.
4.2. Data Harmonization
The heterogeneous volume of big data, in terms of source, geometry, resolution, and
semiology, requires harmonization. Data harmonization is a process in which heteroge-
neous datasets are transformed in such a way that they become uniﬁed, homogeneous, and
compatible so that they are comparable to each other [ 44,45]. A variety of techniques have
been developed over time for big data harmonization [46,47].
The development of merging methodologies, scales, and heterogeneity in remote-
sensing data allows data fusion on a global scale [ 48]. At the European level, harmonization
models have been developed for geospatial data to be made compatible with the European
INSPIRE Directive [ 49]. More specialized models for soil data have been developed for
harmonization at both the global [50,51] and European scales [52,53].
In our case, the harmonization required focused on the spatial, temporal, and descrip-
tive information of the data. Spatial data at various resolutions were merged into single
sets in order to render the information to the appropriate spatial unit. The descriptive
information, respectively, had to be identiﬁed with the merging of the data in the respective
spatial hierarchy.
A typical example of data harmonization involved the development of the phospho-
rus budget for European agricultural soils [ 43], where production data per crop from the
Common Agricultural Policy Regionalized Impact (CAPRI) model had to be merged and
adapted in order to ﬁt the administrative units (regions) of the EU. This harmonization
was not only about spatial integration, but also hierarchical identiﬁcation in predeﬁned
categories of information. The inputs for the phosphorus originated from fertilizers, ma-
nure, chemical weathering, and atmospheric deposition, and the outputs were from uptake
by plants, plant residues, and erosion, and so repartition methods were required to ap-
propriately attribute the spatial distribution of phosphorus to all the necessary spatial
levels (country—nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (nomenclature des unit és
territoriales statistiques, NUTS) Level 0, regions—NUTS Level 2). The NUTS were created
by Eurostat and represent the ofﬁcial, hierarchical, geographical divisions of the EU for
regional statistics. Data harmonization was also applied on a timescale where monthly
or annual data were merged into higher time units (decades or time frames of 5 years).
For example, during the assessment of phosphorus fertilization uncertainty at the country
level, the input data were averaged for the years 2011–2019.
4.3. Compositing—Merging or Mosaicking High-Resolution Data Parts into a Single Dataset
Composites or mosaics are common techniques used in GIS and remote sensing for
merging spatial data [ 54,55]. In GIS, mosaicking is a process in which a single spatial
dataset is created by combining several individual, usually adjacent, rasters. Gaps that can
occur during mosaicking receive a nodata value. During the compositing process, spatially
overlapping rasters are merged into one ﬁle. The values of each pixel in this generated ﬁle
result from applying a function to the individual raster pixels (mean, median, standard
deviation, minimum, maximum, sum, etc.). Sometimes, compositing means the creation of
a single multiband raster from individual rasters. In this case, no function is applied, but
each raster becomes a separate band in the output raster.
For example, the global rainfall erosivity projections for 2050 and 2070 [ 56] apply a
worldwide mean standard deviation to 19 general climate models for three different Repre-
sentative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) scenarios of Coupled Model Intercomparison
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 7 of 24
Project model 5 (CMIP5). In such cases, the use of JEO-batch services, the high-throughput
computing environment of HTCondor (Figure 1), and the tiling mechanism offered by the
pyjeo library were particularly useful in compositing global maps in a reasonable time and
in an efﬁcient way. The number of ﬁles per year (51), the global coverage of the maps, and
the high spatial resolution (~1 km) rendered the production of this data process practically
impossible using typical computational systems due to their limited resources. Raster
compositing was one solution. An alternative option was the tiling mechanisms offered
by the pyjeo library, which implies that ﬁles are fragmented through an out-of-the-box
mechanism on smaller pieces based on a grid. For every grid, the mean composite process
was executed separately and in parallel through the HTCondor distributed mechanism.
Then, the output ﬁles from each subset were joined together to form a new ﬁnal output
ﬁle. This procedure makes feasible the timely, effective, and computable merging of large
geospatial datasets.
4.4. Zoning—Producing Aggregated Statistics
Another common practice for analyzing and visualizing variables and indicators with
a spatial dimension is zonal statistics. Zonal statistics are executed in raster ﬁles with
accompanying zone (either raster or vector) ﬁles. During the process, for each zone, a
function (e.g., mean, median, and minimum) is applied to the raster. The necessity for
using such a method for big geospatial data led to the development of innovative zonal
statistics calculation methods with parallel and distributed processing. This requires the
use of graphics processing units, with global application, and for data with a petabyte order
of magnitude [57,58].
When presenting the results of zonal statistics, the effect of the modiﬁable areal unit
problem (MAUP) requires special interpretation. The term “MAUP” was ﬁrst coined by
Openshaw and Taylor [ 59] who assessed the effect of differentiating space delimitation
or reconstitution into new distinct spatial units on output data and results. The ﬁrst case
concerned the “problem of zones”, which does not change the number of partition zones of
the space, but rather their boundaries, shapes, and positions. The second property is the
“scale problem”, which arises through the aggregation (or disassembly) of spatial units or
by changing the resolution of the data. Both cases can lead to inconsistencies in the research
results.
Zonal statistics are commonly used in the context of soil research in ESDAC for
aggregating data, developing indicators, drawing conclusions, and highlighting spatial
differences at the European level. An example of this method is the soil loss from river
basins (Figure 2). The method vividly depicts the spatial distribution of indicators in space
and provides the possibility to compare data per spatial statistical unit (Figure 2). Detail
is lacking when assembling a polygon, but by using zonal statistics, the noise is reduced
and the necessary generalizations are ensured. However, modifying or scaling polygon
shapes can lead to different results. Particular attention needs to be paid to the stages of the
study that are affected by the MAUP because the impact of the problem can be vital [ 60,61].
Choropleth maps (using MAUP as a tool) can manipulate the reader [ 62,63] and be used as
a means of misinformation in processes that are not related to the scientiﬁc methodology,
but rather to political propaganda.
River basin boundaries are attributed through geomorphological processes and, con-
sequently, no anthropogenic/human intervention is involved. In addition, NUTS statistical
units are the commonly accepted administrative boundaries, widely established at the
European level. The map symbols are ideologically/politically neutral and represent only
the actual conceptual content, quality, or quantity of the variables they symbolize. Data
insights are achieved by choosing the appropriate classiﬁcation method and meaningful
class breaks across the entire data range. The goal is to highlight the differences in the
studied attribute (e.g., mercury loss) by choosing the best possible classiﬁcation method
(quantile, equal interval, natural breaks, or custom).
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 8 of 24
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 26 
 
[62,63]  and be used as a means of misinformation in processes that are not related to the 
scientific methodology, but rather to political propaganda.  
River b asin boundaries are attributed through geomorphological processes and, 
consequently, no anthropogenic/human intervention is involved. In addition, NUTS sta-
tistical units are the commonly accepted administrative boundaries, widely established at 
the Europea n level. The map symbols are ideologically/politically neutral and represent 
only the actual conceptual content, quality, or quantity of the variables they symbolize. 
Data insights are achieved by choosing the appropriate classification method and 
meaningf ul class breaks across the entire data range. The goal is to highlight the differ-
ences in the studied attribute (e.g., mercury loss) by choosing the best possible classifica-
tion method (quantile, equal interval, natural breaks, or custom).  
 
Figure 2. Estimated Hg losses to river basins and Hg fluxes to sea outlets (Mg yr−1) due to water 
erosion  [64]. 
3.5. Spatial Resolution —Aggregating Results at Different Scales  
Choosing the right scale for data representation is crucial in soil geography. The 
generalized image offered at the small scale can obscure details and relationships at the 
micro level. However, even a large -scale ma p can add noise and highlight structures that 
are of no use to the purpose of the study. The selection of spatial resolution depends on 
the phenomenon that is under investigation, and it is therefore quite legitimate to change 
the cartographic scale. Over time, even before the advent of GIS and digital mapping, soil 
research was largely bound by the static scale of proxy variables (such as climate, vege-
tation, and topography) and the inability to dynamically define the scale of the topic 
under investigation  [65]. Nowadays, digital technology provides the option to evaluate 
the appropriate scale of the work and to adapt to every eventuality.  
Figure 2. Estimated Hg losses to river basins and Hg ﬂuxes to sea outlets (Mg yr 1) due to water
erosion [64].
4.5. Spatial Resolution—Aggregating Results at Different Scales
Choosing the right scale for data representation is crucial in soil geography. The
generalized image offered at the small scale can obscure details and relationships at the
micro level. However, even a large-scale map can add noise and highlight structures that
are of no use to the purpose of the study. The selection of spatial resolution depends on
the phenomenon that is under investigation, and it is therefore quite legitimate to change
the cartographic scale. Over time, even before the advent of GIS and digital mapping,
soil research was largely bound by the static scale of proxy variables (such as climate,
vegetation, and topography) and the inability to dynamically deﬁne the scale of the topic
under investigation [ 65]. Nowadays, digital technology provides the option to evaluate the
appropriate scale of the work and to adapt to every eventuality.
The spatial resolution of a study is deﬁned and interpreted in direct relation to the scale
of the map. At global scales, low-spatial-resolution mapping, country-level visualization,
or large bioclimatic zones make sense, as more detail adds noise and hides potential
spatial patterns. On the other hand, European-scale research can be attributed to smaller
geographical reference units (e.g., NUTS2 or catchments) or high cell resolution to ensure
that cartographic generalization does not remove valuable information.
For example, in the global rainfall erosivity projections for 2050 and 2070 [ 56], the
mapping was performed at the optimal global-scale resolution to ensure the differences
in erosivity patterns were apparent without adding unnecessary noise (Figure 3). For the
study on mercury losses in European topsoils [ 64], the mapping scale was European and
the reference unit was the river basin because this drove the process of sediment ﬂow
(Figure 4).
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 9 of 24
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 26 
 
The spatial resolution of a study is defined and interpreted in direct relation to the 
scale of the map. At global scales, low -spatial -resolution mapping, country -level visual-
ization, or large bioclimatic zones make  sense, as more detail adds noise and hides po-
tential spatial patterns. On the other hand, European -scale research can be attributed to 
smaller geographical  reference units (e.g., NUTS2 or catchments) or high cell resolution 
to ensure that cartographic generalization does not remove valuable information.  
For example, in the global rainfall erosivity projections for 2050 and 2070 [56], the 
mapp ing was performed at the optimal global -scale resolution to ensure the differences 
in erosivity patterns were apparent without adding un necessary noise ( Figure 3 ). For the 
study on mercury losses in European topsoils [64], the mapping scale was European and 
the reference unit was the river basin because this drove the process of sediment flow 
(Figure 4 ). 
Different visual approaches are also available,  aimed at facilitating the end -user and 
providing cartographic elegance. An innovative cartographic presentation is given in 
Figure 5  where the values are presented on a hexagon grid map at a 250  km2 spatial res-
olution, a scale different to that of the pri mary data. On this map, the objective was to 
highlight the degree of agreement in trends of rainfall erosivity using several cli-
mate -change prediction models for 2050. Having 250  km2 cell dimensions ensured a 
balance between the generalization of the infor mation and the preservation of the varia-
bility.  
 
Figure 3. Erosivity projection s for the period 2050 −2070 for the scenario RCP 8.5 [56]. 
Figure 3. Erosivity projections for the period 2050  2070 for the scenario RCP 8.5 [56].
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 26 
 
 
Figure 4. Estimated Hg displaced with water erosion per catchment [64]. 
 
Figure 5. Scenario convergence aggregated a pixel of 250  km2. Each scenario counts as +1 (increase) 
or −1 (decrease). Each pixel represents the sum of the increased/decreased scenarios [56]. 
Figure 4. Estimated Hg displaced with water erosion per catchment [64].
Different visual approaches are also available, aimed at facilitating the end-user and
providing cartographic elegance. An innovative cartographic presentation is given in
Figure 5 where the values are presented on a hexagon grid map at a 250 km2spatial
resolution, a scale different to that of the primary data. On this map, the objective was
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 10 of 24
to highlight the degree of agreement in trends of rainfall erosivity using several climate-
change prediction models for 2050. Having 250 km2cell dimensions ensured a balance
between the generalization of the information and the preservation of the variability.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 26 
 
 
Figure 4. Estimated Hg displaced with water erosion per catchment [64]. 
 
Figure 5. Scenario convergence aggregated a pixel of 250  km2. Each scenario counts as +1 (increase) 
or −1 (decrease). Each pixel represents the sum of the increased/decreased scenarios [56]. 
Figure 5. Scenario convergence aggregated a pixel of 250 km2. Each scenario counts as +1 (increase)
or 1 (decrease). Each pixel represents the sum of the increased/decreased scenarios [56].
4.6. Cartography—Map Projections
The study of soil-related spatial phenomena at the European and global scales requires
different geographic reference systems. The reference system is chosen not only on the
basis of cartographic performance, but also on the spatial analysis because each projection
system brings about changes in attributes, such as distances, angles, and areas. As early
as 1999, at a conference organized by the JRC and the Multi-purpose European Ground
Related Information Network, it was jointly agreed that the most appropriate reference
system is the European Terrestrial Reference System 89 (ETRS89) [ 66]. The ETRS89 was
adopted in 1990 in Firenze [ 67]. It uses the Geodetic Reference System 1980 ellipsoid as its
reference ellipsoid, the geometric center of the ellipsoid being coincident with the center
of the mass of the earth and the origin of the coordinate system. Thus, in the context of
studies on the analysis and visualization of data at the European scale, the geographical
reference system ETRS89 is used (Figure 6), which is suitable for mapping at all scales and
for the preservation of distances and areas.
In order to visualize datasets on global maps, the World Geodetic System (WGS)
84 was projected onto a plate car ée projection (i.e., Figure 3). The WGS 84 is an earth-
centered, earth-ﬁxed terrestrial reference system and geodetic datum. It comprises a set of
constants and model parameters (geoid, reference ellipsoid, a standard coordinate system,
and altitude data) that describe the earth’s size, shape, gravity, and geomagnetic ﬁelds.
The WGS 84 is the standard US Department of Defense deﬁnition of a global reference
system for geospatial information and is the reference system that underpins the Global
Positioning System [ 68]. It is compatible with the International Terrestrial Reference System,
which is maintained by the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service.
The plate carr ée map projection is a simple equidistant cylindrical projection. Its
meridians and parallels are straight lines that outline squares from east to west and north
to south. Due to its simplicity, WGS 84 has been a very common projection, especially
during the 15th and 16th centuries. The plate carr ée projection has the standard parallel
at the equator [ 69]. One of its main disadvantages involves its distortions of shapes and
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 11 of 24
areas. Because of the distortions introduced by this projection (Figure 7a), it is not used for
navigation or cadastral mapping, but it is very common in thematic mapping, GIS, and
global raster datasets (i.e., Celestia and NASA World Wind) [ 70]. The plate carr ée projection
ignores the earth’s curvature because it assumes that there is a linear relationship between
the projection of a geographic point ( ',) into Cartesian coordinates (x, y).
In some cases, in order to create more visually appealing global maps, the Robin-
son pseudo-cylindrical projection was used (see example in Figure 8). This is a pseudo-
cylindrical projection, with the standard parallel at the Equator. It has the same distortions
as the Mercator projection. Thus, between about 0 and 15, the areas and shapes are
well preserved, whereas, from approximately 15north and south to approximately 45
north and south (Figure 7b), there is an expansion of the acceptable distortion. In polar
regions, the distortions are less pronounced. Its main advantage is the pleasing appearance,
but with the disadvantage of increased distortions. The Robinson projection is neither
equal-area, conformal, equidistant, nor true in direction [ 71]. The distortions introduced
by the plate carr ée and Robinson pseudo-cylindrical projection are presented in Tissot’s
Indicatrix (Figure 7) [ 72,73]. The Tissot’s Indicatrix method was introduced in 1859 by
Nicolas Auguste Tissot, a French mathematician, in order to visualize local distortions
caused by map projections.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 26 
 
 
Figure 6. Hg stock (g ha−1) in European topsoils  [64]. 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 7. Tissot’s Indicatrix depicting the distortions for (a) plate carrée and (b) Robinson pseu-
do-cylindrical projection  (Acknowledgement: Justin Kunimune)  [72,73] . 
Figure 6. Hg stock (g ha 1) in European topsoils [64].
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 12 of 24
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 26 
 
 
Figure 6. Hg stock (g ha−1) in European topsoils  [64]. 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 7. Tissot’s Indicatrix depicting the distortions for (a) plate carrée and (b) Robinson pseu-
do-cylindrical projection  (Acknowledgement: Justin Kunimune)  [72,73] . 
Figure 7. Tissot’s Indicatrix depicting the distortions for ( a) plate carr ée and ( b) Robinson pseudo-
cylindrical projection (Acknowledgement: Justin Kunimune) [72,73].
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 26 
 
 
Figure 8. Change (%) of erosivity of the period 2010 −2050 for the scenario RCP2.6 [56]. 
3.7. Presentation —Plotting Outputs in a Comprehensive Way  
In the context of better communicating the research results , wate rfall charts, pie 
charts ( Figure 9 ), donut charts, box plots ( Figure 10 ), and dumbbell plots ( Figure 11 ) were 
produced . In many cases, the maps were combined with plots to provide a more com-
prehensive picture of the results.  
Waterfall charts are a special category of bar plots that depict how  an initial value is 
changed as new values are successively added (or deducted). Its name comes from its 
characteristic “waterfall” appearance. The advantage to the end -user is not only being 
able to ascertain the initial and final values of a size, but al so the entire accompanying 
record that had an effect  in the intermediate stage. The initial bar is defined on the basis 
of a baseline,  with  the next bar using the end of the previous bar as the baseline. This 
difference in the baseline is also one of the w eaknesses that can disorient the end -user. In 
addition, disproportionate changes per stage (bar) result in some bars being very small 
and unreadable and some being very large.  
In other cases, it is necessary to present the proportions by data group. Pie charts are 
used t o depict these proportions as parts of a circle. A representative example of using 
pie charts in combinati on with a map is given in Figure 9 , in which the pie charts corre-
spond to each country. Each pie chart depicts the proportion of manur e per animal type. 
Although no particular explanation is needed for the end -user, pie charts are less reada-
ble when incorporating the proportions of several groups. Moreover, they do not present 
the absolute values per group and they do not show inter -temp oral changes; therefore , 
comparisons between pie charts are not easy. A variant of the pie chart is the donut chart. 
In fact, this is a pie chart with a hole in the middle. This hole is usually a space for in-
cluding additional information, such as labels. They have more restricted possibilities 
because they are intended for only a few (2 –4) groups of data.  
A visualization method used to describe and compare the distributions of several 
variables and groups is the box plot. These briefly and graphically att ribute a variable 
distribution because they show the median, first, and third quarters of the data (lower 
and upper hinges), with whiskers that extend from each hinge to 1.5 times the interquar-
tile range. Any data values that exceed the whisker limits are considered to be outliers 
and are provided as a point on the graph. A typical example of a box plot, used for 
Figure 8. Change (%) of erosivity of the period 2010  2050 for the scenario RCP2.6 [56].
4.7. Presentation—Plotting Outputs in a Comprehensive Way
In the context of better communicating the research results, waterfall charts, pie
charts (Figure 9), donut charts, box plots (Figure 10), and dumbbell plots (Figure 11)
were produced. In many cases, the maps were combined with plots to provide a more
comprehensive picture of the results.
Waterfall charts are a special category of bar plots that depict how an initial value
is changed as new values are successively added (or deducted). Its name comes from its
characteristic “waterfall” appearance. The advantage to the end-user is not only being
able to ascertain the initial and ﬁnal values of a size, but also the entire accompanying
record that had an effect in the intermediate stage. The initial bar is deﬁned on the basis
of a baseline, with the next bar using the end of the previous bar as the baseline. This
difference in the baseline is also one of the weaknesses that can disorient the end-user. In
addition, disproportionate changes per stage (bar) result in some bars being very small and
unreadable and some being very large.
In other cases, it is necessary to present the proportions by data group. Pie charts are
used to depict these proportions as parts of a circle. A representative example of using pie
charts in combination with a map is given in Figure 9, in which the pie charts correspond to
each country. Each pie chart depicts the proportion of manure per animal type. Although
no particular explanation is needed for the end-user, pie charts are less readable when
incorporating the proportions of several groups. Moreover, they do not present the absolute
values per group and they do not show inter-temporal changes; therefore, comparisons
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 13 of 24
between pie charts are not easy. A variant of the pie chart is the donut chart. In fact,
this is a pie chart with a hole in the middle. This hole is usually a space for including
additional information, such as labels. They have more restricted possibilities because they
are intended for only a few (2–4) groups of data.
A visualization method used to describe and compare the distributions of several vari-
ables and groups is the box plot. These briefly and graphically attribute a variable distribution
because they show the median, first, and third quarters of the data (lower and upper hinges),
with whiskers that extend from each hinge to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Any data
values that exceed the whisker limits are considered to be outliers and are provided as a point
on the graph. A typical example of a box plot, used for comparing distributions, is shown in
Figure 10. In that plot, mercury concentrations are expressed per country . This characterizes
the potential of the box plot to compare the distributions of this variable, with even a limited
plot being able to express a number of descriptive statistical measures.
Box plots, on one hand, provide brief information; although, on the other hand, they
conceal other important information on the distribution of the data (e.g., the number
of observations). For this reason, in Figure 10, further descriptive measures have been
included, such as the average, the number of samples with high mercury concentrations
>200g kg 1, and the percentage proportion of high-concentration samples compared to
the total number per country.
Finally, a series of dumbbell plots were used to represent differences through time
and to emphasize deviations in the estimates of individual models. These offer very
comprehensive visualizations of deviations and are therefore used to compare multiple
data groups. A typical example of a dumbbell plot is provided in Figure 11. This refers to
the comparison of predictions of future rainfall erosivity for 2070 based on climate-change
scenarios RCP2.6, RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 from the CMIP5 prediction model.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 26 
 
comparing di stributions, is shown in Figure 10 . In that plot, mercury concentrations are 
expressed per country. This characterizes the potential o f the box plot to compare the 
distributions of this variable, with even a limited plot being able to express a number of 
descriptive statistical measures.  
Box plots, on one hand, provide brief information ; although , on the other hand, they 
conceal other im portant information on the distribution of the data (e.g., the number of 
observatio ns). For this reason, in Figure 10 , further descriptive measures have been in-
cluded, such as the average, the number of samples with high mercury concentrations 
>200 µg kg- 1, and the percentage proportion of high -concentration samples compared to 
the total number per country.  
Finally, a series of dumbbell plots were used to represent differences through time 
and to emphasize deviations in the estimates of individual models.  These offer very 
comprehensive visualizations of deviations and are therefore used to compare multiple 
data groups. A typical example of a dumbbell plot is provided in  Figure 11 . This refers to 
the comparison of predictions of future rainfall erosivity fo r 2070 based on cli-
mate -change scenarios RCP2.6, RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 from the CMIP5 prediction model.  
 
Figure 9. Annual manure production (million tonnes) in the European Union and UK and distri-
bution according to main animal types ( period : 2016–2019)  [74]. 
Figure 9. Annual manure production (million tonnes) in the European Union and UK and distribution
according to main animal types (period: 2016–2019) [74].
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 14 of 24
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 26 
 
 
Figure 10. Mercury (Hg) concentration per country as μg Kg−1 [64]. 
 
Figure 11. The range of model predictions for years 2050 and 2070 [56]. 
Another option to provide comprehensible information to the end -user is through 
intricate maps; for example, the phosphorus budget at NUTS Leve l 0 on a choropleth 
map ( Figure 12 ). Along with the color grading representing the phosphorus budget, the 
labels pr ovide summary information on the phosphorus inputs and outputs, and the 
uncertainty at the 90% confidence level. The choice of color scheme type (discrete or 
continuous) is not accidental. Color schemes are a series of associated colors that corre-
spond to certain values. There are two methods that cover the construction of color 
schemes.  
The first is the continuous -gradient method, where the maximum and minimum 
values correspond to two distinct colors, and the intermediate values are defined, 
through an in terpolation method, as a mix of these two colors. The continuous -gradient 
color scheme represents the full range of dataset values with greater success. However, 
the continuous gradient may be influenced by outliers where the data are skewed. In 
Figure 10. Mercury (Hg) concentration per country as g Kg 1[64].
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 26 
 
 
Figure 10. Mercury (Hg) concentration per country as μg Kg−1 [64]. 
 
Figure 11. The range of model predictions for years 2050 and 2070 [56]. 
Another option to provide comprehensible information to the end -user is through 
intricate maps; for example, the phosphorus budget at NUTS Leve l 0 on a choropleth 
map ( Figure 12 ). Along with the color grading representing the phosphorus budget, the 
labels pr ovide summary information on the phosphorus inputs and outputs, and the 
uncertainty at the 90% confidence level. The choice of color scheme type (discrete or 
continuous) is not accidental. Color schemes are a series of associated colors that corre-
spond to certain values. There are two methods that cover the construction of color 
schemes.  
The first is the continuous -gradient method, where the maximum and minimum 
values correspond to two distinct colors, and the intermediate values are defined, 
through an in terpolation method, as a mix of these two colors. The continuous -gradient 
color scheme represents the full range of dataset values with greater success. However, 
the continuous gradient may be influenced by outliers where the data are skewed. In 
Figure 11. The range of model predictions for years 2050 and 2070 [56].
Another option to provide comprehensible information to the end-user is through
intricate maps; for example, the phosphorus budget at NUTS Level 0 on a choropleth map
(Figure 12). Along with the color grading representing the phosphorus budget, the labels
provide summary information on the phosphorus inputs and outputs, and the uncertainty
at the 90% conﬁdence level. The choice of color scheme type (discrete or continuous) is not
accidental. Color schemes are a series of associated colors that correspond to certain values.
There are two methods that cover the construction of color schemes.
The ﬁrst is the continuous-gradient method, where the maximum and minimum
values correspond to two distinct colors, and the intermediate values are deﬁned, through
an interpolation method, as a mix of these two colors. The continuous-gradient color
scheme represents the full range of dataset values with greater success. However, the
continuous gradient may be inﬂuenced by outliers where the data are skewed. In addition,
it is not possible for the human eye to accurately match each color to its corresponding
value, especially when no linear interpolation of the color scale is used. For these reasons,
discrete color schemes are mainly used to create maps.
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 15 of 24
The second method—the discrete color scheme—consists of a series of distinct colors.
These are usually successive shades of one color. Each distinct color corresponds to a
speciﬁc range of data values. Although details of the data are partially lost, spatial patterns
are better depicted and comparisons between cases are easier to see. The end-user can
clearly match the color on the map or diagram with the corresponding value range in the
legend. As an extension of this method, diverging color schemes can also be used. These
involve a discrete color scheme with a light color in the middle and two different dark colors
at the ends that converge toward the center of the palette. This scheme is mainly used where
there is a need to distinguish positive and negative values or, more generally, where there is
a divergence in data values from a central/neutral point of convergence. A representative
example of the discrete color scheme is given in Figure 12. The third type of color scheme
is the categorical color scheme. This is made for simple visual distinction/categorization,
where the color does not correspond to any value or type of hierarchy.
Maps and charts are produced with the aim of delivering the actual distribution of the
data to the end-user in the most optimal way. In addition to the choice of color scheme
(continuous or discrete), the interpolation of the color scale method is also important. During
the interpolation process, all data values are attached/assigned to one color. The most common
color interpolations are the linear, quantile, natural break, pretty break, logarithmic scale, and
standard deviation styles. In many cases, if linear interpolation of the color scale is selected
and there are outliers, important details of the data distribution can be lost.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  17 of 26 
 
 
Figure 12. Phosphorus budget at country scale including sum of inputs/outputs and uncertainties  
[43]. 
In other cases, it may be deemed necessary to combine the cartographic information 
with diagrams; Figure 9  shows the quantity of livestock manure per EU Member State in 
combination with the proportion of manure per animal type.  
The results of this study, in addition to the scientific publications that emanated 
from it, have been disseminated  as open data through the ESDAC 
(https://esdac.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ , accessed on 30  September  2022). 
3.8. Statistics—Developing Indicators  
Appropriate insights into soil properties, and the threats to and functions of these, 
through their spatial distributions , contribute to their proper management and mitiga-
tion in the case of land degradation. This is important in the context of developing indi-
cators and trends in order to better support soil -relevant policies, such as the Soil Strategy 
2030, the Common Agricu ltural Policy (CAP), the Farm -to-Fork Strategy, and the Zero 
Pollution Action Plan [75,76] . 
Examples of policy -relevant indicators are the mean soil erosion rate and the share 
of agricultural area under severe erosion used to evaluate the environmental perfor-
mance of th e CAP  [77]. By using a bar plot ( Figure 13 ), the output of the study is pre-
Figure 12. Phosphorus budget at country scale including sum of inputs/outputs and uncertain-
ties [43].
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 16 of 24
Finally, with respect to choropleth maps, the values need to be standardized over a
unit area (usually a hectare or square kilometer). If absolute values are used, then there is a
risk of large-area polygons also summing up to high values.
In other cases, it may be deemed necessary to combine the cartographic information
with diagrams; Figure 9 shows the quantity of livestock manure per EU Member State in
combination with the proportion of manure per animal type.
The results of this study, in addition to the scientiﬁc publications that emanated from it,
have been disseminated as open data through the ESDAC (https://esdac.jrc.ec.europa.eu/,
accessed on 30 September 2022).
4.8. Statistics—Developing Indicators
Appropriate insights into soil properties, and the threats to and functions of these,
through their spatial distributions, contribute to their proper management and mitigation
in the case of land degradation. This is important in the context of developing indicators
and trends in order to better support soil-relevant policies, such as the Soil Strategy 2030,
the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the Farm-to-Fork Strategy, and the Zero Pollution
Action Plan [75,76].
Examples of policy-relevant indicators are the mean soil erosion rate and the share of
agricultural area under severe erosion used to evaluate the environmental performance of
the CAP [ 77]. By using a bar plot (Figure 13), the output of the study is presented for the
assessment of soil loss by water erosion in the EU [ 77] as an estimated rate per country for
the years 2000, 2010, and 2016.
Land 2022 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 26 
 
sented for the assessment of soil loss by water erosion in the EU [77] as an estimated rate 
per country for the years 2000, 2010, and 2016.  
 
Figure 13. Estimated mean soil erosion rate per country . 
The EU Soil Observatory (EUSO) intends to host a dashboard with indicators  mon-
itoring soil health in the EU. The EUSO was launched in December 2020 , and its main aim 
is to disseminate data and knowledge about soil protection to the wider scientific com-
munity and policymakers, to support research, and to contribute to public awar eness 
regarding soil protection  [76]. The EUSO dashboard will host a series of periodically  
updated indicators that will contribute to the assessment of soil -protection policies. 
Currently, the core of the EUSO —the ESDAC —hosts harmonized datasets that assess soil 
condition s in the EU. The ESDAC includes, among other things, pan -European datasets 
for soil organic carbon, soil erosion, nutrients, diffuse contamination, soil biodiversity, 
and soil physical/chemical properties. Some of these harmonized datasets have been 
used in  the context of the new EU Soil Strategy, the CAP, the Zero -Pollution Action Plan, 
and the EU’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
3.9. Uncertainty  
A common way to evaluate uncertainties in modeling outputs is the Monte Carlo 
method. This method is wide ly used in the scientific fields of biology, engineering, geo-
physics, meteorology, information technology, public health, and commerce. With the 
Monte Carlo method, one or more variables are represented by a probability distribution 
function, and a large n umber (hundreds or thousands) of random values from this dis-
tribution are extracted by sampling. The resulting values from these iterations provide a 
probability distribution of this variable [78]. The metho d is widespread in soil science, 
with applications focusing on soil moisture  [79], hea vy-metal contamination [80], land-
slide susceptibility and hazard assessment [81], and soil classification and stratification 
[82]. 
The Monte Carlo method was also used in the study on phosphorus plant removal 
from European agricultural la nd [42] and the improveme nt of the phosphorus budget in 
European agricultural soils [43]. In specific, Monte Carlo was used to estimate the un-
certainty in phosphorus plant removal as a result of the heterogeneity in crop production, 
humidity rates, and the phosphorus concentration in plant tissues. A total of  1000 Monte 
Carlo simulations were performed for each cropping system and NUTS Level 2 region. 
The outputs of these Monte Carlo simulations resulted in a standard deviation for 
Figure 13. Estimated mean soil erosion rate per country.
The EU Soil Observatory (EUSO) intends to host a dashboard with indicators monitor-
ing soil health in the EU. The EUSO was launched in December 2020, and its main aim is to
disseminate data and knowledge about soil protection to the wider scientiﬁc community
and policymakers, to support research, and to contribute to public awareness regarding soil
protection [76]. The EUSO dashboard will host a series of periodically updated indicators
that will contribute to the assessment of soil-protection policies. Currently, the core of the
EUSO—the ESDAC—hosts harmonized datasets that assess soil conditions in the EU. The
ESDAC includes, among other things, pan-European datasets for soil organic carbon, soil
erosion, nutrients, diffuse contamination, soil biodiversity, and soil physical/chemical prop-
erties. Some of these harmonized datasets have been used in the context of the new EU Soil
Strategy, the CAP , the Zero-Pollution Action Plan, and the EU’s Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 17 of 24
4.9. Uncertainty
A common way to evaluate uncertainties in modeling outputs is the Monte Carlo
method. This method is widely used in the scientiﬁc ﬁelds of biology, engineering, geo-
physics, meteorology, information technology, public health, and commerce. With the
Monte Carlo method, one or more variables are represented by a probability distribution
function, and a large number (hundreds or thousands) of random values from this dis-
tribution are extracted by sampling. The resulting values from these iterations provide
a probability distribution of this variable [ 78]. The method is widespread in soil science,
with applications focusing on soil moisture [ 79], heavy-metal contamination [ 80], landslide
susceptibility and hazard assessment [81], and soil classiﬁcation and stratiﬁcation [82].
The Monte Carlo method was also used in the study on phosphorus plant removal
from European agricultural land [ 42] and the improvement of the phosphorus budget
in European agricultural soils [ 43]. In speciﬁc, Monte Carlo was used to estimate the
uncertainty in phosphorus plant removal as a result of the heterogeneity in crop production,
humidity rates, and the phosphorus concentration in plant tissues. A total of 1000 Monte
Carlo simulations were performed for each cropping system and NUTS Level 2 region. The
outputs of these Monte Carlo simulations resulted in a standard deviation for phosphorus
plant uptake at both the regional and national scales with a 90% conﬁdence level.
5. Discussion
This article presented the methods, techniques, tools, and infrastructure used in soil
research to geo-process large-scale datasets at the ESDAC. This could be used as a guide
for the processing, analysis, and presentation of (large) geospatial soil data. The rapid
disposal of geographical and remote-sensing data requires an approach that exceeds the
capabilities of standard computing systems. The JRC is a successful example of how
adopting and implementing innovative and powerful computing systems, interdisciplinary
cooperation, and effective data management can be applied. End-users and organizations
can now be made aware that there are high-performing computational systems capable of
implementing the geo-processing of large spatial data in reasonable timeframes.
The approach to this new era of large data is not only limited to technological adapta-
tions, but also includes a change in the model of collaboration through remote access. In
this case, the new norm of teleworking provides a novel opening for cooperation among
scientists through online points of collaboration and support (e.g., GitLab) via teleworking
capabilities (JEO-desk).
The adoption of FOSS as another new norm is a huge advancement for open and
collaborative research. It has now been conﬁrmed that the use of FOSS is not a risk to re-
search, but a choice tried and tested by a high-level research organization. In addition to the
economic beneﬁts, FOSS ensures the transparency of its algorithms and the independence
of research beyond the decisions of private companies. With this option, the possibility
of vendor lock-in, or a company handing research data and their security to the private
sector, is excluded. The removal of high-cost software licenses for proprietary software will
result in enormous savings that can be used for new scientiﬁc staff assignments and other
research processes.
Speciﬁc criteria have been presented here that clarify how to choose a map projection
for pan-European or global geospatial data, and how to use the appropriate color scheme
and classiﬁcation method to highlight spatial patterns. In addition, attention has been
drawn to the endogenous weaknesses (projection distortions, MAUP) in the cartographic
process in such a way that the future user can avoid failures and misinterpretations of their
research results.
Geospatial data were harmonized into uniform spatial entities using identical stan-
dards and characteristics (coordinate reference system, units of measurement, spatial
resolution, and cartographic symbols), regardless of the properties of the primary sources.
Harmonization is necessary for temporal resolution where detailed temporal scales are
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 18 of 24
reduced to coarser units so as to generate uniform time series. This methodology makes it
possible to compare heterogeneous data on a European or global scale.
Emphasis is given to making the results interpretable to the broader scientiﬁc com-
munity. For this reason, a series of charts and maps were used to describe divergences,
aggregations, distributions, and proportions in a comprehensible manner. ESDAC stands
as the main, high-trafﬁc distribution center of high-quality datasets for the state of soils at
the European level with 10,000 data downloads in 2022 [ 30]. It is worth mentioning that the
distributed datasets are available with speciﬁc standards (and metadata) that describe the
format, the conceptual content, the units of measurement, the coordinate reference system,
and the accompanying publications in scientiﬁc journals for the end-user. In addition,
proposals have been made on how the users could handle the uncertainty in environmental
indicators through the Monte Carlo method. Its practical application and utility have been
concisely exempliﬁed.
At the level of improvisation and data aggregation, current research has developed
(see the phosphorus budget) and adapted indicators from other sciences (i.e., the Lorenz
curve) to the needs of soil science. For example, Bezak et al. [ 83] investigate the use of the
Lorenz curve in rainstorm frequency and Gini coefﬁcients in measuring the inequality of
storm events.
Despite the comprehensive effort to manage large-scale data, there is still room for
improvement. The digital environment for the management and processing of geospatial
soil data remains classiﬁed and available only to JRC researchers with no potential for
detailed analysis by the wider scientiﬁc community. However, users and organizations in
close collaboration with JRC researchers do have access to the data computing facilities.
Recent works in the ﬁeld of geoinformatics and earth observation have necessitated
that common data analysis (not just consumption) could be a public good from all sci-
entists [ 84,85]. The Copernicus Open Access Hub [ 86] has been cited as an example of
a geospatial platform for sharing not only data, but also computing resources, technical
infrastructure, and algorithms. This integrated research environment aims also to exploit
the vast amounts of data available from the wider scientiﬁc community.
In the case of the ESDAC, however, data-sharing is one-dimensional, with the provi-
sion of static ﬁles. In future efforts to upgrade the ESDAC infrastructure, it is proposed
to make geospatial data more easily accessible to the public through various services
(webmapping, application programming interfaces (APIs), fast processing algorithms,
distributed computing, and cloud applications for wider audiences).
The goal is to develop an API suitable for large-scale spatial deployments that will
allow users to connect and download data in a standardized way from cloud platforms
and data cube services [ 87]. The API will allow the immediate availability of data in a
homogenized form and their integration into programming environments for modeling and
analysis. It can be further separated into more specialized parts that will provide Catalog
API, Statistical API, and Processing API according to the Sentinel Hub implementation [ 88].
The basic infrastructure—BDAP [ 28]—which can support this goal already exists within
the organization.
However, the signiﬁcant efforts made by the JRC, through the adoption of BDAP and
the support of open-source software, should not be overlooked. The use of the BDAP
platform opens new horizons for the management, processing, and analysis of soil data.
The adequate storage and computing resources provide possibilities for investigating, in a
timely manner, research questions at high spatial resolutions, at the European and global
levels, and on a long-term basis. This feature is not available with standard computer
systems or in organizations with limited computing resources. At the same time, the results
of this research have been disseminated both through publications and the relevant web
portals, which can be viewed as reference points for science. The research results have
been presented in such a way (via diagrams, maps, ﬁgures, tables, etc.) that they are easily
accessible by a wide scientiﬁc audience (undergraduate and PhD students, academics) and
end-users (policymakers).
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 19 of 24
Recently, the technical capacity for developing dynamic dashboards via a Jupyter
extension—Voila—has been developed. Viola allows the conversion of Jupyter Notebooks
to standalone web applications. These dashboards are, for the time being, accessible only
to JRC members, but they represent an important tool for the decision-making processes of
policymakers. They have the advantage of allowing the presentation of data as web maps,
diagrams, and tables in live and dynamic ways. In addition, one of the most important
advantages of Voila is that it can provide data analysts with the potential to build web
applications using tools known to them (such as Python), not having to use web-speciﬁc
languages (HTM, JavaScript, etc.). In this way, for the data analysts, the presentation of
research results to policymakers is facilitated and accelerated. Another option for obtaining
deeper data insights and disseminating information to the wider scientiﬁc audience is
the adoption of Qlik. Qlik is a cloud platform for real-time analytics, data warehouse
automation, visualization, and data dashboards.
In addition, the choice of using FOSS to conduct research is essentially an admission
that scientiﬁc knowledge must be independent of business practices that impose limited
access on algorithms, which run the risk of vendor lock-ins, and deprive valuable scientiﬁc
staff of jobs due to the ﬁnancial costs of these. Because research results provide scientiﬁc
evidence for policy proposals and broader strategic planning, the transparency of algo-
rithms and workﬂows (as opposed to proprietary “black boxes”) at all stages of research is
a critical factor. Those directly affected by the accompanying policies and planning should
have the right to access the underlying process. In fact, with the advent of big (spatial) data
and the participation of more and more partners worldwide, checking the reliability of the
research is becoming even more difﬁcult than in the past. The transition to open science
and open data has been a signiﬁcant realization in recent years [89].
On the other hand, although there is a plethora of free software repositories in the
world of open source, the relevant section of the JRC that focuses on soil research lags
behind in publishing code related to workﬂows, models, and their related documentation
for the complete reproduction of their research results. The factors that limit code disclosure
may be related to copyright issues, its degree of completeness and accuracy, the complexity
and heterogeneity of the data, and the obligation to support and educate the public, as well
as the scientiﬁc community [90].
Reproducible research initiatives in the scientiﬁc community have already begun in
the ﬁeld of publication. For example, the publishers of the journals Scientiﬁc Data (http:
//www.nature.com/sdata/, accessed on 15 June 2022), from the Nature Publishing Group,
and Toxicological Sciences , in collaboration with the Dryad Digital Repository, Elsevier,
and GitHub, have taken action to ensure that the contents of their publications will be
accompanied by the corresponding code [ 91]. A similar discussion has been initialized in
the ﬁeld of remote sensing, for which a specialized journal [92] has been proposed.
The ESDAC follows and adapts the current evolutionary process—sometimes referred
to as data science, open science, big data, or spatial analytics. Methodologically, soil science,
as applied to the JRC, merges a variety of techniques, but now requires the exploitation of
vast and varied spatial data based on openness, transparency, sharing, and reproducibility.
6. Conclusions and Future Developments
Soil is inextricably linked to the concept of space and soil research is inseparable from
this concept. New technologies and remote sensing offer novel possibilities in the study of
soil properties and phenomena at various spatial scales. New challenges and opportunities
have arisen with the availability of big data. At the same time, innovative management and
analysis techniques have been developed. The JRC has adapted to the spirit of this new
era by evolving pioneering research tools and methodologies aimed at exploiting these
conditions and effectively disseminating research outputs to the scientiﬁc community.
Future plans include the use of new tools and techniques (large-scale batch pro-
cessing and machine/deep-learning infrastructure) to exploit research advancements in
geo-processing billions of objects (such as parcels), including soil-property values. There is
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 20 of 24
a plan to calculate a series of soil-erosion, soil organic carbon, pH, and nutrient indicators
for ~70 to 75 million parcels, corresponding to the entire (~160 million ha) agricultural area
of the EU countries. This research is becoming especially important because it will provide
a detailed account of the state of the land that has been subjected to intensive exploitation.
The fragmentation of agricultural land into multiple agricultural parcels has changed its
potential for intensive use. In France and Austria, agricultural land has been fragmented
into averages of 22 and 37 parcels/km2, respectively. In Cyprus, Slovenia, and Italy, the
fragmentation of agricultural land is even greater as the landscape is dominated by much
smaller parcels of 215, 119, and 117 parcels/km2, respectively. This variety of agricultural
land fragmentation exerts variable impacts on the soil of the respective parcels. New
spatial patterns that affect the properties of the ground in different ways are expected to be
revealed, based on the number of parcels per unit of surface area. In addition, temporal
changes in the density and sizes of the parcels per unit surface area may not only indicate
changes in the management conditions and exploitation of the agricultural land, but also
may result from land-use changes (pressures of urban sprawl, forest expansion, changes in
production models, etc.).
In addition, new information and communication technologies are proposed for the
future, with plans for data sharing through web-map services, and a map viewer for
navigation and the direct visualization of geospatial data. The above technologies will
be structured according to both the INSPIRE Directive and international interoperability
standards (Open Geospatial Consortium). Data sharing will be extended to integrated
interoperability systems, APIs, and big earth-observation data management and analysis
platforms.
An integral part of the transition to the new scientiﬁc reality is the need for an in-
terdisciplinary approach to territorial phenomena. Close cooperation and consultation
between individual scientiﬁc partners will be required for the analysis of complex questions.
This interdisciplinary community of soil scientists, information technology experts, mod-
elers, geographers, environmental scientists, and data managers will merge their various
scientiﬁc ﬁndings under the evolving umbrella of geography.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.L. and P .P .; methodology, L.L. and P .P .; software, L.L.;
validation, L.L.; formal analysis, L.L.; investigation, L.L.; resources, P .P .; data curation, L.L.; writing—
original draft preparation, L.L.; writing—review and editing, L.L. and P .P .; visualization, L.L.; super-
vision, P .P .; project administration, P .P . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The study is based on data and maps that have been already available
in the European Soil Data Centre (https://esdac.jrc.ec.europa.eu/resource-type/datasets) (accessed
on 16 September 2022).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Brevik, E.C.; Homburg, J.A.; Sandor, J.A. Soils, Climate, and Ancient Civilizations. In Developments in Soil Science ; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2018; Volume 35, pp. 1–28. ISBN 978-0-444-63950-9.
2. Moskal-del Hoyo, M.; Lity´ nska-Zaj ˛ ac, M.; Korczy´ nska, M.; Cywa, K.; Kienlin, T.L.; Cappenberg, K. Plants and Environment:
Results of Archaeobotanical Research of the Bronze Age Settlements in the Carpathian Foothills in Poland. J. Archaeol. Sci. 2015 ,
53, 426–444. [CrossRef]
3. Perlès, C.; Monthel, G. The Early Neolithic in Greece: The First Farming Communities in Europe , 1st ed.; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2001; ISBN 978-0-521-80181-2.
4. Tan, B.; Wang, H.; Wang, X.; Yi, S.; Zhou, J.; Ma, C.; Dai, X. The Study of Early Human Settlement Preference and Settlement
Prediction in Xinjiang, China. Sci. Rep. 2022 ,12, 5072. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Beach, T.; Dunning, N.; Luzzadder-Beach, S.; Cook, D.E.; Lohse, J. Impacts of the Ancient Maya on Soils and Soil Erosion in the
Central Maya Lowlands. CATENA 2006 ,65, 166–178. [CrossRef]
6. Ford, A.; Clarke, K.C.; Raines, G. Modeling Settlement Patterns of the Late Classic Maya Civilization with Bayesian Methods and
Geographic Information Systems. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 2009 ,99, 496–520. [CrossRef]
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 21 of 24
7. Rodrigo-Comino, J.; Senciales, J.M.; Cerd à, A.; Brevik, E.C. The Multidisciplinary Origin of Soil Geography: A Review. Earth-Sci.
Rev. 2018 ,177, 114–123. [CrossRef]
8. Miller, B.A.; Brevik, E.C.; Pereira, P .; Schaetzl, R.J. Progress in Soil Geography I: Reinvigoration. Prog. Phys. Geogr. Earth Environ.
2019 ,43, 827–854. [CrossRef]
9. Carre, F.; Krasilnikov, P .; Montanarella, L.; European Commission; Joint Research Centre; Institute for Environment and
Sustainability. Soil Geography and Geostatistics Concepts and Applications ; Publications Ofﬁce: Luxembourg, 2008.
10. Needham, B.; Louw, E.; Metzemakers, P . An Economic Theory for Industrial Land Policy. Land Use Policy 2013 ,33, 227–234.
[CrossRef]
11. Weber, A. Theory of the Location of Industries/Alfred Weber; Translated with an Introduction and Notes by Carl J. Friedrich. In
Theory of the Location of Industries ; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, IL, USA, 1929.
12. Mason, G. Land as a Distinctive Factor of Production. Available online: http://www.wealthandwant.com/docs/Gaffney_
LaaDFoP .html#A-1 (accessed on 28 April 2022).
13. El-Barmelgy, M.; Shalaby, A.; Nassar, U.; Ali, S. Economic Land Use Theory and Land Value in Value Model. Int. J. Econ. Stat.
2014 ,2, 91–98.
14. Maz úr, E. Space in Geography. GeoJournal 1983 ,7, 139–143. [CrossRef]
15. Angelopoulou, T.; Tziolas, N.; Balafoutis, A.; Zalidis, G.; Bochtis, D. Remote Sensing Techniques for Soil Organic Carbon
Estimation: A Review. Remote Sens. 2019 ,11, 676. [CrossRef]
16. Babaeian, E.; Sadeghi, M.; Jones, S.B.; Montzka, C.; Vereecken, H.; Tuller, M. Ground, Proximal, and Satellite Remote Sensing of
Soil Moisture. Rev. Geophys. 2019 ,57, 530–616. [CrossRef]
17. Chabrillat, S.; Ben-Dor, E.; Cierniewski, J.; Gomez, C.; Schmid, T.; van Wesemael, B. Imaging Spectroscopy for Soil Mapping and
Monitoring. Surv. Geophys. 2019 ,40, 361–399. [CrossRef]
18. Ballabio, C.; Lugato, E.; Fern ández-Ugalde, O.; Orgiazzi, A.; Jones, A.; Borrelli, P .; Montanarella, L.; Panagos, P . Mapping LUCAS
Topsoil Chemical Properties at European Scale Using Gaussian Process Regression. Geoderma 2019 ,355, 113912. [CrossRef]
19. Pham, B.T.; Nguyen, M.D.; Bui, K.-T.T.; Prakash, I.; Chapi, K.; Bui, D.T. A Novel Artiﬁcial Intelligence Approach Based on
Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Network and Biogeography-Based Optimization for Predicting Coefﬁcient of Consolidation of
Soil. CATENA 2019 ,173, 302–311. [CrossRef]
20. Padarian, J.; Minasny, B.; McBratney, A.B. Machine Learning and Soil Sciences: A Review Aided by Machine Learning Tools. Soil
2020 ,6, 35–52. [CrossRef]
21. Campbell, J.B.; Wynne, R.H. Introduction to Remote Sensing , 5th ed.; Guilford Press: New York, NY, USA, 2011; ISBN 978-1-60918-
176-5.
22. Mohanty, B.P .; Cosh, M.H.; Lakshmi, V .; Montzka, C. Soil Moisture Remote Sensing: State-of-the-Science. Vadose Zone J. 2017 ,16,
vzj2016.10.0105. [CrossRef]
23. Peng, J.; Biswas, A.; Jiang, Q.; Zhao, R.; Hu, J.; Hu, B.; Shi, Z. Estimating Soil Salinity from Remote Sensing and Terrain Data in
Southern Xinjiang Province, China. Geoderma 2019 ,337, 1309–1319. [CrossRef]
24. Aiello, A.; Adamo, M.; Canora, F. Remote Sensing and GIS to Assess Soil Erosion with RUSLE3D and USPED at River Basin Scale
in Southern Italy. CATENA 2015 ,131, 174–185. [CrossRef]
25. Goodchild, M.F. GIS in the Era of Big Data. Cybergeo Eur. J. Geogr. 2016 . Available online: http://journals.openedition.org/
cybergeo/27647 (accessed on 16 September 2022).
26. Chi, M.; Plaza, A.; Benediktsson, J.A.; Sun, Z.; Shen, J.; Zhu, Y. Big Data for Remote Sensing: Challenges and Opportunities. Proc.
IEEE 2016 ,104, 2207–2219. [CrossRef]
27. Schade, S. Big Data Breaking Barriers—First Steps on a Long Trail. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2015 ,
XL-7/W3 , 691–697. [CrossRef]
28. Soille, P .; Burger, A.; De Marchi, D.; Kempeneers, P .; Rodriguez, D.; Syrris, V .; Vasilev, V . A Versatile Data-Intensive Computing
Platform for Information Retrieval from Big Geospatial Data. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 2018 ,81, 30–40. [CrossRef]
29. Vassakis, K.; Petrakis, E.; Kopanakis, I. Big Data Analytics: Applications, Prospects and Challenges. In Mobile Big Data ;
Skourletopoulos, G., Mastorakis, G., Mavromoustakis, C.X., Dobre, C., Pallis, E., Eds.; Lecture Notes on Data Engineering
and Communications Technologies; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; Volume 10, pp. 3–20. ISBN
978-3-319-67924-2.
30. Panagos, P .; Van Liedekerke, M.; Borrelli, P .; Köninger, J.; Ballabio, C.; Orgiazzi, A.; Lugato, E.; Liakos, L.; Hervas, J.; Jones, A.;
et al. European Soil Data Centre 2.0: Soil Data and Knowledge in Support of the EU Policies. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 2022 ,73, e13315.
[CrossRef]
31. European Commission—Joint Research Centre Group: JRC Big Data Analytics Platform (BDAP) | Connected Commission.
Available online: https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/connected/groups/bigdataeoss (accessed on 18 January 2022).
32. Baert, S.; Lippens, L.; Moens, E.; Sterkens, P .; Weytjens, J. The COVID-19 Crisis and Telework: A Research Survey on Experiences,
Expectations and Hopes ; Institute of Labor Economics (IZA): Bonn, Germany, 2020.
33. Opara-Martins, J.; Sahandi, R.; Tian, F. Critical Analysis of Vendor Lock-in and Its Impact on Cloud Computing Migration: A
Business Perspective. J. Cloud Comp. 2016 ,5, 4. [CrossRef]
34. European Commission. Communication to the Commission Open Source Software Strategy 2020–2023, Think Open ; European
Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 22 of 24
35. Kempeneers, P .; Pesek, O.; De Marchi, D.; Soille, P . Pyjeo: A Python Package for the Analysis of Geospatial Data. Int. J. Geo-Inf.
2019 ,8, 461. [CrossRef]
36. Gandrud, C. Reproducible Research with R and RStudio , 2nd ed.; Chapman & Hall/CRC the R Series; CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
Group: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2015; ISBN 978-1-4987-1537-9.
37. Yenni, G.M.; Christensen, E.M.; Bledsoe, E.K.; Supp, S.R.; Diaz, R.M.; White, E.P .; Ernest, S.K.M. Developing a Modern Data
Workﬂow for Regularly Updated Data. PLoS Biol. 2019 ,17, e3000125. [CrossRef]
38. Mölder, F.; Jablonski, K.P .; Letcher, B.; Hall, M.B.; Tomkins-Tinch, C.H.; Sochat, V .; Forster, J.; Lee, S.; Twardziok, S.O.; Kanitz, A.;
et al. Sustainable Data Analysis with Snakemake. F1000Res 2021 ,10, 33. [CrossRef]
39. Koster, J.; Rahmann, S. Snakemake–a Scalable Bioinformatics Workﬂow Engine. Bioinformatics 2012 ,28, 2520–2522. [CrossRef]
40. Puig de la Bellacasa, M. Making Time for Soil: Technoscientiﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 2015 ,45, 691–716.
[CrossRef]
41. Brevik, E.C.; Cerd à, A.; Mataix-Solera, J.; Pereg, L.; Quinton, J.N.; Six, J.; Van Oost, K. The Interdisciplinary Nature of SOIL. Soil
2015 ,1, 117–129. [CrossRef]
42. Panagos, P .; Muntwyler, A.; Liakos, L.; Borrelli, P .; Biavetti, I.; Bogonos, M.; Lugato, E. Phosphorus Plant Removal from European
Agricultural Land. J. Consum. Prot. Food Saf. 2022 . [CrossRef]
43. Panagos, P .; Köningner, J.; Ballabio, C.; Liakos, L.; Muntwyler, A.; Borrelli, P .; Lugato, E. Improving the Phosphorus Budget of
European Agricultural Soils. Sci. Total Environ. 2022 ,853, 158706. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Agarwal, P .; Shroff, G.; Malhotra, P . Approximate Incremental Big-Data Harmonization. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
International Congress on Big Data, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 27 June 2013–2 July 2013; pp. 118–125.
45. Kumar, G.; Basri, S.; Imam, A.A.; Balogun, A.O. Data Harmonization for Heterogeneous Datasets in Big Data—A Conceptual
Model. In Software Engineering Perspectives in Intelligent Systems ; Silhavy, R., Silhavy, P ., Prokopova, Z., Eds.; Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; Volume 1294, pp. 723–734.
ISBN 978-3-030-63321-9.
46. Janecka, K.; Cerba, O.; Jedlicka, K.; Jezek, J. Towards interoperability of spatial planning data: 5-Steps harmonization framework.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Multidisciplinary Scientiﬁc GeoConference SGEM 2013, Albena, Bulgaria, 20 June 2013;
Surveying Geology & Mining Ecology Management (SGEM): Soﬁa, Bulgaria; Volume 1, pp. 1005–1016.
47. Kumar, G.; Basri, S.; Imam, A.A.; Khowaja, S.A.; Capretz, L.F.; Balogun, A.O. Data Harmonization for Heterogeneous Datasets: A
Systematic Literature Review. Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 8275. [CrossRef]
48. Longbotham, N.; Kontgis, C.; Maguire, C. Harmonization and Fusion of Global Scale Data. In Proceedings of the IGARSS
2018—2018 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, Valencia, Spain, 22–27 July 2018; pp. 1738–1739.
49. Das, S.; Giunchiglia, F. GeoEtypes: Harmonizing Diversity in Geospatial Data (Short Paper). In On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems: OTM 2016 Conferences ; Debruyne, C., Panetto, H., Meersman, R., Dillon, T., Kühn, E., O’Sullivan, D., Ardagna, C.A., Eds.;
Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; Volume 10033, pp. 643–653.
ISBN 978-3-319-48471-6.
50. Batjes, N.H.; Ribeiro, E.; van Oostrum, A.; Leenaars, J.; Hengl, T.; Mendes de Jesus, J. WoSIS: Providing Standardised Soil Proﬁle
Data for the World. Earth Syst. Sci. Data 2017 ,9, 1–14. [CrossRef]
51. FAO; IIASA; ISRIC; ISS-CAS; JRC. Harmonized World Soil Database (Version 1.1) ; FAO: Rome, Italy; IIASA: Laxenburg, Austia, 2009.
52. Orgiazzi, A.; Ballabio, C.; Panagos, P .; Jones, A.; Fern ández-Ugalde, O. LUCAS Soil, the Largest Expandable Soil Dataset for
Europe: A Review. Eur. J. Soil. Sci. 2018 ,69, 140–153. [CrossRef]
53. Lugato, E.; Bampa, F.; Panagos, P .; Montanarella, L.; Jones, A. Potential Carbon Sequestration of European Arable Soils Estimated
by Modelling a Comprehensive Set of Management Practices. Glob. Chang. Biol. 2014 ,20, 3557–3567. [CrossRef]
54. Li, X.; Feng, R.; Guan, X.; Shen, H.; Zhang, L. Remote Sensing Image Mosaicking: Achievements and Challenges. IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Mag. 2019 ,7, 8–22. [CrossRef]
55. Zhang, W.; Li, X.; Yu, J.; Kumar, M.; Mao, Y. Remote Sensing Image Mosaic Technology Based on SURF Algorithm in Agriculture.
J. Image Video Proc. 2018 ,2018 , 85. [CrossRef]
56. Panagos, P .; Borrelli, P .; Matthews, F.; Liakos, L.; Bezak, N.; Diodato, N.; Ballabio, C. Global Rainfall Erosivity Projections for 2050
and 2070. J. Hydrol. 2022 ,610, 127865. [CrossRef]
57. Singla, S.; Eldawy, A. Raptor Zonal Statistics: Fully Distributed Zonal Statistics of Big Raster + Vector Data. In Proceedings of the
2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Atlanta, GA, USA, 10–13 December 2020; pp. 571–580.
58. Zhang, J.; You, S.; Gruenwald, L. Efﬁcient Parallel Zonal Statistics on Large-Scale Global Biodiversity Data on GPUs. In
Proceedings of the 4th International ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on Analytics for Big Geospatial Data, Bellevue, WA, USA, 3
November 2015; ACM: New York, NY, USA; pp. 35–44.
59. Openshaw, S.; Taylor, P .J. A Million or so Correlation Coefﬁcients: Three Experiments on the Modiﬁable Areal Unit Problem. In
Statistical Applications in the Spatial Sciences ; Wrigley, N., Ed.; Pion: London, UK, 1979; pp. 127–144.
60. Ye, X.; Rogerson, P . The Impacts of the Modiﬁable Areal Unit Problem (MAUP) on Omission Error. Geogr. Anal. 2021 ,54, 32–57.
[CrossRef]
61. Nelson, J.K.; Brewer, C.A. Evaluating Data Stability in Aggregation Structures across Spatial Scales: Revisiting the Modiﬁable
Areal Unit Problem. Cartogr. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2017 ,44, 35–50. [CrossRef]
62. Belyea, B. How to Lie with Maps (Third Edition). Cartogr. J. 2018 ,55, 400–401. [CrossRef]
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 23 of 24
63. Monmonier, M. Lying with Maps. Stat. Sci. 2005 ,20, 215–222. [CrossRef]
64. Panagos, P .; Jiskra, M.; Borrelli, P .; Liakos, L.; Ballabio, C. Mercury in European Topsoils: Anthropogenic Sources, Stocks and
Fluxes. Environ. Res. 2021 , 111556. [CrossRef]
65. Miller, B.A.; Schaetzl, R.J. History of Soil Geography in the Context of Scale. Geoderma 2016 ,264, 284–300. [CrossRef]
66. Ihde, J.; Boucher, C.; Dunkley, P .; Farrell, B.; Gubler, E.; Luthardt, J.; Torres, J. European Spatial Reference Systems—Frames for
Geoinformation System. In Proceedings of the Veröffentlichung der Bayerischen Kommission für die Internationale Erdmessung, München,
No. 61, 2000 ; Tromsö, 2000. Available online: European-Spatial-Reference-Systems-Frames-for-Geoinformation-Systems.pdf
(accessed on 16 September 2022).
67. Bruyninx, C.; Altamimi, Z.; Brockmann, E.; Caporali, A.; Dach, R.; Dousa, J.; Fernandes, R.; Gianniou, M.; Habrich, H.; Ihde, J.;
et al. Implementation of the ETRS89 in Europe: Current Status and Challenges. In REFAG 2014 ; van Dam, T., Ed.; International
Association of Geodesy Symposia; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2015; Volume 146, pp. 135–145. ISBN
978-3-319-45628-7.
68. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, O. of G. WGS 84. Available online: https://earth-info.nga.mil/index.php?dir=wgs84&
action=wgs84 (accessed on 16 September 2022).
69. ESRI Plate Carr ée—ArcGIS Pro | Documentation. Available online: https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/2.8/help/mapping/
properties/plate-carree.htm (accessed on 16 September 2022).
70. PROJ contributors PROJ Coordinate Transformation Software Library. Available online: https://proj.org/ (accessed on 15
September 2022).
71. ICSM Commonly Used Map Projections|Intergovernmental Committee on Surveying and Mapping. Available online: https://
www.icsm.gov.au/education/fundamentals-mapping/projections/commonly-used-map-projections (accessed on 16 September
2022).
72. Wikipedia Equirectangular Projection. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equirectangular_
projection&oldid=1108776583 (accessed on 16 September 2022).
73. Wikipedia Robinson Projection. Available online: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robinson_projection&oldid=10
85731280 (accessed on 16 September 2022).
74. Köninger, J.; Lugato, E.; Panagos, P .; Kochupillai, M.; Orgiazzi, A.; Briones, M.J.I. Manure Management and Soil Biodiversity:
Towards More Sustainable Food Systems in the EU. Agric. Syst. 2021 ,194, 103251. [CrossRef]
75. Montanarella, L.; Panagos, P . The Relevance of Sustainable Soil Management within the European Green Deal. Land Use Policy
2021 ,100, 104950. [CrossRef]
76. Panagos, P .; Montanarella, L.; Barbero, M.; Schneegans, A.; Aguglia, L.; Jones, A. Soil Priorities in the European Union. Geoderma
Reg. 2022 ,29, e00510. [CrossRef]
77. Panagos, P .; Ballabio, C.; Poesen, J.; Lugato, E.; Scarpa, S.; Montanarella, L.; Borrelli, P . A Soil Erosion Indicator for Supporting
Agricultural, Environmental and Climate Policies in the European Union. Remote Sens. 2020 ,12, 1365. [CrossRef]
78. Kwak, Y.H.; Ingall, L. Exploring Monte Carlo Simulation Applications for Project Management. Risk Manag. 2007 ,9, 44–57.
[CrossRef]
79. Yan, H.; DeChant, C.M.; Moradkhani, H. Improving Soil Moisture Proﬁle Prediction with the Particle Filter-Markov Chain Monte
Carlo Method. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 2015 ,53, 6134–6147. [CrossRef]
80. Qu, C.; Sun, K.; Wang, S.; Huang, L.; Bi, J. Monte Carlo Simulation-Based Health Risk Assessment of Heavy Metal Soil Pollution:
A Case Study in the Qixia Mining Area, China. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. Int. J. 2012 ,18, 733–750. [CrossRef]
81. Marin, R.J.; Mattos, Á.J. Physically-Based Landslide Susceptibility Analysis Using Monte Carlo Simulation in a Tropical Mountain
Basin. Georisk Assess. Manag. Risk Eng. Syst. Geohazards 2020 ,14, 192–205. [CrossRef]
82. Hu, Y.; Wang, Y. Probabilistic Soil Classiﬁcation and Stratiﬁcation in a Vertical Cross-Section from Limited Cone Penetration Tests
Using Random Field and Monte Carlo Simulation. Comput. Geotech. 2020 ,124, 103634. [CrossRef]
83. Bezak, N.; Mikoš, M.; Borrelli, P .; Liakos, L.; Panagos, P . An In-Depth Statistical Analysis of the Rainstorms Erosivity in Europe.
Catena 2021 ,206, 105577. [CrossRef]
84. Evangelidis, K.; Ntouros, K.; Makridis, S.; Papatheodorou, C. Geospatial Services in the Cloud. Comput. Geosci. 2014 ,63, 116–122.
[CrossRef]
85. Yang, C.; Goodchild, M.; Huang, Q.; Nebert, D.; Raskin, R.; Xu, Y.; Bambacus, M.; Fay, D. Spatial Cloud Computing: How Can the
Geospatial Sciences Use and Help Shape Cloud Computing? Int. J. Digit. Earth 2011 ,4, 305–329. [CrossRef]
86. ESA Open Access Hub. Available online: https://scihub.copernicus.eu/ (accessed on 21 June 2022).
87. Schramm, M.; Pebesma, E.; Milenkovi´ c, M.; Foresta, L.; Dries, J.; Jacob, A.; Wagner, W.; Mohr, M.; Neteler, M.; Kadunc, M.; et al.
The OpenEO API–Harmonising the Use of Earth Observation Cloud Services Using Virtual Data Cube Functionalities. Remote
Sens. 2021 ,13, 1125. [CrossRef]
88. Milcinski, G.; Batic, M.; Kadunc, M.; Kolaric, P .; Mocnik, R.; Repse, M. SENTINEL-2 Services Library—Efﬁcient Way for
Exploration and Exploitation of EO Data. In Proceedings of the Geophysical Research Abstracts; 19th EGU General Assembly,
EGU20171, Vienna, Austria, 23 April 2017; Volume 19, p. 19502.
89. Brunsdon, C.; Comber, A. Opening Practice: Supporting Reproducibility and Critical Spatial Data Science. J. Geogr. Syst. 2021 ,23,
477–496. [CrossRef]
90. Barnes, N. Publish Your Computer Code: It Is Good Enough. Nature 2010 ,467, 753. [CrossRef]
Land 2022 ,11, 2287 24 of 24
91. Waller, L.A.; Miller, G.W. More than Manuscripts: Reproducibility, Rigor, and Research Productivity in the Big Data Era. Toxicol.
Sci.2016 ,149, 275–276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Nüst, D.; Schutzeichel, M.; Konkol, M. O2r Workshop on Reproducible Remote Sensing. Available online: https://o2r.info/2022
/04/08/workshop-remote-sensing/#o2r-workshop-on-reproducible-remote-sensing (accessed on 9 May 2022).
