PROVOCATION
Composting Feminisms and
Environmental Humanities
JENNIFER MAE HAMILTON
Literary Studies, School of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, University of New England, Australia.
ASTRIDA NEIMANIS
Department of Gender and Cultural Studies, School of Philosophical and Historical Inquiry,
University of Sydney, Australia.
Abstract Composting is a material labor whereby old scraps are transformed —through prac-
tices of care and attention —into nutrient-rich new soil. In this provocation, we develop
“composting ”as a material metaphor to tell a particular story about the environmental
humanities. Building on Donna Haraway ’s work, we insist “it matters what compostables
make compost. ”Our argument is twofold. First, we contend that certain feminist concepts
and commitments are foundational to the environmental humanities ’contemporary emer-
gence. Second, we advocate for more inclusive feminist composting for the future of our ﬁeld.
We begin with a critical cartography of some of the ﬁeld’s origin stories. While we dis-
cover that feminism is named or not named in several different ways, what most interests ushere is a particular trend we observe, whereby key feminist scholars or concepts may be
mentioned, but their feminist investments are not incorporated as such. Following this carto-
graphy, we dig into the stakes of these missed opportunities. A failure to acknowledge thefeminist context that grows some of our ﬁeld’s foundational concepts neutralizes their femi-
nist politics and undermines the potential for environmental humanities to build alternative
worlds. To conclude, we propose feminist composting as a methodology to be taken up fur-ther. We call for an inclusive feminist composting that insists on feminism ’s imbrication
with social justice projects of all kinds, at the same time as we insist that future composting
be done with care. Sometimes paying attention to the feminist scraps that feed the pilemeans responding to feminism ’s own potential assimilations and disavowals, particularly in
relation to decolonization.
Like both the energy-saving domestic practice and the earlier social justice struggles
that inspire it, composting feminism and environmental humanities involves messy and
undervalued work. We maintain, however, that it is a mode of scholarship necessary for
growing different kinds of worlds.
Keywords feminism, composting, environmental humanities, cartography, origin stories
Environmental Humanities 10:2 (November 2018)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-7156859 © 2018 Jennifer Mae Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Atop a kitchen bench rest three containers labeled “chickens, ”“worms, ”and “com-
post ”(ﬁg. 1). Those who live in this house learn how to cook and clean up in rela-
tion to these bins. They know what the chickens like best (leafy greens and human left-overs), what worms don ’t want (citrus and onions), and that the rest goes in the
compost bin (rotten tomatoes, hair, dirt from the dustpan). Despite the different labels,
each bin participates in a domestic methodology for material repurposing —composting.
In one, the chickens appropriate and convert our scraps into eggs and poop; in another,
worms digest our waste to make nutrient rich wee and castings; and in the third, bin-bound biota call on physics and chemistry to transform themselves into plant food in
the generic backyard compost pile. While shit happens even without the interventions
of human household composters, our attention to the turning and distribution of these
matters ﬁgures us as facilitators in these tender alchemies.
In this provocation, we develop “composting ”as a material metaphor to better
understand the relationship between feminism and the environmental humanities.
Composting is a multipurpose concept in this article; it both describes current scholarlypractices in the ﬁeld and proposes a strategy for the future. We argue, ﬁrst, that the
environmental humanities “composts ”certain feminist concepts and commitments,
and that these nutrients are foundational to the ﬁeld’s contemporary emergence —yet
they are not always acknowledged as such. As Donna Haraway (following Marilyn
Strathern) reminds us, it “matters what stories tell stories, it matters which concepts
think concepts. ”
1In our paraphrase, it matters what compostables make compost, and it
matters if and how those nutrients are acknowledged. Second, we propose that feminist
composting is a valuable methodology for the future of our ﬁeld. In its implementation,
Figure 1. Ad o m e s t i c
composting methodology
and material metaphor
for environmentalhumanities. Courtesy of
Jennifer Mae Hamilton
a n dE a r l w o o dF a r m
1. Haraway, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, ”160.502 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

however, we also call for this composting to be done more inclusively, and with a more
rigorous and intentional “politics of citation. ”2
This thinking developed in the context of a reading group started in 2015 in Syd-
ney, Australia. Drawn to the catchy connotations of the word, we proposed COMPOSTING
Feminisms and Environmental Humanities as an opportunity to read key feminist texts to-
gether with environmental humanities research. The ﬁrst epigraph on our invitation to
participants drew on Haraway ’s claim from an article in this journal that “We are all
compost ”;3the second cited a haiku by queer theorist Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick: “Promis-
cuous we! / Me, plus anybody else. / Permeable we! ”4With these inspirations, we won-
dered, what mucky but nourishing insights might emerge from these mash-ups? More-
over, might a more attentive or deliberate “composting ”of ecological questions with
feminist insights feed different kinds of hungry questions for the environmental human-ities? What we discovered —and were driven to investigate further —was both an envi-
ronmental humanities soil richly textured by feminist matters, and a strange lack of
feminism as an acknowledged critical presence in the ﬁeld.
5
Just a year on from bringing Haraway ’s claim and Sedgwick ’s poem together (an
afﬁnity to which we will return below), we discovered that Haraway ’s latest book is,
among other things, a love letter to compost. In Staying with the Trouble (2016), the ﬁgura-
tion of compost works in various ways, with both ontological and ethical ambits. An-other dimension of the ﬁguration, however, concerns the actual practice of composting —
that is, the “dirty work, ”grunt work, and care labor of cultivating “unexpected collabo-
rations and combinations. ”
6Taking both Haraway ’s prompt and the material metaphor
of the domestic composting system as our points of departure, then, we suggest that
composting as practice demands that we pay attention to what goes into the compostbin. It implores that we attend to our critical metabolisms —to notice not only what is
being transmogri ﬁed, but also under what conditions, why, and to what effect.
More precisely still, thinking about the practice of environmental humanities as a
kind of composting allows us to story our ﬁeld as arising from feminist scholarship and
praxis. The ﬁrst section of our provocation ( “A Feminist Cartography of Environmental
2. Ahmed, “Making Feminist Points. ”
3. Haraway, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, ”161.
4. Sedgwick, A Dialogue on Love , 106.
5. To make this argument we do not engage directly with ecofeminism as a named ﬁeld. This is primarily
because some of ecofeminism ’s leading ﬁgures —Ariel Salleh, Maria Mies, Vandana Shiva, for example —are
considerably less cited within environmental humanities ’origin stories. We instead focus our discussion on
those feminist concepts and thinkers (e.g., Haraway and Plumwood) who are frequently cited within work that
explicitly frames itself as environmental humanities, even and especially as their feminism is downplayed. The
relation between ecofeminism and environmental humanities is thus another vital question to address in thiscontext, but it sits to one side of our provocation. Greta Gaard ’s (2011) exploration of the troubled exchange be-
tween ecofeminism and other styles of environmental feminism in “Ecofeminism Revisited ”is a useful point of
departure for future work on this question.
6. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble ,5 .Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 503Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Humanities ’Origin Stories ”) illustrates how certain feminisms have shaped the friabil-
ity of contemporary environmental humanities soil in particular ways. Upon surveying
how this emergent ﬁeld is described and accounted for by its practitioners, we discover
an interesting trend. Although feminism is acknowledged (or not) in several different
ways, curiously often, feminism is named but not claimed . That is, although key feminist
scholars or concepts may be mentioned, their feminist investments are not incorpo-
rated as such.7In another section ( “The Difference that Feminism Makes ”), we dig into
the stakes of this disavowal. We ask: why does claiming the feminism in the compost
as such matter? We argue that a selective use of concepts and theories without attention
to or incorporation of the feminist commitments that underpin them risks exploitative
extraction of those feminist labors. Given feminism ’s tested transformative ambit, it
also impoverishes the potential of our ﬁeld to materially change worldly relations. We
are thus not insisting that every environmental humanities scholar must necessarily
become a feminist (although, why not?), but rather that a rigorous understanding of
feminism ’s legacy within the ﬁeld might subtly or radically change one ’s questions, or
their commitments.
Following from this assessment, the third section ( “Feminist Compostables ”) pro-
poses that feminist composting ought to be extended further. At the same time, our car-
tographic work also reveals that key feminist ﬁgures within contemporary environmen-
tal humanities mirror the ﬁeld’s general whiteness. Thus, as we call for more feminist
composting, we also push for more inclusive feminisms that challenge impermeable bor-
ders between feminism and those perspectives and practices that take up concerns of
race, coloniality, sexuality, ability, class, and their associated power asymmetries. The
composting of these feminisms, however, must be done with care, and with consider-ation of feminism ’s own disavowals. We end the third section by addressing this con-
cern with particular attention to feminism ’s colonial inheritances.
8In light of this com-
mitment to both inclusive and careful feminist composting, we are tempted to parse
Sedgwick ’s invocation of a “permeable we, ”invoked above, as both kin to Haraway ’s
always-multispecies self, but also as a resistance to political struggles as bounded or
discrete; permeability invites us to be both a multispecies “we”and a “we”of solidarity
with intrahuman struggles. Inclusive feminisms seek out regions of overlap and af ﬁnity,
while also respecting important differences (permeability is not sameness).
Moreover, given the urgency of contemporary environmental crises, the last thing
we want to do is to use the ﬁnal bursts of energy from the fossil-fueled Anthropocene
academy to call for always newer and more innovative ideas (after all, we are “writing
7. As will become clear in the next section, our focus on particular feminist thinkers, such as Haraway and
Plumwood, is guided by the citational practices of others.
8. Our claims here resonate with DeLoughrey, Didur, and Carrigan, who argue that “a postcolonial dia-
logue is indispensable for establishing an effective base for the environmental humanities in the twenty- ﬁrst cen-
tury. ”We commit to deeper inquiry into how the post- and decolonial projects relate to one another, and to that
of feminism. DeLoughrey, Didur, and Carrigan, Global Ecologies ,2–3.504 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

the Anthropocene ”in both ﬁgurative and material ways).9Without doubt, just as an
apple core becomes-with newborn worm and produces fresh castings, the scholarly
practice of composting also has a transformative mandate. Such transformations, how-
ever, cannot be innovation for innovation ’s sake; we need practices that counter a re-
gime of disposability.10The earthy justice composting seeks —indeed, prioritizes —is en-
ergy saving: reduce, reuse, recycle, retro ﬁt, compost. Composting explicitly values and
deliberately repurposes extant matters —namely feminism —in the search for different
kinds of worlds. Importantly, these are worlds in which such tactics are valued; drawing
explicitly on the feminist ethos that is at the center of our provocation, we insist that
composting ’s intellectual products cannot be detached from the material labors that
produce them.
A Feminist Cartography of Environmental Humanities ’Origin Stories
In this section, we survey various “origin stories ”of environmental humanities to as-
sess where, why, and how a debt to feminism is included —or not. Critical reading of ori-
gin stories is a well-established strategy in feminist epistemology. Indeed, in early writ-
ing on biology, Haraway identi ﬁes two main feminist strategies for doing so: ﬁrst, a
reinterpretation of the origin story “to get it right the second time ”; and second, more
rebelliously, the proclamation of a totally new story.11Here, we add another tactic to
Haraway ’s list. Neither reinterpreting nor radically rewriting per se, we offer a critical
reading in order to notice and name what ’s already there . In doing so, we align ourselves
with posthuman feminist Rosi Braidotti ’s project of critical cartography. A cartographic
method, according to Braidotti, “is a theoretically based and politically informed reading
of the present ”that aims at “epistemic and ethical accountability, ”12both for the cartog-
rapher and the other positions she is tracking. Heeding Braidotti ’s call to account for
both “difﬁcult transitions ”and “for some of the contradictions inherent in our current
predicament, ”13we seek to map the relationship between feminism and contemporary
environmental humanities by paying attention to both the possibilities and tensions
weﬁnd there.
In researching some of the ways in which contemporary environmental humani-
ties narrates its emergence, a clear sense of feminisms as already part of environmen-tal humanities ’compost pile emerges. Feminism is not a special interest or an add-on
(as is sometimes the assumption when disciplines make room for things like “women ’s
writing ”or“feminist philosophy ”in a second-generation mode). Rather, we argue that
certain feminisms are immanent and foundational to contemporary environmental
9. Boes and Marshall, “Writing the Anthropocene. ”
10. Puig de la Bellacasa similarly rejects scholarly ambits that privilege “critical insight ”only when it “break[s]
with the past ”to offer something “novel. ”Puig de la Bellacasa, “Nothing Comes without Its World, ”203.
11. Haraway, “In the Beginning Was the Word, ”471.
12. Braidotti, “The Posthuman, ”164.
13. Ibid.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 505Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

humanities. We support Neimanis, Åsberg, and Hedren ’s claim that feminist concep-
tual tools “provide the conditions of possibility ”for some of environmental humanities ’key
“lines of inquiry. ”14However, as we discovered in our survey of origin stories, this sense
of feminism ’s immanence is not evenly recognized.15
Origin stories come in all shapes and sizes. They are also as compelling as they are
dangerous: not only do they often order things neatly and chronologically (this then
that), but they justify certain lines of thought (this because that) and often at the exclu-
sion of other possible narratives (this notthat). At the same time, they are important,
even in their tenuousness, for many reasons —from community building, to opening
possibilities for institutionalization, to securing audiences for a speci ﬁc kind of schol-
arly work. Our point is therefore notthat there should be one “correct ”origin story be-
hind which we all must fall in line. Rather, this provocation seeks to story the ﬁeld
through a speci ﬁc tracing of its connection to feminism.
Drawing on a number of narratives where environmental humanities practitioners
describe their own emerging ﬁeld, we discover three rough kinds of relation to feminism.
Theﬁrst argues that feminism plays an important role in scholarship in this ﬁeld.16Our
provocation adds its voice to these positions. The second relation is a non-relation; a
number of texts do not mention feminism at all, but nor do they smuggle in feminist
scholars or concepts in unacknowledged ways.17While much could be said about this
second type of relation, here we limit our response to a question in the spirit of our prov-
ocation: how might an addition of feminist concerns change these origin stories? We in-
vite this scholarship to consider the tactic of feminist composting that we explore later
in this article.
Most interesting to us here is the third kind of relation: where feminism is present
(either as an orientation or through the avatar of one of its key thinkers or as repre-
sented in the deployment of key feminist concepts) but the mattering of that feminism
is downplayed, or disavowed. In other words, the surprise is not an absence of feminism;
it is rather that feminism is an unacknowledged presence —referenced implicitly but
14. Neimanis, Åsberg, and Hedrén, “Four Problems, Four Directions, ”84. Emphasis in original.
15. In making this point, we amplify arguments made by feminist scholars such as Catriona Sandilands,
Greta Gaard, Stacy Alaimo, among others, who have long stressed feminism ’s important place in environmental
scholarship in various ways. For example, in the conclusion to Exposed , Alaimo engages a related debate with
object-oriented ontology and the history of feminism, and traces what object-oriented ontology misses in pass-
ing on feminist insights (178 –88). See also Gaard, “Where is Feminism in Environmental Humanities? ”(81–98);
and Sandilands “Some ‘F’Words for the Environmental Humanities ”(443 –51). Our work in this article stands
humbly on those shoulders!
16. For example, Neimanis, Åsberg, and Hedren, “Four Problems, Four Directions ”; Åsberg, “Resilience Is
Cyborg ”; Oppermann and Iovino, “Introduction ”; Nye and Emmett, The Environmental Humanities . There is sub-
stantial variation across these examples as to the extent to which feminism is described as immanent to the
foundations of contemporary environmental humanities.
17. For example, Heise, “The Environmental Humanities ”; Palsson, et al., “Reconceptualizing the ‘Anthro-
pos. ’”Feminism is mentioned once in the latter, but not in relation to the ﬁeld’s roots.506 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

not named; indexed through its ideas and thinkers, but not claimed. Why, we wonder?
And more to the point, why does this observation matter? It is this (rough and ready)
third category to which we primarily attend below.
When environmental humanities journals and programs were starting up and
drawing attention from funding bodies, one of us jumped at an invitation from The Con-
versation to explain the ﬁeld.18To do so, an analysis of the popular ﬁlmGrease was used
to illustrate the difference between a conventional and an ecocritical reading of a cul-tural text. Here, the ecocritical perspective was deployed as a synecdoche for the de ﬁni-
tive and originary critical strategy in environmental humanities as a whole, whereby we
expand the ﬁeld of analysis from interhuman relations to include the whole material
cosmos. The piece thus characterizes Grease not as a romance between two people, but
as a love affair between an entire society and petroleum (think virginal country girlSandy transformed into urban sex pot dressed as an oil slick, hot for the car-loving
Danny). The cultural migration from rural to urban that accompanies the rise of fossil
fuel exploration is embodied in Sandy ’s transformation too.
Of course, Grease isboth high-school courtship andmaterial metaphor for Ameri-
can society ’s romance with oil (not to mention a coded representation of postwar white
Australia ’s eagerness to transform itself into potential lover to the United States). For
the purposes of expediently illustrating how the environmental humanities project dif-fers from earlier modes of humanist enquiry, however, the overtly gendered dimen-
sions of this story (or, more accurately of both stories —Sandy and Danny andour rap-
ture with fossil fuel) were set aside. But the two evidently work in lock step. In focusing
on the speci ﬁcinnovation of the ﬁeld (environmental humanities is this notthat), that
particular explainer missed the opportunity to show the imbrication of gendered logicsof power and environmental desires. In other words, although gendered concepts and
concerns were implicit in the analysis, this piece missed the opportunity to carefully
compost feminism.
We begin with this example to underscore that our provocation is not written from
a place of righteous infallibility. As Braidotti insists, the cartographer must assess how
the lineaments of power that she maps also situate her in relation to the terrain. Our
storying of environmental humanities here emerges from our own struggles againstfeminism ’s erasures, even as we note how various factors can entice us to participate
in its disappearance. The banality of long-standing institutional “siloing ”of feminism
within academia, being in a certain institution at a certain time with certain mentors, a
pervasive misogyny that is still the very air we breathe —all of these can subdue our
feminism as often as it ignites it. We recognize the operation of unclaimed feminism inthe formation of environmental humanities as a ﬁeld in part because we can locate sim-
ilar tendencies in our own intellectual trajectories. In naming our colleagues, mentors,
and supporters as part of these disavowals, we are thus neither singling them out nor
18. Hamilton, “Explainer: What Are the Environmental Humanities? ”Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 507Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

rejecting their work that has been crucial to our own scholarship and that of many oth-
ers; we are rather hoping to unpick a peculiar and pervasive phenomenon in order to
better understand its stakes.
So in this spirit of generosity and provocation, we turn to other origin stories that
reveal similar misses. In the well-cited inaugural essay for this journal, our colleagues
and friends Deborah Bird Rose, Thom van Dooren, Matthew Chrulew, Stuart Cooke,
Matthew Kearnes, and Emily O ’Gorman neatly theorize the rationale for the emergence
of this ﬁeld and highlight the “need for a more integrated and conceptually sensitive ap-
proach to environmental issues. ”19One of the piece ’s central claims regards the kind of
knowledge generated by expanding the domain of the humanities to include the more-
than-human. In their view, environmental humanities scholars are “able to articulate a
‘thicker ’notion of humanity, one that rejects reductionist accounts of self-contained,
rational, decision making subjects. ”20We agree! But we are surprised that, with a short
bibliography including citations from Donna Haraway, Myra Hird, Vicki Kirby, Annmarie
Mol, Val Plumwood, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, and Anna Tsing —thinkers all working
within feminist traditions —feminism is not taken up as an important, or even founda-
tional, in ﬂuence here.21
A similar sidestepping appears in an even earlier text by Deborah Bird Rose and
Libby Robin that introduces, however still inchoately, environmental humanities in Aus-tralia. In “The Ecological Humanities in Action: An Invitation, ”Rose and Robin launch a
special section of the Australian Humanities Review by outlining some central tenets, pre-
cursors, shifts, and opportunities that make space for ecological humanities. Rose and
Robin note the contribution of feminist theory, generally speaking, to a turn toward sit-
uated and multiple knowledges.
22However, elsewhere in this essay we again ﬁnd the
curious case whereby key feminist texts are cited for their foundational contribution to
“the birth of the ecological humanities ”but their feminism is left unsignalled.23For
example, Carolyn Merchant ’s 1980 Death of Nature gets credit for inaugurating a key
direction for new environmental humanities —namely, an analysis of the relationship
between environmental imaginaries and material change. Yet, just as Merchant ’sb o o k ’s
subtitle, Women, Ecology, and the Scienti ﬁc Revolution , is not mentioned, the speci ﬁc femi-
nist problematics or concerns that inform Merchant ’s insights are left unaddressed.
Plumwood and Karen Warren ’s important works on interspecies ethics of care are also
cited, but, again, Plumwood ’s feminist frameworks and the “ecofeminism ”found in the
title of Warren ’s text are left out. To be clear, Rose and Robin ’s piece hardly practices
19. Rose et al., “Thinking through the Environment, ”2.
20. Ibid., 2.
21. Ecofeminism is mentioned once in a list of Plumwood ’s concerns.
22. They write, “Critical social theory, in part under the stimulus of feminist theory, entails shifts from uni-
versal knowledge to situated knowledges, from monoglossia to heteroglossia, from centred hierarchies to de-
centred networks, and from structure to motion. ”Rose and Robin, “The Ecological Humanities in Action. ”
23. Robyn Eckersley, quoted in Rose and Robin, “The Ecological Humanities in Action, ”n.p.508 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

neutral humanism; the important contributions of indigenous cosmologies to rethinking
ecological connectivity are underscored at length. We are grateful for this acknowledge-
ment, in particular its impetus to push Western thinkers beyond limited and limiting
frames. We wonder also, though, how the origin stories of environmental humanities
might change if the limiting and limited frames of patriarchy and androcentrism were
foregrounded as well.
Another way feminism is sidestepped in many of these ﬁeld-de ﬁning texts is by
highlighting how the humanities adds value to the natural or “hard ”sciences. We see
this, for example, in David E. Nye and colleagues ’“The Emergence of the Environmental
Humanities ”; in Ursula K. Heise ’s introductory essay to The Routledge Companion to the En-
vironmental Humanities ; and in Sverker Sörlin ’s short essay on environmental humanities
inBioscience. Nye and colleagues ’report contends that the ﬁeld“builds bridges between
scienti ﬁc disciplines, as well as between research and companies, and other authorities
and actors ”and the report ’s authors provide a strongly value-based argument for ex-
actly that.24InThe Routledge Companion ’s introduction the relationship with science ﬁg-
ures centrally too; unlike Nye et al., who cite almost all humanities disciplines as having
a stake in the development of the ﬁeld, Heise describes the lineage of environmental
humanities as having a clear disciplinary predecessor in environmental studies. Heise
assures readers that this outgrowth is much more than an elaborate rebranding exer-cise and underscores how environmental humanities builds on environmental studies ’
collaborations with scientists and engineers, by way of a speci ﬁc concern with social jus-
tice. Environmental humanists, she argues, “envision ecological crises fundamentally as
questions of socioeconomic inequality, cultural difference, and divergent histories, val-
ues, and ethical frameworks. ”
25And while Sörlin links the emergence of environmental
humanities directly to the modern environmentalist movement stemming from Ameri-
can scholars such as Rachel Carson and Aldo Leopold, Sörlin similarly argues for the
value-adding that humanities scholarship brings to the sciences.26
We note with interest, though, that while feminism has for decades provided key
inputs into “the science question ”—as Rose and Robin brie ﬂy note —these feminist
perspectives remain practically unaddressed in these ﬁeld surveys (although Nye et al.
mention gender studies as one feeder ﬁeld for environmental humanities). In this sense,
these texts miss the opportunity to show how feminist ideas have been key drivers of
this scholarly move. While feminist science studies are not the sole source of these
arguments, their not-naming here repeats an invisibilization that informs the origin
stories of the ﬁeld.
24. Nye et al., “The Emergence of the Environmental Humanities. ”This report was commissioned by
MISTRA (a Swedish funding agency) and resulted in a grant to The Seed Box , which among other things enabled
the collaboration between us, the authors of this provocation. Cecilia Åsberg, founding director of the Seed Box
has also played a key role in supporting feminist environmental humanities.
25. Heise, “Plant, Species, Justice —And the Stories We Tell about Them, ”3.
26. Sörlin, “Environmental Humanities. ”Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 509Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Undoubtedly, individual authors will justify their origin stories in various ways,
especially as many of the ﬁeld-describing texts are short, targeted pieces with a particu-
lar audience in mind. What we can notice, however, is the institutional work such dis-
avowal does even incidentally , and what it means when feminism (among other ﬁelds) is
overlooked to highlight the originality of the ﬁeld or make a stronger case for new and
necessary complementarity to science. By stating that environmental humanities is
not just the usual kind of cultural analysis, but something shiny and different, the caseis strengthened for its importance in an institutional context that rewards commodi ﬁ-
able innovation over the grunt work required to build more just and livable worlds. The
purely “value-adding ”story of the ﬁeld risks building an institutional space not in col-
lective collaboration (nor in a spirit of indebtedness), but in competition with and “mov-
ing on ”from its named foundational voices, including feminism. This is also an evasion
of the labors required to sort, mix, and turn these contributions with care.
Feminist concerns do ﬁnd their way into Joni Adamson, William A. Gleeson, and
David N. Pellow ’s introduction for Keywords for Environmental Studies , as among those
texts that challenge the purported universality of science. They write,
Building on the work of in ﬂuential feminists, poststructuralists, sociologists, and science
and technology studies (STS) scholars, including Sandra Harding, Donna Haraway, andVal Plumwood, and in ﬂuenced by the convergent development of narrative, network,
complexity and relationality theories in the social and natural sciences, contributorsillustrate how the environmental humanities and sciences of nature are, in a sense, “re-
coding ”each other, by blurring the lines separating humans, nonhuman animals, and
machines, nature and culture, and the humanities and/the sciences.
27
It is worth noting, though, that even Adamson, Gleeson, and Pellow ’s text names but still
doesn ’t entirely claim the feminism here: although these feminist source texts “blur the
lines ”between nature and culture, Harding, Haraway, and Plumwood also make explic-
itly feminist claims about social politics and justice as integral to this blurring. While
perhaps inferred, this aspect is not taken up by Adamson, Gleeson, and Pellow. Like our
response to the inaugural essay to this journal, our provocation here speci ﬁcally is this:
a failure to acknowledge the feminist context that grows some of our ﬁeld’s founda-
tional concepts neutralizes their feminist politics and undermines the potential for
environmental humanities to build alternative worlds.
Environmental humanities has a legitimate claim to being a named, organized,
and practiced ﬁeld of research in its own right. Indeed, we see ourselves as part of this
project. But we propose that the speci ﬁc originality or ontoepistemological value of the
ﬁeld is compromised when a stated openness to intellectual inheritances of all kinds
does not adequately engage with the rich history of feminisms (again, among other key
27. Adamson, Gleeson, and Pellow, Keywords for Environmental Studies ,3–4.510 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

ﬁelds, such as anticolonial and black studies) wherein the category of the human has al-
ready been tirelessly debated, questioned, expanded, torqued, and rejected; wherein the
role of science has been rigorously investigated; and wherein both of these are already
inextricable from questions of justice.
Is the disavowal of inclusive feminisms really what is necessary to make an expe-
dient case for humanistic ecological knowledge production in the neoliberal academy?
We hope not. In her book Matters of Care , Puig de la Bellacasa suggests that if we are
interested in extending an ethics of care to more-than-human worlds, then the seem-
ingly dated feminist standpoint theory project of the early 1980s is a very useful place
to begin. Puig de la Bellacasa ’s retro insights into domestic work remind us that there
“has to be some form of care going on somewhere in the substrate of (anyone ’s) world
for living to be possible. ”28Someone has to sort and empty the compost bucket, so to
speak. This is why instead of only offering a (shiny! new!) critique of the origin stories
of environmental humanities, we want our provocation to be primarily about rethink-
ing our practice. We want to encourage the (sometimes drudgey, almost always under-
valued) work of gathering up and sifting through what ’s already there, with care. We
want to see how old feminist insights and contributions from cognate ﬁelds can grow
new things, while explicitly honoring their contributions. On offer is our mucky meth-
odology for doing so.
Drawing inspiration from Puig de la Bellacasa and others, in the next section we
more speci ﬁcally unpack the immanence of some speci ﬁc forms of feminist thinking to
the frameworks of contemporary environmental humanities. We expound why feminist
contributions are not simply old ideas to be ﬁled away, and we clarify the stakes of
these politics of citation.
The Difference that Feminism Makes
One might argue that it does not matter whether feminist ideas are named as such or
not, if they nonetheless nourish the environmental humanities soil in some way. Per-
haps keeping track of all the scraps in a compost pile is an extravagant and unnecessary
labor? In this section, we clarify why an inclusion of feminism needs to be more than a
cherry picking of concepts or ideas. First, we examine interlocking oppressions, situatedknowledges, and storying as speci ﬁc feminist concepts that have been taken up within
environmental humanities, and how they risk losing their founding meaning if pushed
too far a ﬁeld of their founding feminist commitments. Moreover, we argue that environ-
mental humanities has much to gain by paying closer attention to the feminist roots of
thinkers and frameworks it deploys.
To begin, though, we clarify more precisely the kind of feminism we are calling for
in this provocation. Feminism is not “one, ”but manifold. We don ’t seek to parse its vari-
eties using (always inadequate) categories (liberal, radical) or chronologies (we won ’t dip
28. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care ,5 .Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 511Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

into those waves). Rather, in invoking its inclusivity we interpellate a feminism that
understands gender as inseparable from experiences and discourses of race, sexuality,
colonization, ability, age, geography, class, and species (at least). Although we might
most commonly understand feminism to be about power relations among sexed and
gendered bodies, inclusive feminisms view power relations as materialized in the con-
text of other aspects of our embodied identities. The feminism we refer to here is there-
fore also attentive to racism, colonialism, heterosexism, ableism, speciesism and otherpower structures simultaneously. This doesn ’t mean that inclusive feminism equals de-
colonial practice, or queer activism, for example (see “Feminist Compostables ”section
below), but we strive to articulate it with these other perspectives in ways that are both
responsive to and respectful of diverse politics. Relatedly, in promoting inclusive femi-
nisms we don ’tw a n tt oi n s i s to ni m m u t a b l eb o r d e r sb e t w e e nf e m i n i s ma n dt h e s e
other perspectives; we seek instead to include their regions of overlap in a broadly con-
strued feminist territory —albeit with care. “We”are permeable, to quote Sedgwick again,
but to paraphrase lesbian feminist Adrienne Rich, “we”are also many, and do not want
to be the same.
29
Feminism ’s interrogation of gender as a structuring logic of power is thus contigu-
ous with other kinds of social justice projects that disrupt a humanist fantasy of a self-
sufﬁcient, neutral (read: male, straight, white, exceptional, European, able-bodied, and
otherwise normative) subject. We stress the contiguity (overlap, mutual imbrication) of
oppressions and reject the idea of analogy between them (e.g., sexism is “like”racism)
because we wish to underscore how these structures of power provide each other ’s scaf-
fold and alibi: they are the condition of possibility for one another. To stress the inclu-
siveness of the feminism is thus in part about de ﬁning the kind of feminism we wish
to promote. At the same time, we recognize that feminism has participated in its own
exclusions and erasures (discussed more below), and note that the key feminist ﬁgures
within contemporary environmental humanities mirror the predominant whiteness of
theﬁeld more generally. This underscores why we need to pay greater attention to in-
terlocking forms of power, privilege, and oppression when we examine how feminism
is intrinsically part of contemporary environmental humanities.30
Plumwood, whose considered challenge to the nature/culture dualism is often cited
as a key concept in current environmental thought, is an interesting example in regard
to these interimplicated oppressions. Too often, citations of her work fail to note that
Plumwood ’s ecological feminism and her diagnosis of the “Master Model ”embed this
nature/culture critique in a far more expansive critique of binarisms. Male/female, civi-
lized/savage, white/black, and so on, are, in her words, “mutually reinforcing dualisms. ”31
29. Rich, “Notes toward the Politics of Location (1984), ”225.
30. In Sandilands ’s words, “That ecological relations must always be understood in the context of colo-
nialism, gender, race, sex, class, and ability is a crucial part of what the intersectional feminist humanities havelong since offered back to ecology. ”Sandilands, “Some ‘F’Words for the Environmental Humanities, ”447.
31. Plumwood, Feminism and the Mastery of Nature , 42. See also Gaard, “Women, Water, and Energy. ”512 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

In other words, the dualisms that structure our human relation in the West to the more-
than-human world are not “like”intrahuman oppressions; rather, they “reﬂect the major
forms of oppression in western culture. In particular, the dualisms of male/female,
mental/manual (mind/body), civilized/primitive, human/nature correspond directly to
and naturalise gender, class, race and nature oppressions respectively. ”32To focus on
the nature/culture dualism without acknowledging its connection to gender, race, and
other structures thus evacuates from Plumwood ’s work its central insight. The way she
brings contemporary feminist questions to bear on environmental concerns makes it
impossible to address environmental harms without also addressing social ones. The
latter are governed by similar logics of domination, even if these logics play out in spe-
ciﬁc and sometimes surprising ways.
In this regard, we return to the inaugural essay of this journal, discussed above. In
their call to expand the domain of the humanities to include the more-than-human, the
authors draw on Plumwood ’s work. They show how Plumwood identi ﬁed two central
tasks for the ecological humanities: “to resituate the human within the environment,
and to resituate nonhumans within cultural and ethical domains. Both tasks aim to
overcome the nature/culture binary that positions humans outside of nature and thus
implicitly posits that we are free to control our own destiny within a broader ‘natural ’
world that is devoid of meaning, values, and ethics. ”33This is a plausible summary of
Plumwood ’s work and her contribution to the ﬁeld. Edited out of this summary, how-
ever, is her important feminist work on mutually reinforcing dualisms, and the notion
that “each of them has crucial connections to other elements. ”34As noted above, for
Plumwood, overcoming the nature/culture dualism involves rethinking the ways in
which all of the related dualisms “correspond directly to and naturalise gender, class,
race and nature oppressions respectively. ”35While that inaugural essay is very short,
citing the nature/culture binary without the nod to the larger structures of oppression
central to Plumwood ’s work could be read as incidentally, or even accidentally, natural-
izing other oppressions. Avoiding the ongoing erasure of this important dimension of
Plumwood ’s work is a key reason why feminist composting matters.
A similar risk can be located in Heise ’s introduction to the Routledge Companion ,
also referenced above. When Heise points to Ortner ’s work “Is Female to Male as Nature
Is to Culture? ”(1972) as an important foundation for environmental humanities, but
without talking about the feminism that conditions it, what political commitments are
sidestepped? Ortner ’s key point, similar to Plumwood ’s, was to unmask the ways in
which a view of women as inferior was ineluctably tied to the subordination of nature.36
32. Plumwood, Feminism and the Mastery of Nature ,4 3
33. Rose et al., “Thinking through the Environment. ”
34. Plumwood, Feminism and the Mastery of Nature , 42.
35. Ibid., 41.36. Ortner, “Is Female to Male as Nature Is to Culture? ”Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 513Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

By citing Ortner, but failing to note the dual dimension of her essay ’s key premise, the
nature/culture divide as a foundational question for environmental humanities becomes
dangerously neutralized. This is particularly salient given Ortner states from the outset
that her essay ’s aim is “more than academic ”and seeks “genuine change ”in the hege-
monic order of gender inequality.37
We could similarly ask, what happens when Haraway ’s feminist impetus is
skirted, even as her work is positioned as foundational for contemporary environmentalhumanities? Adamson, Gleeson, and Pellow cite Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Re-
invention of Nature (1991) as an index of Haraway ’s formative contributions to the ﬁeld.
This text includes the republication of two of Haraway ’s most in ﬂuential early essays,
on“situated knowledges ”and “cyborgs ”—which for us begs the question of how Hara-
way ’s key concepts, such as “situated knowledges, ”get taken up within our ﬁeld. We
need to remember that in Haraway ’s original articulation, situated knowledges were
not about the neutral need to include all perspectives. It matters that the title of this
landmark essay includes the word “feminism ”(“Situated Knowledges: The Science
Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective ”). This essay had its own
context —academically, the rise of poststructural epistemologies and a suspicion of pos-
itivism that left Haraway “still [wanting] to talk about reality, ”
38thus spurring her to
develop her theory of feminist objectivity (alongside and in response to feminist stand-point theory). Materially, this context included the ongoing exclusion of feminist think-
ing from science and a devaluing of feminist knowledge, and Haraway ’s recognition of
the ways in which false objectivities disproportionately impact the lives of women, col-
onized people, and more-than-human others. In short, her arguments in “Situated
Knowledges ”are not just neutral epistemological expansions; they are political and eth-
ical maneuvers. Like Ortner ’s“Is Female to Male ”essay, Haraway ’s vision of situated
knowledges had a stated political goal, explicitly premised on a “solidarity in politics. ”
39
So we wonder aloud again, what happens when the idea gets taken up in general , with-
out a necessary commitment to “solidarity ”with the material politics at the heart of
this work?
One answer might be again to quote Haraway (quoting Marilyn Strathern): “It mat-
ters what stories tell stories, it matters which concepts think concepts, ”40alongside our
own paraphrase: it matters what compostables make compost. “Storytelling, ”we know,
is a key method for Haraway and one taken up across our ﬁeld.41Haraway ’s version of
storytelling is also instructive on the questions we are asking in this provocation. As
she insists, storytelling refers to the “patterning of possible worlds ”42as“crucial to the
37. Ibid., 5.
38. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges, ”577.
39. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges, ”584.
40. Haraway, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, ”160.
41. In ﬂuentially in Thom van Dooren ’s epilogue in Flight Ways.
42. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble ,3 1514 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

practice of thinking. ”43But in stressing that stories matter,44Haraway underscores that
stories emerge from speci ﬁc histories, and they engender material effects. Hers is not a
plea for storytelling “in general, ”but for stories that catalogue the effects of patriarchal,
capitalist, and colonial nature-cultures, as well as vignettes of resistance to these he-
gemonies. Stories, then, not only describe but intervene in these worlds.
In“Sowing Worlds: A Seed Bag for Terraforming with Earth Others, ”Haraway the-
orizes different strategies for storytelling as modes of worlding. While Haraway ’s essay
rethinks the role of the human in planetary dramas, it also asks: Who or what speci ﬁ-
cally is left out of these tales? Whose labors make these stories possible? It is not an
accident that she explores this problematic in explicitly gendered terms: “In a tragic
story with only one real actor —one real world-maker, the hero —this is the Man-making
tale of the hunter on a quest to kill and bring back the terrible bounty. This is the cut-ting, sharp, combative tale of action that defers the suffering of glutinous [ sic], earth
rotted passivity beyond bearing. ”
45In the classic hero narrative, the protagonist cate-
gorically fails to understand the systems that support his tale. The protagonist ’s poor
understanding of his situation de ﬁnes the generic conventions. While the environmen-
tal humanities underline this unacknowledged support system in order to take us be-
yond the human (recall Danny ’s failure to understand the petroleum wells that fuel his
“greased lightning ”), the human power plays (e.g., sexism) imbricated in this misrecog-
nition need to remain part of the story too (for instance, Sandy ’s willingness to dress as
a sexy oil slick in order to win Danny ’s affections and ensure the ﬁlm’s happy ending). A
conventional story ’s emotional arc often banks on that dual forgetting. “All others in the
prick tale ”as Haraway notes (gendered double entendre almost certainly intended), “are
props, ground, plot space, or prey. They don ’t matter; their job is to be in the way, to be
overcome, to be the road, the conduit, but not the traveler, the begetter. ”46This “back-
grounding ”(to use Plumwood ’s term) of all others on which or whom the hero depends
supports the foregrounding not just of the human but the speci ﬁcally masculine hero.
Heroes are common in ﬁction and fantasy, but Haraway ’s notion of storying also
concerns scholarly stories we humans tell ourselves about our place in the world. For
example, Haraway turns to Ursula K. LeGuin ’s“Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction ”as a con-
cept with which to counter how foundational human stories —such as the story of
human evolution —can also sediment as phallogocentric prick tales; LeGuin in turn dis-
cusses Elizabeth Fisher ’s carrier-bag theory of evolution that claims as the human ’sﬁrst
tool invention not a sharp pointy weapon (as the evolutionary hero prick tale usually
has it), but “a container to hold gathered products and some kind of sling or net car-
rier. ”47For LeGuin, this evolution story “grounds [her] personally ”in her culture in a
43. Ibid., 39.
44. Haraway, “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, ”160.
45. Haraway, “Sowing Worlds, ”138.
46. Ibid., 138.
47. Fisher quoted in LeGuin, “The Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction, ”166.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 515Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

way that stories about “the use of long, hard objects for sticking, bashing and killing ”48
do not. In other words, storying evolution via a carrier bag instead of a pointed weapon
is not just a different story; it is a story that accommodates bodies (read: women) who
are routinely marginalized in these stories.
Our point is that a feminist tale is not just another story among many options;
these stories inaugurate particular kinds of relationships between humans and with
the more-than-human world.49Still drawing on LeGuin, Haraway points out that the
carrier bag, or the seed bag, is especially useful for telling tales of terraforming or world-
ing in ecologically troubled times. To make this point, Haraway turns to another gen-
dered metaphor, asking how containers —as“concave hollowed out things ”generate
“richer, quirkier, fuller, un ﬁtting, ongoing stories, stories with room for the hunter but
which weren ’t and aren ’t about him, the self-making Human, the human making ma-
chine of history. ”50Describing this receptacle image in feminist terms may seem criti-
cally redundant, but as Haraway stresses, “the details matter. ”51Even as this image
might conjure an essentialized specter of Mother Earth, for Haraway the gendered con-
nections are more nuanced: mother does not equal earth, and feminist politics do not
necessarily equate to environmental ones. They are, however, necessarily coimbricated
questions and connected political ambits. We argue that only by paying attention to the
feminist substrate can we tease out the nuances of these relations and adequately ex-plain their coimbrication.
Telling certain stories is about changing the world in speci ﬁc, material ways. So,
when as environmental humanities scholars we repeatedly cite Haraway ’s claim that it
matters what stories tell stories, does it not behoove us to pay attention to the particu-
lar matters of her tales? Which stories matter for Haraway? If we uproot the theoryfrom its feminist soil, what nutrients (opportunities, pathways of connection) are we
leaving behind?
Like Haraway, we know that our attention to the unnaming of feminism can begin
to sound like “paranoid fantasies and academic resentments, ”but we also follow her
lead in explaining that our concern is not with some “invisible conspiracy ”of individual
scholars.
52We are more concerned with what happens when a feminist foundation in
environmental humanities is eroded by what Nancy Hartsock called “abstract masculin-
ity”53and what Sara Ahmed has more contemporarily called “White Men ”(noting not
only the gendered but key racialized basis of this institution).54We repeat, our concern
48. LeGuin, “The Carrier Bag Theory, ”167.
49. See chap. 3, “Fishy Beginnings ”in Neimanis, Bodies of Water , for more discussion of evolution stories
and their relation to feminism.
50. Ibid., 138 –39.
51. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble , 116.
52. Haraway, “Situated Knowledges, ”575.
53. Harstock, quoted in ibid., 578.54. Ahmed, “Making Feminist Points. ”516 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

here is that the value of environmental humanities is compromised when it does
not acknowledge feminism ’s already extant thickening of the category of the human,
its linking of the nature-culture dualism to mutually reinforcing dualist structures of
power, its ongoing troubling of the way we think the relation between nature and cul-
ture, and its need for situated and entangled stories that acknowledge their own antipa-
triarchal roots.
About a half an hour into the recent documentary by Fabrizio Terranova, Haraway
discusses feminist science ﬁction writers, feminist theorists, and books that have had a
“huge impact on us. ”Shortly thereafter, she literally picks up Joanna Russ ’s book How to
Suppress Women ’s Writing and critiques the ways in which women ’s writing is explained
away. Moving on to talk about her own formative beginnings as a writer, she points out
that “women have repeatedly understood that . . . our thinking is disappeared fast”by
“the powerful apparatus of masculinist thinking, of masculinist practices both in insti-
tutions and at the level of individual people. ”In response, she advocates a feminist
practice that, “deliberately and carefully, ”is“very precise about the history of ideas
and the particular creativity and originality and importance of other women ’s thinking.
And I know myself, from my own experience and from powerful women I know, that
the speed with which we disappear from the citation apparatuses is breathtaking. ”55
These concerns are distinctly related to what antiracist feminist scholar Sara Ahmed
terms a “politics of citation. ”Ahmed describes citation as “a rather successful reproduc-
tive technology, a way of reproducing the world around certain bodies ”and points to
the ways in which feminist and critical race critiques are routinely “screened out ”of
the formation of disciplines via citational practices. Like the choice of readings on an
undergraduate syllabus, citation is a “technique of selection ”that makes “certain bodies
and thematics core to the discipline, and others not even a part. ”56Thus the ﬁeld is re-
produced, rearticulated, and reaf ﬁrmed as “belonging ”to certain writers and research-
ers whose work will be cited, engaged, and critiqued anew.
Fields of study, like species, are not natural categories with predetermined bound-
aries. They are made through patterns of reproduction and composted as intra-actions
with an outside. These makings are not neutral, but are always caught up in operations
of power. As feminist scholar Chandra Mohanty points out, this entails acknowledgingthat “knowledge systems are produced in histories that are shot through with differen-
tially constituted power relations. ”
57The game here is not to get out of power relations —
as if that were possible —but to pay better attention to those at work in our own politics
of citation, and being responsible for their effects. As Eve Tuck, K. Wayne Yang, and
Rubén Gaztambide-Fernández remind us, “Our practices persist without consideration
of the politics of linking projects to the same tired reference lists ”58—that is, too often
55. Terranova, Storytelling .
56. Ahmed, “Making Feminist Points. ”
57. Mohanty, cited in Wekker, “In the Arena of Disciplines, ”57.
58. Tuck, Yang, and Gaztambide-Fernández, “Citation Practices Challenge. ”Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 517Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

we cite from a place of inattention to the politics at stake.59In our case, then, paying
attention means being attuned to how the speci ﬁc compostables that feed the growing
heap of environmental humanities open (or foreclose) the trajectories of its ongoing
development.
In response to the question with which we opened this section (why do we need to
claim feminism if its traces still serve as nourishment for the ﬁeld?), then, we would
concur that soil made with feminist thinkers or concepts might be fertile with or with-out incorporating the feminist commitments that are the conditions of their possibility.
The global ﬂourishing of environmental humanities scholarship arguably evidences
this. But we ask in return, what opportunities for apprenticeship in thinking, growing,
becoming, are missed? Again, we are not arguing that all environmental humanities
scholarship must place a named feminism at its front-and-center. We are suggestingthat more attention to a feminist backstory can enable two complementary moves: On
the one hand, it will refuse the neutralization of feminist commitments that have given
rise to some of environmental humanities ’most in ﬂuential concepts. On the other hand,
our wager is that this insistence will enliven the potential of the environmental human-
ities to “change the story ”in more coherent ways and strengthen its alter-worlding
potential. What other responses to environmental dilemmas might we occasion, we
ask, if we were to attend more deliberately to environmental humanities ’feminist sub-
strate? We are also asking, somewhat provocatively, by refusing to name it and fully
claim it, what else might we be avoiding?
60
Feminist Compostables: Taking Stock and Taking Care
Considering the richness with which these insights have imbued an environmentalhumanities soil, in this section we brie ﬂy note other key feminist insights that have
much to offer our ﬁeld. The imbricated oppressions that Plumwood ’s master model
stresses, however, also invite us to consider explicitly feminism ’s own erasures and the
need for careful composting that respects solidarity in difference.
Just as feminism has offered valuable conceptual tools for addressing intrahuman
questions of social justice, and just as feminisms have steadfastly pushed at the bound-
aries of what counts as “human ”in the ﬁrst place, it is a logical consequence that femi-
nisms would emerge with concepts and frameworks ﬁt-for-purpose for grappling with
questions of multispecies ﬂourishing in a climate-changing world. While an exhaustive
59. This claim resonates with Puig de la Bellacasa ’s analysis of Haraway ’s own “politics of quotation ”as a
form of care work, that “reveal[s] a commitment to a collective of knowledge-makers. ”“Nothing Comes without
Its World, ”202.
60. Here we acknowledge the need to explore the connection between disavowing feminisms in environ-
mental humanities scholarship and the gender (and related) politics (including discrimination and harassment) in
academic institutions. Sherilyn MacGregor reminds us that “hegemonic masculinity exists as an unmarked cate-
gory in [the scholarly communities of] environmental studies. ”MacGregor, “Gender and Environment: An Intro-
duction, ”5. Greta Gaard has also spoken incisively about this connection (keynote panel, ALECC Biannual Con-
ference, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay Ontario, August 2014).518 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

list of these feminist insights might exhaust even you, dear reader, we nonetheless lay a
few scraps on this kitchen bench for your further consideration.
Theﬁrst is the concept of intersectionality, coined by black feminist and antidis-
crimination legal scholar Kimberlé Crenshaw in 1988 but since meaningfully expanded
in various ways, including a consideration of speciesism.61Most importantly, intersec-
tional analysis allows us to consider the ways in which certain oppressions might take
precedence in particular situations, while always insisting that all axes of oppressionremain in view. Environmental humanities will undoubtedly bene ﬁt from a more thor-
ough application of intersectional approaches. A second concept, already at play in liter-
atures of toxic embodiment, among others, is material intercorporeality whereby bodies
(our own, and those of more-than-human others) are understood as permeable and
interdependent; our wager is that the speci ﬁcally feminist genealogy of this work has
much to teach environmental humanities about unevenly distributed body burdens
and the exploitation of care.
62This relates directly to feminist interrogations of care
labor and social reproduction,63and queer and feminist work on intimacies, erotics,
and kinships,64all of which explicitly extend human norms about whom and what we
should care for and how, but in ways that make necessary connections to capitalist het-
eropatriachy. These name only some of the ways in which feminist scholarship (broadly
framed) has not only transformed our understandings of interhuman relations, but hasbegun to reshape our relations to the more-than-human world, imaginatively and
materially, in pathbreaking ways.
As this partial list already suggests, separating out feminism “proper ”from femi-
nism that is ecologically oriented is dif ﬁcult —and this is partly our point. As Sandilands
underlines, many feminist concerns are at heart ecological and material —which is why
they grow so easily into/within an environmental space.
65While we cannot fully un-
pack all of the ways in which these concepts can make for a more robust environmental
humanities, we can point to work already underway that provides valuable models for
how inclusive feminisms can further enrich our ﬁeld. These are part of a growing cor-
pus of (what we like to call) “already composted ”feminist environmental humanities
scholarship. Indeed, in choosing texts to read in our COMPOSTING group, some of these
examples intuitively surfaced, such as Elizabeth Povinelli ’s“Transgender Creeks and the
61. See Gruen and Adams, “Introduction. ”For coining of intersectionality , see Crenshaw, “Mapping the
Margins. ”
62. Here, the feminist embodied phenomenology of Luce Irigraray, Helene Cixous, Gail Weiss, Ros
Diprose, and Margrit Shildrick meets more contemporary expressions of connected embodiment like Stacy
Alaimo ’s transcorporeality and Astrida Neimanis ’s bodies of water.
63. Puig de la Bellacasa ’sMatters of Care has made signi ﬁcant inroads here. Other potential composta-
bles include Ruddick “Maternal Thinking, ”and Federici, Caliban and the Witch .
64. A preliminary list includes Audre Lorde ’s“Uses of the Erotic, ”Judith Butler ’sAntigone ’s Claim ,a n d
Kath Weston ’sFamilies We Choose .
65. Sandilands, “Some ‘F’Words for the Environmental Humanities. ”Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 519Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Three Figures of Power in Late Liberalism. ”66Drawing together feminist, queer, and anti-
colonial insights enables Povinelli ’s broad retheorization of power in the Anthropocene.
Kathryn Yusoff ’s“Queer Coal: Geneaologies in/of the Blood ”politicizes both carbonifer-
ous matter and deep time by making surprising connections between labor activism,
coal mining, and contemporary queer identity.67These are just two examples among
many: Puig de la Bellacasa carefully describes how feminism informs her central claims
in“Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care ”;68Carla Hustak
and Natasha Myers ’s“Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the Science of
Plant/Insect Encounters ”composts feminist insights with plants;69Mel Y. Chen ’sAnima-
cies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect ,70published in a queer studies book ser-
ies, brings feminist antiracist, crip, and queer knowledge to bear on environmental mat-
ters; Claire Jean Kim ’sDangerous Crossings demonstrates the inextricable imbrication of
race and gender in our attempts to ﬁnd cross-species political af ﬁnities;71Sarah Ensor ’s
“Queer Fallout ”explores queer thinking on the intimacies of cruising as environmental
affairs;72Michelle Murphy ’s“Distributed Reproduction, Chemical Violence, and Latency ”
is just one example of her scholarship that articulates a critique of contemporary toxic-
ity with anticolonial and transinclusive perspectives.73This small sample is extended in
the reading list of our COMPOSTING group —serving as both archive and methodological
model for thinking feminisms and ecological questions together. This demonstrateswhat a well-composted environmental humanities can look like. This archive will con-
tinue to grow.
So even as we acknowledge a foundational relation between feminist and ecologi-
cally oriented thinking, we also encourage a more deliberate cultivation of their recipro-
cal in ﬂuence. At the same time, as with one ’s literal compost pile, care also needs to be
taken about the kinds of experiences, ideas, and matters that end up mulched together.
Sometimes we need to plant parallel gardens and tend to their speci ﬁcities.
74For us, this
is a particular challenge in thinking through the relationship between feminist and de-
colonial practice and scholarship, especially in the (predominantly white) environmen-
tal humanities space. We are helpfully reminded by scholars like Evelyn Araluen that
“decolonial theory gives us what feminism, critical race studies and gender critiques
cannot alone give us, ”but simultaneously, that “there is no protocol for settlers to
66. Povinelli, “Transgender Creeks. ”
67. Yusoff, “Queer Coal. ”
68. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil. ”
69. Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum. ”
70. Chen, Animacies .
71. Kim, Dangerous Crossings .
72. Ensor, “Queer Fallout. ”
73. Murphy, “Distributed Reproduction. ”
74. The two row wampum that was suggested by the Haudensaunee to govern their relation to the Dutch
colonizers is a useful image here. See Keefer, “A Short Introduction to the Two Row Wampum. ”520 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

engage with the enormously confronting notion of decolonisation in any discipline. ”75
As a result, we —white settler feminists —must not shy away from this challenge, even
if we are bound to be clumsy. This is all the more reason to take care.
For example, recent scholarship and activism in the emerging area of feminist
queer ecologies challenge the heteronormativity of Western kinship structures and sug-
gest that our intimate relations might also be with nonhuman natures. A related area of
art, activism, and scholarship known as ecosexuality (notably promoted by Annie Sprin-kle and Beth Stephens) also calls to engage earth not as mother, but as lover.
76One
might wonder, then, about the compostability of ecosexuality with non-Western under-
standings of more-than-human kinship. But while a connection here might be exciting,
it is neither simple nor straightforward. After engaging with Beth Stephens and Annie
Sprinkles ’s ecosexual activism, Dakota scholar Kim TallBear admits that the indigenous
traditions she has encountered speak also of human and nonhuman close physical
relations. At the same time, TallBear underlines that “those relations don ’t seem to be
cohered into something, i.e. ‘sexuality ’as we know it in Western modernity. ”Compost-
ing these different kinds of physical relations to the earth, TallBear notes, would need to
acknowledge that “there are no easy, literal translations between indigenous ontologies
and ecosexuality, at least among the indigenous people I run with. Rather, there are
careful conversations with much careful thought to be had. ”77
In a similar vein, Anishnaabe and Haudenosaunee scholar Vanessa Watts points
out that her society “conceives that we (humans) are made from the land; our ﬂesh is
literally an extension of soil. ”78As Watts notes, this digs into territory very similar to
that of some feminist ecological materialisms, where soil is seen as coextensive —or, in
Stacy Alaimo ’s terms, as transcorporeal —with our own bodies.79Yet Watts also warns
us of eliding these views too easily: the quality of relationship between human and soil
is parsed differently in both views. “In [Alaimo ’s description of our] relationship with
dirt, humans are responsible to land the way an owner might be responsible for a pet.
This type of dirt is not First Woman. ”80
In both TallBear ’s and Watts ’s comparisons, the issue here is not which relation is
more “correct ”; the point is rather about the care we need to take in presuming a trans-
latability in the ﬁrst place. In other words, even while composting suggests that many
things merge productively in the muck, we resist any lure of homogeneity. We know
75. Araluen, “Resisting the Institution. ”While some might disagree that there is “no protocol, ”insofar as
many are actively working on decolonial projects, and while these might seem complementary in theory to eco-logical ones, the practical realization of the politics is proving dif ﬁcult. See Vincent and Neale, Unstable Relations .
76. Stephens and Sprinkle, “On Becoming Appalachian Moonshine. ”
77. TallBear, “What ’s in Ecosexuality for the Indigenous Scholar of Nature. ”Our thanks to Lindsay Kelley
for bringing this reading to the composting pile.
78. Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency amongst Humans and Non-humans, ”27.
79. Alaimo, Bodily Natures .
80. Watts, “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency amongst Humans and Non-humans, ”29.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 521Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

that muddy ground contains multiple worlds, and that the differences of these worlds
also need tending.
Reading Métis scholar Zoe Todd ’s essay “An Indigenous Feminist ’s Take on the On-
tological Turn, ”we note how her concern for the erasure of indigenous thought in the
so-called ontological turn parallels our arguments in relation to environmental human-
ities and feminism. Todd laments the ontological turn ’s“spinning itself on the backs of
non-European thinkers, ”and points out that those credited (in scholarly forums) for
these “incredible insights into the ‘more-than-human ’”are not those people who have
labored to build and maintain those knowledge systems. Todd writes how upon leaving
a Bruno Latour lecture, “once again, I felt as though I was just another inconvenient In-
digenous body in a room full of people excited to hear a white guy talk around themes
shared in Indigenous thought without giving Indigenous people credit or a nod. Doesn ’t
this feel familiar , I thought. ”81
Doesn ’t it, indeed. The disavowals of indigenous thought that Todd theorizes as
structural and systemic (rather than always malicious or deliberate) resonate with some
of our diagnoses here. It is not lost on us that the erasures that open Todd ’s essay —from
the “dropping ”of Inuit activist and leader Sheila Watt-Cloutier from the nominee dou-
ble bill for the Nobel Peace Prize that she initially shared with Al Gore in 2007, to the
ignorance of the work of activists like Watt-Cloutier and Rosemary Kupatana in Latour ’s
discussions of “climate as a common organising force ”—are simultaneously erasures of
female voices. (Back to those interlocking oppressions . . . ) Yet while our call for inclu-
sive feminisms seeks territories of con ﬂuence with other social justice paradigms like
decolonization, we also recognize that these cannot be simply collapsed, their impor-
tant differences easily composted in a common pile.82
We also acknowledge that just as various feminisms have very problematically
promoted some women ’s emancipation over others ’—notably of indigenous women
and women of color —some feminist environmentalisms have also been complicit in
erasure and appropriation of indigenous voices. Careful composting is thus about pay-
ing close attention to what and how we compost, as environmental feminists. It is
about refusing our own neutralizing of the commitments of those social justice move-
ments with which environmental feminisms seek af ﬁnity —such as decolonization. Just
as we ask environmental humanities scholars to heed the feminist commitments that
engender the concepts we deploy, we must also remember that “decolonization is not a
metaphor. ”83After all, anticoloniality is not here to serve our feminist objectives, even if
as white feminists, we hope to learn from it and actively support these efforts; rather, as
81. Todd, “An Indigenous Feminist ’s Take on the Ontological Turn. ”
82. In Is Racism An Environmental Threat? Ghassan Hage explicitly names feminism ’s important contribu-
tion to meaningfully addressing the problem of environmental harm. Doing so also enables him to carefully cri-
tique Plumwood ’s theory of dualisms. Hage, Is Racism An Environmental Threat? , 113 –14. We cite this because
it also demonstrates that unless feminism is attentively recognized, a thoughtful critique of these positions re-mains elusive.
83. Tuck and Yang, “Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor. ”522 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Araluen insists, “The decolonial imagination should be there to serve the colonised in
protest and solidarity. ”84The care we must exercise, in other words, has as its stakes
not only our potential failure as “careful composters, ”but (in Araluen ’s words) the per-
sistence of “those outside the sandstone walls of a colonial institution, mortared with
[aboriginal] blood. ”85
Sometimes voices speak together, and sometimes they need to speak, and be
accountable, on their own terms. Calling for more inclusive feminist composting inenvironmental humanities does not mean destroying all borders or limits between tra-
ditions, disciplines, and methodologies, but invites careful attention to how myriad
environmental and social injustices, violences, and power asymmetries intersect —and
don ’t—while just as carefully working to see which stories and concepts can help grow
others into being.
Coming Back to the Compost Buckets
When asked why feminism is such a driving force in current environmental humani-
ties, Alaimo underscores feminism ’s insight into “that dual sense of having been posi-
tioned as both a subject and an object. ”For Alaimo, “That sense of theorizing and think-
ing even while being a material being ”is key for being able to rethink the challenges we
currently face, where “this distinction between human and what we call nature ”no lon-
ger holds.
86While the ﬁeld of environmental humanities holds at its heart a disruption
of the separation of nature and culture, for scholars like Haraway (for example, in provid-
ing an early articulation of our more-than-human hybrid nature in the form of the cy-
borg) or Plumwood (particularly as she theorized out of being literal prey, in the jaws of
a crocodile), the nature-culture divide as it connects to female-male, black-white, savage-civilized, or other binaries has never been just an intellectual exercise. For feminists,
writing from the experience of objecti ﬁcation and instrumentalization as women (or
trans, or gender nonbinary people) opens readily to being able to theorize asnature —
rather than about it.
Understanding ourselves as always implicated in the problems we parse comes
from a long lineage of feminist thinking. To name this ensures that we continue to rec-
ognize the inextricable entanglement of structures of oppression —from the objecti ﬁca-
tion of nature to the objecti ﬁcation of women or colonized peoples. In the words of fem-
inist antiracist and animal studies scholar Claire Jean Kim, “It may be that forms of
domination —white supremacy, heteropatriarchy, human supremacy, mastery over na-
ture, and more —are so intricately woven together, so dependent upon each other for
sustenance, that they will stand or fall together. ”
87Naming feminism in the compost is
84. Araluen, “Resisting the Institution, ”10.
85. Ibid.
86. Boyer and Howe, “Ep. #39 —Stacy Alaimo. ”
87. Kim, “The Wonderful Horrible Life of Michael Vick, ”188.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 523Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

part of refusing to hierarchize these oppressions, and rather committing to their con-
comitant dismantling.
If these are the stakes, it may sound like our compost fork is nothing more than an
extended metaphor. In closing, though, we wish to reassert that this methodology is a
matter of matter, too. Composting insists that environmental humanities scholarship
emerges from and contours the world around us. This is because how we think ,speak ,
and write the world can shape how we actin it and make it, as many scholars interested
in radical imaginaries remind us. Even if composting as described in this provocation
may traf ﬁc more in texts than in dirt piles, it is no less engaged in seeding possible fu-
tures. In the seminar room as in the community garden, we are writing the world-to-
come with soil-stained ﬁngers. The composting we promote is a direct descendant of a
feminist lineage of recognizing the inseparability of theory and praxis; of the personalas the political; of the “shadow places ”and entanglements that always undergird and
make possible being and becoming as a certain kind of social reproduction.
88
That brings us back to the scraps in buckets on the kitchen bench and the messy
business of waste management. These bins at once facilitate an attempt to minimize
landﬁll and represent the wish that the cumulative effect of small-scale actions can
help sustain the planet. At the same time, they are the food scraps of unpaid domestic
labors, which reminds us of prior struggles to transform the reproductive economy, re-claim and revalue the maternal body, rethink the heteronormative nuclear family, and
remember other (classed, racialized, colonized) bodies and labors on which white social
reproduction is built. In this regard, the triumvirate of tubs intersects with nascent
strategies for making other kinds of kinship, politicizing home economics beyond the
human sphere, and slowly cultivating different relationships with the more-than-human matters that are part of our daily lives. But it is in solidarity with earlier feminist
struggles to similarly make new kinds of worlds to which this kind of inquiry is both
deeply indebted and on which it hangs its hope.
JENNIFER MAE HAMILTON is a lecturer in literary studies at the University of New England, Armi-
dale, Australia. From 2016 to early 2018 she was a postdoctoral researcher funded by The Seed
Box at Linköping University in Sweden and housed in Gender and Cultural Studies at the Univer-
sity of Sydney and the Institute for Culture and Society at Western Sydney University in Australia.
Her project is called Weathering the City. Her ﬁrst book is This Contentious Storm: An Ecocritical
and Performance History of King Lear (2017). Prior to that she was adjunct tutor in environmental
humanities at the University of New South Wales.
ASTRIDA NEIMANIS writes mostly about bodies, water, and weather, in an intersectional feminist
mode. Her most recent monograph is Bodies of Water: Posthuman Feminist Phenomenology
(2017). She is also associate editor of the journal Environmental Humanities and scienti ﬁc director
of the “Deep Waters ”cluster of The Seed Box: A Mistra-FORMAS Environmental Humanities Col-
laboratory (Linköping University, Sweden). Currently, Neimanis is senior lecturer in the Depart-
ment of Gender and Cultural Studies at the University of Sydney, on Gadigal land, in Australia.
88. For “shadow places, ”see Plumwood, “Shadow Places. ”524 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Together, Hamilton and Neimanis initiated the COMPOSTING Feminisms and Environmental
Humanities Reading and Research Group at the University of Sydney in 2015.
Acknowledgments
This research has grown from and been invaluably sustained by our involvement in the COMPOSTING
Feminisms and Environmental Humanities Reading and Research Group (compostingfeminisms.word-
press.com), supported by the Sydney Social Sciences and Humanities Advanced Research Centre. Ourthanks to all our fellow composters, who have made this group a lively and relevant forum for re-
search, care, and curiosity. Research funding has also been provided by The Seed Box: A Mistra-FORMAS
Environmental Humanities Collaboratory . We are moreover grateful for the suggestions of two anonym-
ous reviewers.
References
Adamson, Joni, William A. Gleeson, and David N. Pellow. Keywords for Environmental Studies .N e w
York: New York University Press, 2016.
Ahmed, Sara. “Making Feminist Points. ”feministkilljoys.com/2013/09/11/making-feminist-points/
(accessed September 11, 2003).
Alaimo, Stacy. Bodily Natures: Science, Environment and the Material Self . Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
⸻ .Exposed: Environmental Politics and Pleasures in Posthuman Times . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2016.
Araluen, Evelyn. “Resisting the Institution. ”Overland 227 (2017): 3 –10.
Åsberg, Cecilia. “Resilience Is Cyborg: Feminist Clues to a Post-disciplinary Environmental Human-
ities of Critique and Creativity. ”Resilience 1( 2 0 1 4 ) .
Boes, Tobias, and Kate Marshall. “Writing the Anthropocene. ”minnesota review 80 (2014): 60 –72.
Boyer, Dominic, and Cymene Howe. “Ep. #39 —Stacy Alaimo (introducing Felix) ”Cultures of Energy
(2016), http://culturesofenergy.com/ep-39-stacy-alaimo-introducing-felix/ (accessed Novem-
ber 20, 2017).
Braidotti, Rosi. The Posthuman . Cambridge: Polity, 2013.
Butler, Judith. Antigone ’s Claim: Kinship between Life and Death . New York: Columbia University Press,
2000.
Chen, Mel Y. Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect . Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2012.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against
Women of Color. ”Stanford Law Review 43, no. 6 (1991): 1241 –99.
DeLoughrey, Elizabeth, Jill Didur, and Anthony Carrigan. Global Ecologies and the Environmental Human-
ities: Postcolonial Approaches . London: Routledge, 2015.
Ensor, Sarah. “Queer Fallout: Samuel R. Delany and the Ecology of Cruising ”Environmental Humanities
9 (2017): 149
–66.
Federici, Silvia. Caliban and the Witch: Women, The Body, and Primitive Accumulation . Brooklyn: Autono-
media, 2004.
Gaard, Greta. “Where Is Feminism in Environmental Humanities? ”inEnvironmental Humanities: Voices
from the Anthropocene , edited by Serpil Oppermann and Serenella Iovino, 81 –98. London: Row-
man and Little ﬁeld, 2016.
⸻ .“Women, Water, and Energy: An Ecofeminist Approach ”Organization and Environment 14, no. 2
(2001): 157 –72.
⸻ .“Ecofeminism Revisited: Rejecting Essentialism and Replacing Species and a Material Femi-
nist Environmentalism. ”Feminist Formations 2 3 ,n o .2( 2 0 1 1 ) :2 6 –53.
Gruen, Lori, and Carol J. Adams. “Introduction. ”InEcofeminism: Feminist Intersections with Other Ani-
mals and the Earth . London: Bloomsbury, 2014.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 525Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Hage, Ghassan. Is Racism an Environmental Threat? Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017.
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae. “Explainer: What Are the Environmental Humanities? ”The Conversation ,
December 2, 2013. theconversation.com/explainer-what-are-the-environmental-humanities
-20040 .
Haraway, Donna. “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin. ”Envi-
ronmental Humanities 6 (2015), 159 –65.
⸻ .Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2016.
⸻ .“Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of the Partial Per-
spective. ”Feminist Studies 14, no. 3 (1988): 575 –99.
⸻ .“A Seed Bag for Terraforming with Earth Others. ”InBeyond the Cyborg: Adventures with Donna
Haraway , edited by Margaret Grebowitcz and Helen Merrick, 137 –46. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 2013.
⸻ .“In the Beginning Was the Word: The Genesis of Biological Theory. ”Signs 6, no. 3 (1981): 469 –81.
Heise, Ursula K. “Plant, Species, Justice —And the Stories We Tell about Them. ”InThe Routledge Com-
panion to the Environmental Humanities , edited by Ursula K. Heise, Jon Christensen, and Michelle
Niemann, 1 –10. London: Routledge, 2017.
⸻ .“The Environmental Humanities and the Futures of the Human. ”New German Critique 43, no. 2
(2016): 21 –31.
Hustak, Carla, and Natasha Myers. “Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the Sciences of
Plant/Insect Encounters. ”differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 23, no. 3 (2012): 74 –118.
Keefer, Tom. “A Short Introduction to the Two Row Wampum. ”Briarpatch Magazine ,M a r c h1 0 ,2 0 1 4 .
briarpatchmagazine.com/articles/view/a-short-introduction-to-the-two-row-wampum .
Kim, Claire Jean. “The Wonderful Horrible Life of Michael Vick. ”InEcofeminism: Feminist Intersections
with Other Animals and the Earth, edited by Lori Gruen and Carol J. Adams, 175 –90. London:
Bloomsbury, 2014.
⸻ .Dangerous Crossings: Race, Species, and Nature in a Multicultural Age .N e wY o r k :C a m b r i d g eU n i -
versity Press, 2015.
LeGuin, Ursula. “Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction. ”Dancing at the Edge of the World: Thoughts on Words,
Women, and Places . New York: Grove Press, 1989: 165 –170.
Lorde, Audre. “Uses of the Erotic. ”Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches . Berkeley, CA: Crossings Press,
1984: 53 –59.
MacGregor, Sherilyn. “Gender and Environment: An Introduction. ”InRoutledge Handbook of Gender
and Environment , edited by Lori Gruen and Carol J. Adams, 27 –42. London: Routledge, 2017.
Murphy, Michelle. “Distributed Reproduction, Chemical Violence, and Latency ”Scholar and Feminist
Online . 11, no. 3 (2013). sfonline.barnard.edu/life-un-ltd-feminism-bioscience-race/distributed
-reproduction-chemical-violence-and-latency/ .
Neimanis, Astrida. Bodies of Water: Feminist Posthuman Phenomenology . London: Bloomsbury, 2017.
Neimanis, Astrida, Cecilia Åsberg, and Johan Hedrén, “Four Problems, Four Directions for Environ-
mental Humanities: Toward Critical Posthumanities for the Anthropocene. ”Ethics and the Envi-
ronment 20, no. 1 (2015): 67 –97.
Nye, David, and Robert Emmett. The Environmental Humanities: A Critical Introduction . Boston: MIT
Press, 2017.
Nye, David E., Linda Rugg, James Fleming, and Robert Emmett. “The Emergence of the Environmental
Humanities. ”MISTRA, May 2013. https://www.mistra.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Mistra_
Environmental_Humanities_May2013.pdf .
Oppermann, Serpil, and Serenella Iovino. “Introduction: The Environmental Humanities and the
Challenges of the Anthropocene. ”InVoices from the Anthropocene , edited by Serpil Oppermann
and Serenella Iovino, 1 –21. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Little ﬁeld, 2017.
Ortner, Sherry. “I sF e m a l et oM a l ea sN a t u r eI st oC u l t u r e ? ”Feminist Studies 1, no. 2 (1972): 5 –31.526 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Palsson, Gisli, et al. “Reconceptualizing the ‘Anthropos ’in the Anthropocene: Integrating the Social
Sciences and Humanities in Global Environmental Change Research. ”Environmental Science and
Policy 28 (2013): 3 –13.
Plumwood, Val. Feminism and the Mastery of Nature . New York: Routledge, 1993.
⸻ .“Shadow Places and the Politics of Dwelling. ”Australian Humanities Review 44 (2008): n.p.
Povinelli, Elizabeth. “Transgender Creeks and the Three Figures of Power in Late Liberalism. ”differ-
ences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 26. no. 1 (2015): 168 –87.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”So-
cial Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
⸻ .Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds . Minneapolis: University of Min-
nesota Press, 2017.
⸻ .“‘Nothing Comes without Its World ’:T h i n k i n gw i t hC a r e . ”Sociological Review 60, no. 2 (2012):
197–216.
Rich, Adrienne. “Notes toward the Politics of Location (1984). ”InBlood, Bread, and Poetry: Selected Prose
1979 –1985 . London: Little Brown, 1994: 210 –231.
Rose, Deborah Bird, and Libby Robin, “The Ecological Humanities in Action: An Invitation. ”Australian
Humanities Review 31–32 (2004): n.p.
Rose, Deborah Bird, Thom van Dooren, Matthew Chrulew, Stuart Cooke, Matthew Kearnes, and Emily
O’Gorman, “Thinking through the Environment, Unsetttling the Humanities. ”Environmental
Humanities 1 (2012): 1 –5.
Ruddick, Sara. “Maternal Thinking. ”Feminist Studies 6, no. 2 (1980): 342 –67.
Sandilands, Catriona. “Some ‘F’Words for the Environmental Humanities: Feralities, Feminisms, Fu-
turities. ”InThe Routledge Companion to the Environmental Humanities, edited by Ursula K. Heise,
Jon Christiensen, and Michelle Niemann, 443 –51. London: Routledge, 2017.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. A Dialogue on Love . Boston: Beacon Press, 1999.
Sörlin, Sverker. “Environmental Humanities: Why Should Biologists Interested in the Environment
Take the Humanities Seriously? ”Bioscience 62, no. 9 (2012): 788 –89.
Stephens, Beth, and Annie Sprinkle, “On Becoming Appalachian Moonshine. ”Performance Research
17, no. 4 (2012): 61 –66.
TallBear, Kim. “What ’s in Ecosexuality for the Indigenous Scholar of Nature, ”retrieved from http:/
/indigenoussts.com/whats-in-ecosexuality-for-an-indigenous-scholar-of-nature/ (accessed July
26, 2018).
Terranova, Fabrizio, dir. Storytelling for Earthly Survival . 2017.
Todd, Zoe. “An Indigenous Feminist ’s Take on the Ontological Turn: Ontology Is Just Another Word
for Colonialism. ”Historical Sociology 29 (2016): 4 –22.
Tuck, Eve, and K. Wayne Yang. “Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor. ”Decolonization: Indigeneity, Educa-
tion, and Society. 1, no. 1 (2012): 1 –40.
Tuck, Eve, K. Wayne Yang, and Rubén Gaztambide-Fernández. “Citation Practices Challenge. ”www
.criticalethnicstudiesjournal.org/citation-practices/ (accessed November 7, 2017).
van Dooren, Thom. Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction . New York: Columbia University
Press, 2014.
Vincent, Eve, and Timothy Neale. Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and Environmentalism in Contem-
porary Australia. Perth: University of Western Australia Press, 2016.
Watts, Vanessa. “Indigenous Place-Thought and Agency Amongst Humans and Non-humans (First
Woman and Sky Woman to Go on a European World Tour!). ”Decolonization: Indigeneity, Educa-
tion, and Society 2, no. 1 (2013): 20 –24.
Wekker, Gloria. “In the Arena of Disciplines: Gloria Anzaldua and Interdisciplinarity. ”InDoing Gender in
Media, Art, and Culture , edited by R. Buikema and I. Van Der Tuin, 54 –69. London, Routledge: 2007.
Weston, Kath. Families We Choose: Lesbians, Gays, Kinship . New York: Columbia University Press, 1991.
Yusoff, Kathryn. “Queer Coal: Genealogies in/of the Blood. ”philoSOPHIA 5, no. 2 (2015): 203 –29.Hamilton and Neimanis / Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities 527Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/501/1551184/501hamilton.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

