Vol.:(0123456789)Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-024-01609-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
Contestations in the emerging soil‑based carbon economy: 
towards a research agenda
Julie Ingram1  · Damian Maye1 · Mark Reed1,2
Received: 1 April 2024 / Accepted: 17 November 2024 / Published online: 4 January 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
This paper highlights the need to consider the processes and relations in the political, knowledge, technical and socio-material 
complex that underpins the emergence of a soil-based carbon economy. This economy, characterised by the proliferation of 
voluntary soil-based carbon markets, carbon farming policies, supply chain and other initiatives, operates through private 
mechanisms (offsetting, insetting) and public policy instruments. This emerging economy entails a number of inherent 
political and knowledge contestations associated with claims around the mitigation potential of soil carbon sequestration 
and carbon farming. We adapt a social ecological systems (SES) framework to understand these contestations and draw on 
a corpus of agricultural, ecological, political and social science literatures to identify and pose critical questions for future 
research. We conceptualise the emerging soil-based carbon economy as interactions and outcomes among actors embed -
ded within a defined SES (governance, resource systems, resource units, actors). Five themes are identified: Marketisation, 
abstraction and technogovernance; Power relations and expert knowledge; Disputing the meaning and value of soil carbon; 
Disruptions: new interfaces, configurations and actor relations; Uncertainties and capabilities. These underpin a research 
agenda proposal. We argue that an integrative conceptualisation is essential to equitably account for the broad mix of social, 
technical, economic, political, and ecological contexts in which soil carbon is embedded and present options for operation-
alising the conceptualisation.
Keywords Soil-based carbon economy · Social Ecological Systems · Soil carbon markets · Carbon farming · Governance · 
Power
Introduction
Green finance has become an essential element in helping 
governments to meet their commitments to climate change 
mitigation and net zero, and biodiveristy (Benton et al. 
2021), and in driving new bioeconomy and green business 
models (CBI Economics 2024; Davies et al. 2021). These 
private sector sources of finance are increasingly looked 
on to fill government funding gaps. For example, the gov -
ernment in England has set a target for private finance into nature recovery to reach over £1 billion a year by 2030 
(Defra 2023), with the green finance strategy (HM Gov -
ernment 2023) outlining how they intend to achieve the 
step change needed. This green finance is envisaged to 
help quickly upscale a farming transition towards net zero 
(Green Finance Institute 2023). Private sector finance can 
be mobilised for this transition through banks, retailers and 
the supply chain, and as buyers of and investors in ecosystem 
services. Globally, there are now an increasing number of 
opportunities to access new funding streams through private 
nature markets for enacting nature-based solutions (and land-
based natural climate solutions), including funding for car -
bon sequestration, improving water quality, and enhancing 
biodiversity (Reed et al. 2022; Buck and Palumbo-Compton 
2022; UNEP 2021). The COP28 UAE partners agreed to 
scale up and enhance access to all forms of finance to trans-
form agriculture in response to climate change (COP28, 
2023). The European Commission’s EU Carbon Farming 
Handled by Leslie Mabon, The Open University, United Kingdom.
 * Julie Ingram 
 jingram@glos.ac.uk
1 Countryside and Community Research Institute, University 
of Gloucestershire, Cheltenham GL50 4AZ, UK
2 Natural Capital Challenge Centre, Scotland’s Rural College 
(SRUC), Edinburgh EH9 3JG, UK
598 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
initiative1 is based on a green business model that rewards 
land managers through private and public mechanisms 
(European Commission 2021) (Bogojević 2024). With this 
increase in interest, however, are growing concerns about the 
potential environmental and social impacts and the influence 
of private sector actors to define what and how to govern, 
which is an inherently ‘political act’ (Hirons 2021; Chausson 
et al. 2023; Battersby et al. 2022).
Soils provide a natural capital that is essential for our 
well-being, and which is reflected in global initiatives to 
protect soils for climate change mitigation, food production, 
and biodiversity conservation (Bardgett and Van Wensem 
2020; Lal 2016). Promoting soil as an enhanced carbon sink 
that absorbs anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions while 
provdiing co-benefits has become an increasingly prominent 
narrative (Bossio et al. 2020), underpinning international 
scientific and political interests in carbon sequestration, the 
“4 per 1000” proposal endorsed by the COP 21 Steering 
Committee in 2015 (OECD 2015) and given formal recog-
nition in the UNFCCC process in 2017 (COP23 decision 4/
CP.23) (Rumpel et al. 2018; Vermeulen et al. 2019; Minasny 
et al. 2017). In particular, there is high expectation as 
regards transformative potential of agricultural practices to 
store soil carbon. As such, soil carbon is emerging as a key 
agricultural resource. As Keenor et al. (2021, p1) observe 
“[t]he establishment of a soil-based carbon economy has 
the potential to deliver a paradigm shift that will accelerate 
climate change mitigation, and concurrently realise net gains 
for soil health and the delivery of soil ecosystem services”. 
Furthermore, scholars argue for a rapid scaling up of carbon 
removal through carbon farming and a range of land-based 
approaches to compensate for the large food system GHG 
emissions (Crippa et al. 2021).
This soil-based carbon economy operates through pri-
vate mechanisms and public policy instruments that reward 
farmers for carbon farming practices that store soil carbon, 
recarbonise soil, and/or reduce GHG emissions (Keenor 
et al. 2021; FAO 2019). Such practices can be incentiv -
ised through private sector voluntary markets where car -
bon farming credits become an additional product that land 
managers can sell; supply chain standards for land manage-
ment (insetting to meet Scope 3 net zero targets)2 as well as 
public sector policy measures such as EU CAP instruments 
(Bossio et al. 2020; Battersby et al. 2022; Baumber et al. 
2020; European Commission 2021); direct financial rewards from governments (Fleming et al. 2019) and potentially gov -
ernment subsidies and taxes (Frank et al. 2024). Of these, 
voluntary soil carbon markets (VCM) have attracted most 
attention, increasingly viewed as mechanisms to enable and 
scale the adoption of carbon farming practices in the UK and 
internationally with a growing global marketplace (Buck and 
Palumbo-Compton 2022; Black et al. 2022; Paul et al. 2023; 
Cevallos et al. 2019). This carbon offsetting approach is an 
appealing instrument for markets to generate new revenue 
streams for a range of supply chain actors, financial institu-
tions, and farmers (Reed et al. 2022; Buck and Palumbo-
Compton 2022). However, the increase in agri-food compa-
nies setting net zero targets for Scope 3 emissions by 2050 
such as major food retailers (e.g. in the UK Tesco, 2021; 
Sainsbury's 2023), processors, and international corpora -
tions (e.g. Nestle) represents another dimension of the soil-
based carbon economy. As part of this, farm businesses may 
need to demonstrate reduced emission or increased seques-
tration to access existing supply chain markets.
The last few years have witnessed a proliferation of vol-
untary markets, new investors, traders and brokers, project 
developers, and public and private sector carbon farming 
initiatives, networks, and projects with soil carbon becoming 
part of the lexicon of supply chain actors and policy makers, 
both internationally (Saifuddin et al. 2024) and in the UK 
(Reed et al. 2024).
However, the expectations for soil carbon sequestration 
(Buck and Palumbo-Compton 2022), the urgency to address 
climate change (Bradford et al. 2019), and the expansion 
of unregulated soil carbon markets (Reed et al. 2022) into 
the so-called ‘wild west’ territory of offset markets, along 
with public and private sector attempts to scale up carbon 
farming, creates multiple cultural and scientific challenges 
which coalesce to make this a highly contested and dynamic 
arena. In particular, this emerging soil-based carbon econ-
omy entails a number of inherent political and knowledge 
contestations associated with claims around the mitigation 
potential of soil carbon sequestration and carbon farming 
(Henderson et al. 2022; Sykes et al. 2020). Described as a 
‘speculative and promissory climatic regime’ (King et al. 
2018), and as ‘overly optimistic and inherently flawed’ 
(Amundson and Biardeau 2018), scholars argue that the 
existing knowledge base does not justify the current trend 
to set global agendas focusing on soil carbon sequestration 
(Moinet et al. 2023 ). Critics argue that, not only are there 
fundamental flaws in the logic of these markets to reach 
climate neutrality, but also environmental justice concerns 
(Saifuddin et al. 2024). Furthermore, VCM are controver -
sial, and are criticised and championed by various groups in 
equal measure (Miltenberger et al. 2021). VCM thus present 
significant governance challenges (Black et al. 2022) and 
potentially risk marginalising soil’s wider value and mean-
ing. Additionally, the social, economic, and political barriers 2 For companies to gain the benefits of shared value, they need to 
engage in carbon insetting, in which the carbon credits generated by 
farmers are marketed directly to buyers within the same supply chain.1 Carbon farming practices refer to those agricultural activities that 
can sequester carbon and/or reduce GHG emissions for example 
cover crops, reduced tillage, manure and fertiliser management.
599 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
to the implementation of soil carbon sequestration and car -
bon farming are only just becoming apparent (Amelung et al. 
2020; Amundson and Biardeau 2018), as evidenced in the 
relatively small scale and slow progress in investment and 
action in this area (Vermeulen et al. 2019).
Against this backdrop, this paper highlights the need to 
consider the processes and relations in the political, knowl-
edge, technical, and socio-material complex that characterise 
the emergence of a soil-based carbon economy. We adapt a 
social ecological systems (SES) framework to understand 
contestations in this emerging economy and draw on a cor -
pus of agricultural, ecological, political, and social science 
literatures to identify and pose critical questions for future 
research.
These studies reveal persistent and related themes which 
to date were not always connected or applied to soil carbon 
(Table  1). Drawing on these insights, we identify a number 
of intersecting contestations relevant to the emerging soil-
based carbon economy. We argue that an integrative concep-
tualisation (i.e. pluralist ontology that combines disciplinary 
perspectives) is essential to equitably account for the broad 
mix of social, technical, economic, political, and ecological 
contexts in which soil carbon is embedded.
Social ecological systems framework
A framework for analysing a soil-based carbon economy 
needs to draw on sociotechnical systems, where social ele-
ments (such as regulations, trading mechanisms, and stake-
holder interests, goals, and values) and technical elements 
(such as carbon accounting methods, verification technolo-
gies, and IT platforms for trading) come together, and it 
needs to incorporate agroecological perspectives of soil 
systems and the multiple variables and processes acting 
within and between the ecological, political, economic, and 
social components. The social ecological systems (hereaf-
ter ‘SES’) framework provides a means to do this, bringing 
together ecological and social systems by focusing on four 
high tier components: the governance system (formal and 
informal rules), the resource system (particular ecosystem 
types and biophysical processes), resource units (part of 
and interact with the resource system), actors (public and 
private actors within a governance system). Interactions  
between the above components take place and are medi-
ated by broader system relations within which the SES is 
embedded and produce outcomes. SES can be employed 
to organise arguments and analyses from the distinct per -
spectives relevant to a soil-based carbon economy (Ben-
nett and Gosnell 2015; Amin et al. 2020). We conceptu-
alise the emerging soil-based carbon economy (Fig.  1) as 
a set of interactions and outcomes among actors operating 
in an action situation embedded within a defined SES in which market and policy intermediaries negotiate, manage 
and trade in resource units with the intent of enhancing or 
maintaining carbon sequestration within the resource soil 
system; and actors such as land managers and farmers, and 
those who influence and support them, navigate changes, 
implement new practices, and deliver soil carbon within a 
governance system that legitimises, enforces, and monitors 
agreements among these actors. Employing the SES framing 
shows how the soil-based carbon economy is a highly con-
tested set of interactions and outcomes. First, we synthesise 
literature concerning the four components of the SES, and 
in the following section we identify the five key interactions 
and outcomes which underpin our research agenda proposal. 
We acknowledge that there are many different frameworks 
for social–ecological systems and conceptual and methodo-
logical ambiguities (Binder et al. 2013; De Vos et al. 2019; 
Schlüter et al. 2019), but for this high level conceptualisa-
tion we take the key dimensions where there is agreement 
(Partelow 2018).
SES components and relevance to soil‑based carbon 
economy
Governance
Governing the many dimensions of sustainable soil manage-
ment brings new demands (Helming et al. 2018). These are 
especially acute with soil carbon governance where a lack 
of monitoring, problems in ensuring additionality, perma-
nence, and safeguarding against leakage effects, and poor 
accountability are prominent (Battersby et al. 2022; Paul 
et al. 2023).
Soil carbon trading, supply chain governance, and policy 
implementation all require consensus on certification instru-
ments used for long-term soil carbon storage, and the devel-
opment of robust institutional agreements and processes 
(Rodrigo-Comino et al. 2020; Keenor et al. 2021; Amin 
et al. 2023) and an agreed method for valuation (Baveye 
2023). International soil carbon codes are in operation, but 
exhibit differences in governance, scope, rules, methods, and 
marketplace and as such are not easily transferable (Black 
et al. 2022). Whilst more developed in Australia and USA, 
voluntary markets for soil carbon in Europe and the UK, 
for example, are currently unregulated. With the absence of 
regulation, significant controversy remains over the claims 
that are made with respect to gains or losses in soil carbon 
sequestered, and there are accusations of corporate "green-
washing”. Central to this is the lack of transparency, environ-
mental integrity, and standardisation in the methodologies 
and rules for monitoring, reporting, and verifying (MRV) 
and the use of different methods, benchmarks, technologies, 
and rules to deliver and generate carbon credits (Elliott et al. 
2020; Smith et al. 2020). Currently, there are many models 
600 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
Table 1  Summary of previously disconnected bodies of research in soil science, climate science, ecosystem services, and social and political studies
Soil carbon: scientific debates Social, economic and political barriers to the implementation of soil carbon sequestration
Ecosystem services, soil carbon sequestration and mitigation Carbon farming and markets: farmer adoption, governance Carbon (non-soil) offsetting and markets
Soil ecosystem services, 
natural capital (NC), nature-
based solutions (NBS)Soil carbon sequestration and 
mitigation potentialCarbon farming (CF), soil 
carbon (SC) markets, farmer 
perspectives, capability Governance Commodification, marketisa-
tionPolitical ecology, ecosystem 
services
Soil ecosystem services 
(Bardgett and van Wensum 
2020 (soil as NC); Baggaley 
et al. 2022 (NBS, UK); 
Baveye 2023)
Natural capital (Robinson 
et al. 2014)
Soil politics and human 
dimensions (Krzywoszyn-
ska and Marchesi 2020, 
Gosnell 2022;Granjou and 
Meulemans 2023)
NBS (Hirons 2021; Chausson 
et al. 2023)Role of soil carbon in miti-
gation (Smith et al. 2012; 
Banwart et al. 2014 (SC, 
global); Bossio et al. 2020; 
Paul et al. 2023; Minasny 
et al. 2017; Smith et al. 
2020; Yumashev et al. 2022 
(UK))
High expectation—SOC 
sequestration ‘win-win’, 
co-benefits, few trade-offs 
(Rumpel et al. 2018; Ame-
lung et al. 2020; Rodrigo-
Comino et al. 2020; IPCC 
WG1, 2021; Miltenberger 
et al. 2021; McGlade and 
Morris 2023; Frank et al. 
2024)
Contested role (Bradford 
et al. 2019; King et al. 2018; 
Keenor et al. 2021; Moinet 
et al. 2023)
Mitigation potential of land 
management practices and 
knowledge gaps
(Smith et al. 2012; Powlson 
et al. 2011; Paustian et al. 
2016, 2017; Oldfield et al. 
2022)Co-benefits and trade offs 
(Tang et al. 2016 (review 
GHG incentives, USA); 
Fleming et al. 2019 (CF, 
Aus); Keenor et al. 2021, 
McGuire et al. 2022; Buck 
and Palumbo-Compton 2022 
(review SC, USA))
Carbon certificates (Paul 
et al. 2023)
Adoption barriers and 
incentives for farmers 
(Kragt et al 2017 (CF, 
AUS); Sykes et al. 2020 
(SC); Amundson and 
Biardeau 2016 Dumbrell 
et al. 2016 (CF, Aus); Fre-
lih-Larsen et al. 2020 (CF, 
EU); Gosnell 2022; Baum-
ber et al. 2020; Barbato and 
Strong 2023 (CM, USA); 
Amin et al. 2023; Phelan 
et al. 2022 (SCM, UK)
Knowledge and capacity 
(Ingram et al. 2016; Kragt 
et al. 2017 (Aus); Aslam 
et al. 2017; Ingram and 
Mills 2019 (EU); Guan et al. 
2021 (GHG, China); Mac-
donald 2022 (EU); Mattila 
et al. 2022)Soil carbon governance 
and MRV (Elliott et al. 
2020 (UK); Kragt et al. 
2017 (Aus); Battersby et al. 
2022; Jackson Hammond 
et al. 2021 (USA); Black 
et al. 2022 (UK); Reed et al. 
2022; in press; Paul et al. 
2023)
Techno-politics/Techno-
governance (standards and 
metrics) (Freidberg 2014; 
Rosin et al. 2017; Konefal 
et al. 2022)Green finance, climate 
capitalism, NBS (Chausson 
et al. 2023)
Neoliberal processes, 
marketisation, calculative 
and performative work, 
materiality, subsumption 
of nature (Mackenzie 2009; 
Callon 2009, Bumpus 2011; 
Twyman et al. 2015; Blok 
2016 Ferreira 2017; Nel 
2017; Cavanagh et al. 2021)
Fantasy of carbon offset-
ting, integrity, governance 
of traded credits (McAfee 
2016; Watt 2021)
Abstraction. Datafication. 
politics (Scheidel 2019; 
Gabrys et al. 2022)
Carbon storytelling and 
new actors (Kröger 2016; 
Chartier and Demaze 2020)Carbon colonialism and 
injustice (Lawhon and Mur -
phy 2012; Bennett and Gos-
nell 2015; Berbés-Blázquez 
et al. 2016)
Political ecology north-south 
REDD+ (Leach et al. 2014 
Lyons and Westoby 2014; 
Schumacher 2023
Power asymmetries (Giller 
et al. 2009; Kosoy and 
Corbera 2010; Leach et al. 
2014 (biochar and markets); 
Newell and Taylor 2018; 
Carton 2020)
Private sector, corporates 
and offsetting (Vermeulen 
et al. 2019; Battersby et al. 
2022)
Carbon farming licence to 
operate (Baumber et al. 
2020)
601 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
for carbon farming payments and mechansims in Europe 
and the UK, linked to different levels of MRV with associ-
ated risks and adminsitrative costs to farmers, and levels of 
certainty of mitigation (Macdonald 2022).
Furthermore, the implementation of insetting measures 
by supply chain companies is currently only rudimentarily 
established with no precise rules on how insetting should be 
accounted for. The lack of uniform accounting rules, clear 
definitions and methodologies to account for carbon and 
emissions, questions the integrity of companies’ emission 
reduction and net zero targets (Ebersold et al. 2023 ; Stoll 
et al. 2019). The low investment in sustainable supply chains 
is in contrast to the number of ‘hazy’ voluntary business 
commitments made (UNEP 2021). To compound this, there 
is a high level of divergence in the farm carbon calcula-
tors on the market to support monitoring, as evidenced in a 
recent report for the UK (RSK ADAS Ltd 2023).
This leads to concerns that in the long term, mitigation 
will not be achieved and soil carbon certificates are likely 
to fall short of providing the certified emission offsets (Paul 
et al. 2023; Oldfield et al. 2022). In addition, markets might 
expose farmers and investors to unnecessary financial risks, 
leading to hesitancy and low confidence amongst farmers 
and other agri-food actors (Kragt et al. 2017; Buck and 
Palumbo-Compton 2022). Only when delivered with high 
integrity can carbon offsetting have an important (but small) 
role to play in achieving net zero (Committee on Climate 
Change 2022). However, in response to these critiques, 
some argue that ‘the perfect can be the enemy of the good’ 
and given the urgency of the situation they assert that such 
issues are resolvable and that VCM for example are a first, 
but urgent step in the transition (Miltenberger et al. 2021; 
Bernstein 2023).Governance arrangements are forming to respond to the 
above, with a European framework for carbon removals in 
development (European Commission 2021) (Günther et al. 
2024), and in UK principles for a Farm Soil Carbon Code 
(UKFSCC) recently identified (Black et al. 2022) as well as 
developing a range of nature investment standards which 
provide clear rules for how farmers can access payments 
from nature markets (BSI 2024 ). These are independent 
of standards already applied globally (Jackson Hammond 
et al. 2021). The lack of integration and potential conflict in 
the UK between public funding and voluntary markets for 
natural capital, and limited analysis about how they might 
be blended, has also been highlighted (Reed et al. 2024). 
To address this, each of the UK governments are working 
towards integrating public payments to complement nature 
markets (e.g. Defra 2023).
Resource systems
Soils are critical to agroecological systems, providing multi -
ple interlinked ecosystem services and operating at the inter -
face of agriculture, climate science, and natural capital (Bag-
galey et al. 2022). Soil organic carbon (SOC) in the form of 
organic matter is a key component of soil ecosystems. Envis-
aged as stocks and flows, SOC dynamics are particularly 
complex with many feedback loops. Soils have the capacity 
to both release and sequester carbon and other greenhouse 
gases and, as King et al. (2018) argue, a rather restrictive 
vision of soil as a global stock of carbon that we could 
monitor, model, manage, and enhance largely downplays 
this complex dynamic. Net soil carbon sequestration occurs 
when the difference between  CO2 removals and emissions 
is positive and contributes to mitigation when sequestration Fig. 1  SES framework for soil-
based carbon economy (adapted 
from McGinnis and Ostrom 
2014)

602 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
results from a net gain of carbon from the atmosphere. There 
are a range of approaches for achieving this (Sykes et al. 
2020). However, debates over the role of SOC in mitigation 
are long-standing and have been described as adversarial 
(Bradford et al. 2019; Saifuddin et al. 2024). Equally, the 
impact of carbon farming practices such as conservation 
tillage, cover cropping, and residue management in arable 
systems is questioned (Buck and Palumbo-Compton 2022; 
Oldfield et al. 2022; King et al. 2018; Sykes et al. 2020; 
Powlson et al. 2011). For the UK, there are multiple contex-
tual considerations (Yumashev et al. 2022). Furthermore, 
SOC responds slowly to changes in agricultural manage-
ment, and in ecosystem terms it is called a ‘slow’ variable 
(Smith et al. 2012). Claims that carbon sequestration pro-
vides a win–win solution for mitigation and food security are 
also contested (Saifuddin et al. 2024; Moinet et al. 2023). 
However, others argue that despite the difficulty of ensuring 
long-term storage and sequestration of carbon, to overlook 
this potential opportunity does not make sense, pointing 
to evidence of some practices succeeding (McGlade and 
Morris 2023). Calls from the scientific community for a 
global-scale soil climate mitigation strategy and an agenda 
for collective action demonstrate the growing momentum 
in support of this view (Amelung et al. 2020; Vermeulen 
et al. 2019).
Resource units
There is a large body of work looking at how complex 
socioecological realities concerned with farm soils are 
made legible and governable by translating scientific 
knowledge into tools that markets and policymakers can 
use (Granjou and Meulemans 2023). This stems from soil 
systems having multiple properties and functions that have 
been disaggregated, measured and monitored by scientists. 
A soil-based carbon economy necessitates both quantify -
ing soil carbon changes and determining a trading value. 
Soil organic matter (SOM) and soil organic carbon (SOC) 
are the most commonly measured variables; however, 
some argue that they provide little insight into carbon 
sequestration (Moinet et al. 2023). This is because meas-
uring SOC reliably is challenging with high spatial and 
temporal variability of stocks and multiple management 
and context variables (Smith et al. 2012). A range of tools, 
technologies, and methods (measurement based, model 
based and remote sensing based) are used by markets and 
policy instruments to measure and predict soil carbon 
change, while farmers are rewarded according to actions, 
outcomes, or both (Macdonald 2022). Different methods 
are critiqued, for example a sociology of modelling per -
spective argues that modelling practices construct an inev -
itably selective reading of and gaze upon the world (Leach 
et al. 2014 ). Carbon payment is often in the form of “offset credits” that equate to a removal or reduction of 1t  CO2e. 
As such, as Carton (2020, p. 1355) observes that for car -
bon offsetting, a ‘technocratic toolbox’ is required which 
is “an assemblage of carbon dioxide equivalents, carbon 
credits, baselines, carbon measurement methods, monitor -
ing, report and verification (MRV) methodologies”.
Actors
Soil systems are socio-natural systems. In agriculture, 
they are managed systems that hold together farmer and 
soil material relations, and consequently have important 
human and cultural value (Granjou and Meulemans 2023; 
Baveye 2023; Gosnell 2022; Krzywoszynska and Marchesi 
2020). Soil system management and governance is enacted 
by a multiplicity of traditional actors in the agri-food sys-
tem (farmers, land managers, advisers, researchers across 
public and private sectors) (Ingram and Mills 2019; Bum-
pus 2011; Chartier and Demaze 2020). Most interest has 
been directed at farmers, and evidence from Australian 
(Kragt et al. 2012; Fleming et al. 2019; Dumbrell et al. 
2016), international (Buck and Palumbo-Compton 2022), 
and US (Barbato and Strong 2023) studies show that co-
benefits are more important drivers of farmer adoption 
of soil carbon sequestration practices and participation in 
carbon markets or programmes than receiving offset cred -
its. Synergies may arise if participating farmers start to 
rethink soil management and increase soil organic matter, 
which can lead to improved soil health, fertility and resil-
ience (Paul et al. 2023). However, some question the addi-
tionality that such markets can bring for farmers already 
implementing soil health practices, while a UK study 
suggested that such farmers may even be excluded due to 
regulations (Phelan et al. 2022). Furthermore, there is a 
risk that selling credits will harm farmers’ own decarboni-
sation efforts and penalise them when supply chains start 
to require net zero farm status (Elliott et al. 2020). Overall, 
there is low confidence amongst farmers and agri-food 
actors in the governance of carbon farming due to policy 
and market complexity and uncertainty (Elliott et al. 2020; 
Kragt et al. 2017), which Baumber et al. (2020) argued 
was threatening the social licence of carbon farming in 
Australia. Information shortcomings across the Agricul-
tural Knowledge and Innovation Systems (a framework for 
understanding supporting organisations, actors, and link -
ing mechanisms) limit effective advisory support. Oppor -
tunity costs (including transaction and measurement costs) 
(Kragt et al. 2012 ; Tang et al. 2016 ) may lead to overes -
timates of income. Cultural, agronomic, and knowledge 
deficits are further barriers as well as concerns related to 
credibility, relevance, and legitimacy (Mills et al. 2019; 
Ingram et al. 2016).
603 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
Contested interactions in the SES: 
towards a research agenda
The emerging soil-based carbon economy is conceptualised 
as a set of interactions and outcomes among actors embed-
ded within this SES as defined above by the high tier compo-
nents. We identify five interconnected key themes in this SES 
framework which provide the basis for a research agenda 
and research questions (Fig.  2). Drawing on commonalities 
across different perspectives and literatures, the themes were 
identified iteratively by the authors as foci of contestation.
Marketisation, abstraction, and technogovernance
This theme centres on marketisation processes and the 
abstraction and governance activities that accompany them. 
A large body of literature, examining the politics of offset-
ting and its character as a market instrument, can inform our 
analysis. This critiques the assumptions, values, and expert 
knowledges that underpin carbon as a tradable commodity 
(Watt 2021), explored along themes of climate capitalism, 
commodification of nature, the integrity and governance 
of traded credits, ‘the fantasy of carbon offsetting’, and 
fetishisation of carbon (Watt 2021; Carton 2020; McAfee 
2016). Kosoy and Corbera (2010) identify three ‘inherent 
invisibilities’ relevant to the commodification of soil car -
bon: simplifying the complexity of natural ecosystems; pri -
oritising a single exchange value; and masking the social 
relations embedded in the process of ‘producing’ and ‘sell-
ing’ ecosystem services. With commodification, new mean-
ings are conferred on carbon by the neoliberal processes of marketisation (Twyman et al. 2015; Callon 2009) which 
express a global technocratic order of enviromental gov -
ernance (Blok 2016). Such marketisation brings multiple 
controversies which relate to abstraction, measurement, and 
governance (Callon 2009). The processes of abstraction 
and datafication (Gabrys et al. 2022; McKenzie et al. 2013; 
Nel 2017), and the constructed nature of ecosystem mar -
kets, obscure crucial social and ecological differences that 
have been the focus for carbon offset research (e.g. Bumpus 
2011). The new imaginaries around soil carbon as a tradable 
commodity turn it into an abstracted ‘value of equivalence’, 
which counters the common understanding of a more holis-
tic soil system and risks reinforcing the disconnect between 
people and nature. As Leach et al. (2014, p. 49) observe with 
respect to the new carbon economy in Africa “soil carbon 
is ‘chopped out’ of its ecosystem and social contexts and 
revalued as exchangeable pieces of carbon nature. Farmers 
are hailed as green actors and market winners, provided they 
discipline their practices according to these new technical 
and market logics”. This singular focus on carbon has been 
criticised as marginalising the many other benefits managing 
soil health can deliver (McGuire et al. 2022).
Sciences and technology studies scholarship takes a mar -
ketisation perspective on the creation and performance of 
carbon markets (Callon 2009; Bumpus 2011; Ferreira 2017). 
Carbon markets are regarded as ongoing collective experi-
ments that are assembled as carbon is ‘brought into being’ 
as a commodity (Callon 2009). As such, the emerging soil-
based carbon economy may be conceptualised as a ‘market-
in-the-making’ (Callon 2021), by which we mean a com-
bination of farm-level mangement practices and emerging 
Fig. 2  SES interactions in the soil-based carbon economy
604 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
government and private forms of investment, regulation, and 
codification that collectively, but by no means in unison, 
‘frame’ what is ‘valued’ to form a ‘soil-based carbon econ-
omy’. The essential point therefore is the need to pay close 
attention to the social and material relations that ‘make’ 
markets over and above the markets themselves.
Through this marketisation perspective, then, both off -
setting and insetting necessitate a form of ‘techno-political 
governance’ (Freidberg 2014) where new practices of soil 
carbon metric governance are authorised and enacted. Argu-
ably like food footprinting, soil carbon metrics ‘do technopo-
litical work’, in that they serve as a tool for achieving certain 
political ends, which markets and supply chain actors use 
to govern and legitimate their ideas (Konefal et al. 2022; 
Freidberg 2014; Rosin et al. 2017). This raises the following 
research questions:
What are the implications of soil carbon commodifica-
tion and abstraction processes for farmer and practi-
tioner communities? How does the apparent ‘simplifi-
cation’ of soil carbon dynamics impact soil health and 
ecosystem services management more widely? What 
and how are private forms of governance emerging and 
which stakeholders are involved?
Power relations and expert knowledge
Both offsetting and payment for ecosystem services litera-
tures foreground political ecology and political economy 
perspectives, highlighting issues of injustice, carbon colo-
nialism, corporate control, and power asymmetries (Berbés-
Blázquez et al. 2016; Bennett and Gosnell 2015; Battersby 
et al. 2022; Newell and Taylor 2018; Kosoy and Corbera 
2010; MacKenzie 2009). Political ecology theory can show 
how power relations manifest themselves, how governance 
practices emerge, and how knowledge is built, negotiated, 
and authorised (Van der Horst and Evans 2010). It explicitly 
questions the expert-led framings and challenges theorists to 
more carefully and widely consider who is knowledgeable 
about particular environmental issues (Lawhon and Murphy 
2012).
Marketisation and expanding carbon farming policies 
involve mobilising knowledge claims and discourses that 
construe offsetting as scientifically valid and legitimate. This 
can lead to reliance on expert knowledge which authorises 
the technocratic toolbox and acts to maintain the “hegem-
onic position that carbon markets enjoy in climate policy, 
in that knowledge claims inevitably come imbued with val-
ues, interests, and power relations” (Carton 2020, p. 1355). 
Power asymmetries have been observed in North–South 
relations in past programmes such as REDD+ (reduc-
ing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation 
in developing countries framework), and in contemporary carbon finance initiatives (Cavanagh et al. 2021; Schu-
macher 2023; Lyons and Westoby 2014), where political 
framings and commercial interests steer the promotion of 
practices such as conservation agriculture and climate smart 
farming despite weak evidence of beneficial impact (Giller 
et al. 2009). This is positioned within the increasing cor -
porate influence over the governance of food systems and 
their role in nature-based solutions which is seen as a threat 
(Chandrasekaran et al. 2021), for example, the Bayer Carbon 
Initiative. Farmers have inherently had weak political capa-
bilities in such contexts where policy, corporate pressure, 
and markets act to reinforce existing inequalities (Cavanagh 
et al. 2021). Political capabilities analysis highlights the 
significance of underlying relationships and processes to 
an individual’s ability to achieve outcomes, including those 
that are personal (for example, skills, experience, health), 
social (power, social norms, gender roles), and environmen-
tal (institutions, public goods) (Ensor et al. 2021). There are 
also warnings that emergent technopolitics around measure-
ment and simplification can provide new powers of legiti-
misation for corporate or state-planned land uses (Scheidel 
2019). Narratives of anticipated or imagined carbon benefits 
or ‘carbon storytelling’ can be fundamental to achieving 
political support (Kröger 2016), whilst crisis narratives can 
be equally powerful in steering governance (Hirons 2021). 
Further balance between the benefits and costs, and their 
distribution across different stakeholders, are critical factors 
in determining whether carbon farming is able to obtain a 
‘social licence to operate’ from the communities affected by 
them (Baumber et al. 2020).
It is important therefore with respect to a soil-based car -
bon economy to show how power relations manifest them-
selves in the particular institutional spaces where climate 
change and agriculture overlap (Newell and Taylor 2018 ; 
Saifuddin et al. 2024 ), to avoid further entrenching power 
asymmetries (Chausson et al. 2023), and to use inclusiv -
ity and legitimacy approaches to give farmers a voice 
(Ingram et al 2016; Hirons 2021). Already, it is recognised 
that farmer and community capacity to deal with markets 
is mismatched with the growth of natural capital investors 
and project developers, with calls for a fairer, more just, 
and responsible investment in natural capital (Scottish Land 
Commission 2023). Market value will depend on several 
factors, including carbon prices and demand for the credits, 
but based also on current value this is not high in the UK 
at present (Elliott et al. 2020). The complexity and uncer -
tainty, high MRV costs of carbon markets, and open market 
structure lower the cost for buyers and other market actors, 
but raise costs for participating farmers (Elliott et al. 2020). 
Farmers also have different levels of control about selling 
certificates, and the type of certificate or credit created 
can affect claims farmers are able to make about their own 
impact. Furthermore, tenant farmers and smaller farmers 
605 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
cannot take full advantage of new natural capital (Benton 
et al. 2021). Assumptions that ‘market-forces’ will gener -
ate shared prosperity overlook the challenges of ensuring 
distributional and procedural equity (Moinet et al. 2023). 
However, opportunities for creating shared value with inset-
ting are highlighted by some (Banerjee et al. 2013). This 
raises the following research questions:
Who implements and authorises the technocratic tool-
box for soil-based carbon and who governs the politi-
cal and markets arena? Whose agendas are represented 
and advanced, and which activities and methods are 
deemed to count? What assumptions, values, and 
expert knowledges underpin soil-based carbon mar -
kets? How can transformational change come about 
when power asymmetries exist? How can farmer polit-
ical capabilities be strengthened?
Disputing the meaning and value of soil carbon
This theme is characterised by the contestations associated 
with different values attributed to soil carbon and is closely 
linked to marketisation, abstraction, and technogovernance. 
Soil scientists have struggled to quantify or provide mon-
etary valuation of soil services/functions (Baveye 2023; 
Robinson et al. 2014) and some question the “appropria-
tion of soils as natural capital” (Bardgett and Van Wensem 
2020). From the perspective of farmers and practitioners, 
their situated meanings of soil carbon are unlikely to match 
the abstracted, globalised knowledges of soil carbon as a 
marketable, tradable commodity (Twyman et al. 2015). Soil, 
not carbon, will have a tangible history and socio-material 
relation for farmers; their experiential knowledge, care 
practices, and values they hold about the wider benefits of 
soil health are potentially threatened (Fleming et al. 2019; 
Tang et al. 2016). Defining practices in terms of soil carbon 
risks marginalising and negating the many other benefits 
managing soil health can deliver and the non-monetary 
value of soil (Keenor et al. 2021; McGuire et al. 2022) and 
distracts from ongoing material relations, knowledges, and 
care practices that farmers have with their soil. A stronger 
interest in co-benefits (soil health, fertility, resilience) of 
markets or carbon farming demonstrates this (Buck and 
Palumbo-Compton 2022; Fleming et al. 2019; Sykes et al. 
2020; Baumber et al. 2020). This resonates with calls for a 
shift from a myopic lens on carbon towards a more holistic 
approach (Harrison et al. 2021), and for a deep cultural and 
systemic shift, resetting human–soil relations (Chausson 
et al. 2023). As Moinet et al. ( 2023) observe, when nature 
becomes a provider of monetisable services, this can crowd 
out values and intrinsic social motivations driving steward-
ship. However, arguably market mechanisms can enable and 
scale up the adoption of carbon farming practices, bringing wider ecosystem benefits. How carbon is understood and 
valued by farmers and practitioners, and how standards and 
metrics are transcribed onto the material realities of daily 
lives need further investigation, as does the opposing needs 
of farmers and investors around permanence, and the con-
straints on future management that this may impose. This 
raises the following research questions:
How do different actors make sense of value and give 
meaning to soil carbon? How is carbon understood and 
valued by farmers and practitioners, and how are soil 
carbon metrics transcribed onto the material realities 
of daily lives of the farming community? What is the 
burden of work associated with MRV or interacting 
with market intermediaries who do the MRV? How 
does the abstract nature of soil carbon affect assess-
ment of risk in decision-making around participating?
Disruptions: new interfaces, configurations, and actor 
relations
In this theme, the focus is on the reconfiguration of actors 
and the implications for knowledge and discourse. The 
emerging soil-based carbon economy is already heralding 
new actors, interfaces, configurations, and social and mate-
rial relations. Its ‘market-making’ is enacted by a constella-
tion of new actors such as developers of projects generating 
carbon credits, credit retailers, wholesalers and/or invest-
ment funds, certification bodies, brokers, entrepreneurs, 
and customers (Demaze and Moïse 2021; Bumpus 2011), 
who have their own roles, expectations, conceptions, pro-
jects, and interests (Callon 2009). New intermediaries are 
deployed to discipline and frame the individual subjectivities 
of all actors and act to distribute accountabilities (Freidberg 
2014). They potentially disrupt existing actors and services, 
markets, institutions, and practices. Traditional roles and 
analytical categories (farmer, adviser, supply chain actor, 
researcher) of those in the agri-food system can be chal-
lenged and redefined and social and professional relations 
reconfigured. Such reconfigurations can disrupt and destabi-
lise ‘meso-scale’ actors' (e.g. advisers) routines and practices 
that are critical for supporting farmer learning as observed 
for digital agriculture (Eastwood et al. 2019).
Networks of actors (socio-natural and technical config-
urations) can be assembled in the soil carbon context, as 
observed for offsetting (Bumpus 2011). How these networks 
encounter and negotiiate practices, knowledges, and technol -
ogies, create discourses, and assemble capabilities (knowl-
edge and political capabilties) should be key questions for 
research. The intersections of politics and knowledge with 
definitional and governance struggles create different visions 
or storylines of how soil carbon can be measured, governed, 
and managed. Carbon has its own language that circulates 
606 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
between sciences, markets, the public, and governments; the 
term ‘carbon’ carries a plurality of meanings with associ-
ated values (Twyman et al. 2015). Storylines cohere around 
groups of actors or networks that exist at a given point in 
time indicating the relative strengths of social, technical, 
economic, and political interest groups. Market actors con-
strue offsetting and the commodification of soil carbon as 
scientifically valid and legitimate; traditional agri-system 
actors perceive high risks due to the unregulated nature of 
markets and question market credibility (Elliott et al. 2020; 
European Commission 2021), while policy makers position 
soil carbon markets as part of a broader geopolitical dis-
course associated with neoliberal environmental governance. 
This raises the following research questions:
What are the new interfaces and cross sector linkages 
that facilitate the expansion of these markets? To what 
extent do carbon market actors and new relations dis-
rupt or invigorate established roles and relations? How 
do different groups of actors create storylines around 
soil-based carbon economies to make sense of and give 
meaning to them? And how do they legitimise particu-
lar knowledge claims and practices?
Uncertainties and capabilities
This theme draws together notions of credibility, capabili -
ties, and situated literacy linking them to empowerment. 
Land managers (farmers, advisers, and support services) 
face burdens and new demands in engaging in carbon 
accounting, voluntary soil carbon markets, and carbon farm-
ing (Buck and Palumbo-Compton 2022; Kragt et al. 2017; 
Green Finance Institute 2023). They struggle to assess the 
inherent uncertainties and credibility of different knowledge 
claims about soil carbon (Ingram et al. 2016). They have to 
navigate market, policy and supply chain mechanisms, nego-
tiate different narratives, and understand complex concepts, 
terms, and metrics. Limited farmer knowledge and advisory 
capacity with respect to soil carbon management practices 
has been previously revealed (Kragt et al. 2017; Aslam et al. 
2017; Ingram and Mills 2019), specifically their understand-
ing of soil carbon dynamics and the relationship between 
soil carbon stocks and flows, and between fast and slow vari-
ables (Mattila et al. 2022; Frelih-Larsen et al. 2020). It has 
also been found that those who are more knowledgeable can 
be the most sceptical about carbon sequestration (Ma and 
Coppock 2012).
Baumber et al. (2020) found that shared values, world-
views, and land use norms strongly affected community 
acceptance of carbon farming. Hence, the importance of 
building soil capabilities and facilitating farmer learning 
networks and communities for soil management and social 
capital (Ingram 2010; Guan et al. 2021; Skaalsveen et al. 2020) takes on a new significance in the context of this 
emerging soil-based carbon economy. Furthermore, carbon 
farming options need to be designed for specific soil, politi-
cal, economic, and ecological contexts (Moinot et al. 2023; 
Chausson et al. 2023) and take into account the farmers’ 
behavioural control capability (Guan et al. 2021). This is 
recognised by the government in the UK who acknowledge 
that accessing nature markets can be complicated and may 
be a new experience for most farmers. They have commis-
sioned an online toolkit to help farmers identify and access 
private payments for environmental benefits building on pre-
vious work (GFI 2023). Using toolkits like these, it is pos-
sible that a move to a soil-based carbon economy could help 
to build knowledge about soil and carbon markets, offering 
net gains for soil health and the delivery of soil ecosystem 
services.
Although previous studies have developed carbon capa-
bility frameworks for the public (Whitmarsh et al. 2011; Wei 
et al. 2016) and for farmers (Guan et al. 2021), these ignore 
the wider ecosystem services from soil and existing rela-
tionships with soil. There is a strong argument for building 
knowledge capabilities as part of a wider soil carbon literacy . 
Literacies are seen as ‘socio-technical’; this is particularly 
the case with soil carbon as skills are implicated in wider 
socio-political (regulation and governance) and corporate 
(business models and monetisation) aspects. They can also 
be sites of struggle, built around the contextual knowledge 
and diverse experiences that shape relationships (McCosker 
et al. 2022). By connecting the notion of ‘situated literacies’ 
(Barton et al. 2000) to soil carbon, we can emphasise the 
need to understand transformations in the communicative, 
social, and relational contexts through which soil carbon 
knowledge and data are produced and traded. This literacy 
needs to develop across all actors in the AKIS. This raises 
the following research questions:
To what extent do actors have knowledge capabilities 
to understand soil carbon dynamics, metrics, methods, 
and markets? How is this understanding of soil car -
bon as situated literacy distributed across actors in the 
AKIS? How do individuals develop knowledge and 
political capabilities, and how do these actions inter -
play with how carbon is known and valued? Can cross 
sector interaction strengthen capabilities?
Conclusion
This paper highlights the need to consider the processes and 
relations in the political, knowledge, technical, and socio-
material complex that characterise the emergence of a soil-
based carbon economy. Conceptualising this emerging econ-
omy as a set of interactions and outcomes among the SES 
607 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
tier components of governance, resource systems, resource 
units, and actors provides a novel means for identifying five 
research agenda themes, as shown in Fig.  2.
The multiplicity of issues identified shows that relevant 
research hitherto has been dispersed and addressed from a 
number of disciplines and perspectives. The interconnection 
between the themes calls for integration in future research 
approaches and for combining disciplinary perspectives 
through trans- and inter-disciplinarity. However, the meth-
odological pluralism that characterises SES and other sys-
tems approaches creates challenges in understanding this 
system complexity (De Vos et al. 2019).
SES is intended here as a high-level conceptual frame-
work to identify research themes through the diagnosis of 
contestations in interactions and outcomes. With respect 
to operationalising this concept to address the themes and 
research questions identified here, it can help scholars 
deconstruct the system complexity, identify at what con -
ceptual level their research is located, and suggest a logi -
cal entry point to analysis that suits their specific research 
questions of interest (Ostrom 2009). Specifically, the SES 
framework provides variables (for the four main tiers and 
the tiers nested below them) which can be used to create 
theoretically grounded indicators. Although these variables 
are derived empirically for collective action and sustainable 
common pool resource use (Partelow 2018; Schlüter et al. 
2019), some are relevant to the contestations discussed here. 
The interactions and outcomes (the action situation) can also 
be taken as the focal unit of analysis, although decisions 
about the activities to include, which processes to represent, 
and where to set system boundaries in an analysis depend 
on the question or phenomenon of interest (Schlüter et al. 
2019 ). Most SES empirical work is typically more place 
based (e.g. de Vos et al. 2019 ), whereas soil-based carbon 
economy contestations may extend across spatial and institu-
tional scales with important feedbacks between the multiple 
levels of its constituent scales (Glaser and Glaeser 2014).
Although there are limitations, the framework never -
theless offers a valuable heuristic for operationalising this 
research agenda to investigate contestations associated 
with the soil-based carbon economy. Selected variables 
for the main tiers could include: government, NGO, and 
supply chain organisations (governance); agricultural/
land-based sectors (resource system); economic value and 
beneficiaries of carbon credits (resource unit); and buyers 
and sellers of carbon credits (actors). Interaction variables 
can include deliberative processes and monitoring activi-
ties and conflicts, while outcome variables can include 
some measure of social benefit (empowerment, revenue) 
and soil carbon sequestration performance. With respect 
to scale (dimension of analysis) and level (the unit of 
analysis) (after Cash et al. 2006), higher levels of spatial  
(global, country), jurisdictional (national and regional), and institutional (laws and regulations) scales can capture 
the scope and the heterogeneity in meanings, actors, and 
strategies in this developing economy, while landscape 
and more local level spatial scales, alongside local and 
regional levels of jurisdictions and rules (e.g. MRV) in 
institutions, provide insights at a finer resolution. Network  
scale (levels of family, group, and society) and knowledge  
scale (levels of universal–context and general–expert) are 
particularly important to reveal the constellation of actors 
and the power and knowledge processes in this emerg-
ing economy. Regarding approaches and methods, given 
the nascent form of the economy, research methodologies 
that track ‘market-in-the-making’ processes and prac-
tices are important, as assemblages are formed (Konefal 
et al. 2022), alongside social research methods to better 
understand how metrics order and structure behaviours 
and practices (Rosin et al. 2017 ). Case study approaches 
(sector and initiative based) using methods such as social 
network analysis, Netmap analysis, and discourse analysis 
can reveal knowledge contestations. Critically, such stud-
ies can help foreground analysis of power relations that 
can attend to the human actors and their relations with 
soils, institutional settings, and broader narratives and dis-
courses, as well as identify how political and knowledge 
capabilities can be built. Table  2 illustrates how research 
might be designed for the theme marketisation, abstrac-
tion, and technogovernance.
Although this paper has focused on the emerging soil-
based carbon economy in the UK, drawing on the interna -
tional literature and experiences ensures that the analysis 
has wider resonance and can inform conceptualisations 
and research agendas in other contexts. Given the sig-
nificant role of green finance and private sector actors, 
researchers need to engage with frameworks for antici-
patory governance and responsible innovation to envis-
age and steer future developments (Battersby et al. 2022). 
This is particularly urgent with the increasing emphasis 
on green business models in soil carbon sequestration ini-
tiatives for mitigation. Looking towards the future, some 
scholars envisage that by 2050, the “current discrete mar -
ket-based solutions in climate action will become inter -
nalised aspects of our economies rather than separate 
remediations” (Miltenberger et al. 2021 , p1) and should 
be given leeway to improve and fulfil this. Robust research 
has a clear role in such a transition, to inform both the pub-
lic and private forms of governance, both instrumentally 
by strengthening the evidence base, and conceptually by 
prompting new thinking and debates about soil carbon mit-
igation trajectories with respect to sustainability, equity, 
integrity, and accountability. Equally, those scholars with 
fundamental concerns about offset markets and environ-
mental justice will need to marshal their research plans to 
support further advocacy.
608 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Amelung W, Bossio D, de Vries W, Kögel-Knabner I, Lehmann 
J, Amundson R, Bol R, Collins C, Lal R, Leifeld J (2020) 
Towards a global-scale soil climate mitigation strategy. Nat 
Commun 11:5427
Amin MN, Hossain MS, de Bruyn LL, Wilson B (2020) A systematic 
review of soil carbon management in Australia and the need 
for a social-ecological systems framework. Sci Total Environ 
719:135182
Amin MN, Lobry De Bruyn L, Hossain MS, Lawson A, Wilson 
B (2023) The social-ecological system of farmers’ current 
soil carbon management in australian grazing lands. Environ 
Manag 72(2):294–308
Amundson R, Biardeau L (2018) Soil carbon sequestration is 
an elusive climate mitigation tool. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
115:11652–11656
Aslam U, Termansen M, Fleskens L (2017) Investigating farmers’ 
preferences for alternative PES schemes for carbon sequestra-
tion in UK agroecosystems. Ecosyst Serv 27:103–112
Baggaley N, Britton A, Sandison F, Lilly A, Stutter M, Rees R, Reed 
M, Buckingham S (2022) Understanding carbon sequestration 
from nature-based solutions. The James Hutton Institute
Banerjee A, Rahn E, Läderach P, Hoek RVD (2013) Shared value: 
agricultural carbon insetting for sustainable, climate-smart 
supply chains and better rural livelihoods. CIAT Policy Brief
Barbato CT, Strong AL (2023) Farmer perspectives on carbon mar -
kets incentivizing agricultural soil carbon sequestration. Npj 
Clim Action 2:26
Bardgett R, Van Wensem J (2020) Soil as natural capital. KVAB 
Thinkers’ Programme
Barton D, Hamilton M, Ivaniúc R (2000) Situated literacies. Rout-
ledge, London
Battersby F, Heap RJ, Gray AC, Workman M, Strivens F (2022) The 
role of corporates in governing carbon dioxide removal: outlin-
ing a research agenda. Front Clim 4:686762
Baumber A, Waters C, Cross R, Metternicht G, Simpson M (2020) 
Carbon farming for resilient rangelands: people, paddocks and 
policy. Rangel J 42:293–307
Baveye PC (2023) Ecosystem-scale modelling of soil carbon dynam-
ics: time for a radical shift of perspective? Soil Biol Biochem 
184:109112
Bennett DE, Gosnell H (2015) Integrating multiple perspectives on 
payments for ecosystem services through a social–ecological 
systems framework. Ecol Econ 116:172–181
Benton D, Plumpton H, Elliott J, Kleczka J (2021) Natural capital: 
the battle for control. Green Alliance, London
Berbés-Blázquez M, González JA, Pascual U (2016) Towards an 
ecosystem services approach that addresses social power rela-
tions. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 19:134–143Table 2  Research design considerations for the theme: marketisation, abstraction, and technogovernance
a Scale is defined as ‘the spatial, temporal, quantitative or analytical dimensions used to measure and study any phenomenon’ and levels as ‘the units of analysis that are located at different 
positions on a scale’ (Glaser and Glaeser 2014). The critical system scales for understanding and responding to human environment interactions, each with their appropriate level (in brackets), 
include: spatial (areas), temporal (rates, etc.), jurisdictional (administration), institutional (rules), management (plans), networks (links), knowledge (truths), and ecosystems (outputs) (Cash 
et al. 2006)Example theme and research 
questionMain tier—selected variables Interactions—selected vari-
ablesOutcomes—selected variables Scale—dimension of inves-
tigation and level—units of 
 analysisaApproaches and methods
Marketisation, abstraction 
and technogovernance
What are the implications of 
soil carbon commodification 
and abstraction processes 
for farmer and practitioner 
communities?Govt., NGO, supply chain, 
and sector organisations
Resource system—sector
Resource unit—economic 
value (distribution of 
benefit)
Actors—buyers and sellers, 
-type, power and normsDeliberative processes
Monitoring activities
Conflicts
Investment activities
Supply chain activities
Standardisation activitiesSocial performance measures 
(empowerment, just carbon 
credit payments)
Soil carbon sequestration 
performance measuresSpatial and temporal 
(national, regional, local)Map actors, organisational 
structures and processes
Track ‘market-in-the-making’ 
practices and processes as 
assemblages are formed
Case study approach (sec-
tors)—using e.g. metrology to 
understand how metrics order 
and/or structure behaviours & 
practicesJurisdictional (international, 
national, regional, local)
Institutional (regulations, 
MRV)
Networks (individual farmers, 
intermediaries—constella-
tions of actors)
Knowledge (general-expert; 
scientific-contextual)
609 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
Bernstein AA (2023) The perfect is the enemy of the good: carbon 
credits and funding for decarbonization in developing coun -
tries. N Engl J Public Policy 35:4
Binder CR, Hinkel J, Bots PW, Pahl-Wostl C (2013) Comparison of 
frameworks for analyzing social-ecological systems. Ecol Soc 18
Black HI, Reed MS, Kendall H, Parkhurst R, Cannon N, Chapman 
PJ, Orman M, Phelps J, Rudman H, Whaley S (2022) What 
makes an operational farm soil carbon code? Insights from a 
global comparison of existing soil carbon codes using a struc-
tured analytical framework. Carbon Manag 13:554–580
Blok A (2016) Configuring homo carbonomicus: carbon markets, 
calculative techniques, and the green neoliberal. Neoliberalism 
and Technoscience, Routledge
Bogojević S (2024) Carbon removals, ecosystems and the European 
Green Deal. Eur Law Open 3(1):199–208
Bossio D, Cook-Patton S, Ellis P, Fargione J, Sanderman J, Smith P, 
Wood S, Zomer R, von Unger M, Emmer I (2020) The role of 
soil carbon in natural climate solutions. Nat Sustain 3:391–398
Bradford MA, Carey CJ, Atwood L, Bossio D, Fenichel EP, Gennet 
S, Fargione J, Fisher JR, Fuller E, Kane DA (2019) Soil carbon 
science for policy and practice. Nat Sustain 2:1070–1072
BSI (2024) High-integrity standards framework for UK nature markets
Buck HJ, Palumbo-Compton A (2022) Soil carbon sequestration as 
a climate strategy: what do farmers think? Biogeochemistry 
161:59–70
Bumpus AG (2011) The matter of carbon: understanding the material-
ity of tCO2e in carbon offsets. Antipode 43:612–638
Callon M (2009) Civilizing markets: carbon trading between in vitro 
and in vivo experiments. Acc Organ Soc 34:535–548
Callon M (2021) Markets in the making: rethinking competition, 
goods, and innovation. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Carton W (2020) Rendering local: the politics of differential knowl -
edge in carbon offset governance. Ann Am Assoc Geogr 
110:1353–1368
Cash DW, Adger WN, Berkes F, Garden P, Lebel L, Olsson P, Pritchard 
L, Young O (2006) Scale and cross-scale dynamics: governance 
and information in a multilevel world. Ecol Soc 11
Cavanagh CJ, Vedeld PO, Petursson JG, Chemarum AK (2021) 
Agency, inequality, and additionality: contested assemblages 
of agricultural carbon finance in western Kenya. J Peasant Stud 
48:1207–1227
CBI Economics (2024) The UK’S net zero economy. In: Energy and 
climate intelligence unit (ed)
Cevallos G, Grimault J, Bellassen V (2019) Domestic carbon standards 
in Europe-Overview and perspectives. Inconnu
Chandrasekaran C, Guttal S, Kumar M, Langner L, Manahan MA 
(2021) Exposing corporate capture of the NFSS through multi-
stakeholderism. In: Summit, L. G. O. T. P. S. A. R. T. T. U. F. 
S. (ed)
Chartier A, Demaze MT (2020) Africa in the international agenda for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions: which energy transition for 
which kind of development? The case of Madagascar. Mondes 
En Developpement 192:71–88
Chausson A, Welden E, Melanidis MS, Gray E, Hirons M, Seddon 
N (2023) Going beyond market-based mechanisms to finance 
nature-based solutions and foster sustainable futures. PLOS Clim 
2:e0000169
Committee on Climate Change (2022) Voluntary carbon markets and 
offsetting
COP28 (2023) COP28 UAE Declaration on Sustainable Agriculture, 
Resilient Food Systems, and Climate Action [Online]. Accessed 
12 Feb 2024
Crippa M, Solazzo E, Guizzardi D, Monforti-Ferrario F, Tubiello FN, 
Leip A (2021) Food systems are responsible for a third of global 
anthropogenic GHG emissions. Nat Food 2:198–209Davies C, Chen WY, Sanesi G, Lafortezza R (2021) The European 
Union roadmap for implementing nature-based solutions: a 
review. Environ Sci Policy 121:49–67
de Vos A, Biggs R, Preiser R (2019) Methods for understanding social-
ecological systems: a review of place-based studies. Ecol Soc 
24:16
DEFRA (2023) Strategy; the nature markets framework in England
Demaze T, Moïse C (2021) La compensation carbone volontaire: Struc -
turation et reconfigurations d'un éco-business. In: La compensa-
tion carbone volontaire, pp 1–174
Dumbrell NP, Kragt ME, Gibson FL (2016) What carbon farming 
activities are farmers likely to adopt? A best–worst scaling sur -
vey. Land Use Policy 54:29–37
Eastwood C, Ayre M, Nettle R, Rue BD (2019) Making sense in the 
cloud: farm advisory services in a smart farming future. NJAS-
Wagening J Life Sci 90:100298
Ebersold F, Hechelmann R-H, Holzapfel P, Meschede H (2023) 
Carbon insetting as a measure to raise supply chain energy 
efficiency potentials: opportunities and challenges. Energy 
Convers Manag X 100504
Elliott J, Ritson J, Reed M, Kennedy-Blundell O (2020) The oppor -
tunities of agri-carbon markets: policy and practice. Green 
Alliance and WWF.
Ensor J, Tuhkanen H, Boyland M, Salamanca A, Johnson K, 
Thomalla F, Mangada LL (2021) Redistributing resilience? 
Deliberate transformation and political capabilities in post-
Haiyan Tacloban. World Dev 140:105360
European Commission (2021) Sustainable Carbon Cycles. Commu-
nication from the Commission to the European Parliament and 
the Council
FAO (2019) Recarbonization of global soils—a dynamic response 
to offset global emissions. FAO
Ferreira C (2017) The contested instruments of a new governance 
regime: accounting for nature and building markets for biodi-
versity offsets. Account Audit Account J 30:1568–1590
Fleming A, Stitzlein C, Jakku E, Fielke S (2019) Missed opportu-
nity? Framing actions around co-benefits for carbon mitigation 
in Australian agriculture. Land Use Policy 85:230–238
Frank S, Lessa Derci Augustynczik A, Havlík P, Boere E, Ermolieva 
T, Fricko O, Di Fulvio F, Gusti M, Krisztin T, Lauri P (2024) 
Enhanced agricultural carbon sinks provide benefits for farm-
ers and the climate. Nat Food 5:742–753
Freidberg S (2014) Footprint technopolitics. Geoforum 55:178–189
Frelih-Larsen A, Ittner S, Tarpey J, Olesen JE, Graversgaard M, 
Claessens L, Emoke Madari B, Razafimbelo TM, Konto-
boytseva A, Nciizah A (2020) CIRCASA Project-Deliverable 
D2. 3.: synthesis report on knowledge demands and needs of 
stakeholders
Gabrys J, Westerlaken M, Urzedo D, Ritts M, Simlai T (2022) Rework -
ing the political in digital forests: the cosmopolitics of socio-
technical worlds. Prog Environ Geogr 1:58–83
Giller KE, Witter E, Corbeels M, Tittonell P (2009) Conservation agri-
culture and smallholder farming in Africa: the heretics’ view. 
Field Crop Res 114:23–34
Glaser M, Glaeser B (2014) Towards a framework for cross-scale and 
multi-level analysis of coastal and marine social-ecological sys-
tems dynamics. Reg Environ Change 14:2039–2052
Gosnell H (2022) Regenerating soil, regenerating soul: an integral 
approach to understanding agricultural transformation. Sustain 
Sci 17:603–620
Granjou C, Meulemans G (2023) Bringing soils to life in the human 
and social sciences. Soil Secur 10:100082
Green Finance Institute (2023) https://  www. green finan  ceins  titute. com/  
gfihi ve/. Accessed 15 Mar 2024
610 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611
Guan X, Ma W, Zhang J, Feng X (2021) Understanding the extent to 
which farmers are capable of mitigating climate change: a carbon 
capability perspective. J Clean Prod 325:129351
Günther P, Garske B, Heyl K et al (2024) Carbon farming, overesti-
mated negative emissions and the limits to emissions trading in 
land-use governance: the EU carbon removal certification pro-
posal. Environ Sci Eur 36:72
Harrison MT, Cullen BR, Mayberry DE, Cowie AL, Bilotto F, Badgery 
WB, Liu K, Davison T, Christie KM, Muleke A (2021) Carbon 
myopia: The urgent need for integrated social, economic and 
environmental action in the livestock sector. Glob Change Biol 
27:5726–5761
Helming K, Daedlow K, Hansjürgens B, Koellner T (2018) Assessment 
and governance of sustainable soil management. MDPI
Henderson B, Lankoski J, Flynn E, Sykes A, Payen F, Macleod M 
(2022) Soil carbon sequestration by agriculture: policy options. 
OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers, No. 174, OECD 
Publishing, Paris
Hirons M (2021) Governing natural climate solutions: prospects and 
pitfalls. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 52:36–44
Ingram J (2010) Technical and social dimensions of farmer learn-
ing: an analysis of the emergence of reduced tillage systems in 
England. J Sustain Agric 34:183–201
Ingram J, Mills J (2019) Are advisory services “fit for purpose” to 
support sustainable soil management? An assessment of advice 
in Europe. Soil Use Manag 35:21–31
Ingram J, Mills J, Dibari C, Ferrise R, Ghaley BB, Hansen JG, Igle -
sias A, Karaczun Z, McVittie A, Merante P (2016) Communi-
cating soil carbon science to farmers: incorporating credibility, 
salience and legitimacy. J Rural Stud 48:115–128
Jackson Hammond AA, Motew M, Brummitt CD, Dubuisson ML, 
Pinjuv G, Harburg DV, Campbell EE, Kumar AA (2021) 
Implementing the soil enrichment protocol at scale: Opportu-
nities for an agricultural carbon market. Front Clim 64
Keenor SG, Rodrigues AF, Mao L, Latawiec AE, Harwood AR, Reid 
BJ (2021) Capturing a soil carbon economy. R Soc Open Sci 
8:202305
King JKK, Granjou C, Fournil J, Cecillon L (2018) Soil sciences and 
the French 4 per 1000 initiative—the promises of underground 
carbon. Energy Res Soc Sci 45:144–152
Konefal J, Hatanaka M, Strube J, Glenna L, Conner D (2022) Sus-
tainability assemblages: from metrics development to metrics 
implementation in United States agriculture. J Rural Stud 
92:502–509
Kosoy N, Corbera E (2010) Payments for ecosystem services as com-
modity fetishism. Ecol Econ 69:1228–1236
Kragt ME, Pannell DJ, Robertson MJ, Thamo T (2012) Assessing 
costs of soil carbon sequestration by crop-livestock farmers in 
Western Australia. Agric Syst 112:27–37
Kragt ME, Dumbrell NP, Blackmore L (2017) Motivations and barri-
ers for Western Australian broad-acre farmers to adopt carbon 
farming. Environ Sci Policy 73:115–123
Krzywoszynska A, Marchesi G (2020) Toward a relational material -
ity of soils: introduction. Environ Humanit 12:190–204
Lal R (2016) Soil health and carbon management. Food Energy 
Secur 5:212–222
Lawhon M, Murphy JT (2012) Socio-technical regimes and sustain -
ability transitions: insights from political ecology. Prog Hum 
Geogr 36:354–378
Leach M, Fairhead J, Fraser J (2014) Green grabs and biochar: reval-
uing African soils and farming in the new carbon economy. 
In: Green grabbing: a new appropriation of nature. Routledge
Lyons K, Westoby P (2014) Carbon colonialism and the new land 
grab: plantation forestry in Uganda and its livelihood impacts. 
J Rural Stud 36:13–21Ma Z, Coppock DL (2012) Perceptions of Utah ranchers toward car -
bon sequestration: policy implications for US rangelands. J 
Environ Manag 111:78–86
Macdonald (2022) Carbon farming making agriculture fit for 2030
Mackenzie D (2009) Making things the same: gases, emission rights 
and the politics of carbon markets. Acc Organ Soc 34:440–455
Mattila TJ, Hagelberg E, Söderlund S, Joona J (2022) How farmers 
approach soil carbon sequestration? Lessons learned from 105 
carbon-farming plans. Soil Tillage Res 215:105204
Mcafee K (2016) Green economy and carbon markets for conserva-
tion and development: a critical view. Int Environ Agreem Polit 
Law Econ 16:333–353
McCosker A, Yao X, Albury K, Maddox A, Farmer J, Stoy -
anovich J (2022) Developing data capability with non-profit 
organisations using participatory methods. Big Data Soc 
9:20539517221099880
Mcginnis MD, Ostrom E (2014) Social-ecological system frame-
work: initial changes and continuing challenges. Ecol Soc 19
Mcglade J, Morris KF (2023) Soil carbon farming has the potential 
to bridge the global emissions gap. UCL Open: Environment 
Preprint
McGuire R, Williams PN, Smith P, McGrath SP, Curry D, Donnison I, 
Emmet B, Scollan N (2022) Potential co-benefits and trade-offs 
between improved soil management, climate change mitigation 
and agri-food productivity. Food Energy Secur 11:e352
McKenzie AJ, Emery SB, Franks JR, Whittingham MJ (2013) 
Landscape-scale conservation: collaborative agri-environment 
schemes could benefit both biodiversity and ecosystem ser -
vices, but will farmers be willing to participate? J Appl Ecol 
50:1274–1280
Mills J, Ingram J, Dibari C, Merante P, Karaczun Z, Molnar A, Sánchez 
B, Iglesias A, Ghaley BB (2019) Barriers to and opportunities 
for the uptake of soil carbon management practices in European 
sustainable agricultural production. Agroecol Sustain Food Syst 
44:1185–1211
Miltenberger O, Jospe C, Pittman J (2021) The good is never perfect: 
why the current flaws of voluntary carbon markets are services, 
not barriers to successful climate change action. Front Clim 
3:130
Minasny B, Malone BP, McBratney AB, Angers DA, Arrouays D, 
Chambers A, Chaplot V, Chen Z-S, Cheng K, Das BS (2017) 
Soil carbon 4 per mille. Geoderma 292:59–86
Moinet GY, Hijbeek R, van Vuuren DP, Giller KE (2023) Carbon for 
soils, not soils for carbon. Glob Change Biol 29:2384–2398
Nel A (2017) Contested carbon: carbon forestry as a speculatively 
virtual, falteringly material and disputed territorial assemblage. 
Geoforum 81:144–152
Newell P, Taylor O (2018) Contested landscapes: the global politi-
cal economy of climate-smart agriculture. J Peasant Stud 
45:108–129
Oldfield EE, Eagle AJ, Rubin RL, Rudek J, Sanderman J, Gordon DR 
(2022) Crediting agricultural soil carbon sequestration. Science 
375:1222–1225
Ostrom E (2009) A general framework for analyzing sustainability of 
social-ecological systems. Science 325:419–422
Partelow S (2018) A review of the social-ecological systems frame-
work. Ecol Soc 23
Paul C, Bartkowski B, Dönmez C, Don A, Mayer S, Steffens M, Weigl 
S, Wiesmeier M, Wolf A, Helming K (2023) Carbon farming: are 
soil carbon certificates a suitable tool for climate change mitiga-
tion? J Environ Manag 330:117142
Phelan L, Chapman PJ, Ziv G (2022) Reconciling farmers’ expecta -
tions with the demands of the emerging UK agricultural soil 
carbon market
611 Sustainability Science (2025) 20:597–611 
Powlson DS, Gregory PJ, Whalley WR, Quinton JN, Hopkins DW, 
Whitmore AP, Hirsch PR, Goulding KWT (2011) Soil manage-
ment in relation to sustainable agriculture and ecosystem ser -
vices. Food Policy 36:S72–S87
Reed MS, Curtis T, Gosal A, Kendall H, Andersen SP, Ziv G, Attlee 
A, Fitton RG, Hay M, Gibson AC (2022) Integrating ecosys-
tem markets to co-ordinate landscape-scale public benefits from 
nature. PLoS ONE 17:e0258334
Reed MS, Mccarthy JM, Jensen EA, Rudman H (2024) Governing 
high-integrity markets for ecosystem services. Eartharxiv.
Robinson D, Fraser I, Dominati E, Davíðsdóttir B, Jónsson J, Jones 
L, Jones S, Tuller M, Lebron I, Bristow K (2014) On the value 
of soil resources in the context of natural capital and ecosystem 
service delivery. Soil Sci Soc Am J 78:685–700
Rodrigo-Comino J, López-Vicente M, Kumar V, Rodríguez-Seijo A, 
Valkó O, Rojas C, Pourghasemi HR, Salvati L, Bakr N, Vau-
dour E (2020) Soil science challenges in a new era: a trans-
disciplinary overview of relevant topics. Air Soil Water Res 
13:1178622120977491
Rosin C, Campbell H, Reid J (2017) Metrology and sustainability: 
Using sustainability audits in New Zealand to elaborate the com-
plex politics of measuring. J Rural Stud 52:90–99
RSK ADAS LTD (2023) Harmonisation of carbon accounting tools for 
agriculture. In: Report for Defra U (ed)
Rumpel C, Amiraslani F, Koutika L-S, Smith P, Whitehead D, Wol-
lenberg E (2018) Put more carbon in soils to meet Paris climate 
pledges. Nature Publishing Group, London
Saifuddin M, Abramoff RZ, Foster EJ, McClelland SC (2024) Soil 
carbon offset markets are not a just climate solution. Front Ecol 
Environ 22:e2781
Scheidel A (2019) Carbon stock indicators: reductionist assessments 
and contentious policies on land use. J Peasant Stud 46:913–934
Schlüter M, Haider LJ, Lade SJ, Lindkvist E, Martin R, Orach K, 
Wijermans N, Folke C (2019) Capturing emergent phenomena 
in social-ecological systems. Ecol Soc 24
Schumacher JM (2023) Framing REDD+: political ecology, actor–net-
work theory (ANT), and the making of forest carbon markets. 
Geogr Helv 78:255–265
Scottish Land Commission (2023) Natural capital and land reform- 
next steps for a just transition. Scottish Land Comission, Scottish 
Government
Skaalsveen K, Ingram J, Urquhart J (2020) The role of farmers’ social 
networks in the implementation of no-till farming practices. 
Agric Syst 181:102824
Smith P, Davies CA, Ogle S, Zanchi G, Bellarby J, Bird N, Boddey 
RM, McNamara NP, Powlson D, Cowie A (2012) Towards an integrated global framework to assess the impacts of land use 
and management change on soil carbon: current capability and 
future vision. Glob Change Biol 18:2089–2101
Smith P, Soussana JF, Angers D, Schipper L, Chenu C, Rasse DP, 
Batjes NH, van Egmond F, McNeill S, Kuhnert M (2020) How 
to measure, report and verify soil carbon change to realize the 
potential of soil carbon sequestration for atmospheric greenhouse 
gas removal. Glob Change Biol 26:219–241
Stoll C, Klaaßen L, Gallersdörfer U (2019) The carbon footprint of 
bitcoin. Joule 3:1647–1661
Sykes AJ, Macleod M, Eory V, Rees RM, Payen F, Myrgiotis V, Wil-
liams M, Sohi S, Hillier J, Moran D (2020) Characterising the 
biophysical, economic and social impacts of soil carbon seques -
tration as a greenhouse gas removal technology. Glob Change 
Biol 26:1085–1108
Tang K, Kragt ME, Hailu A, Ma C (2016) Carbon farming economics: 
what have we learned? J Environ Manag 172:49–57
Twyman C, Smith TA, Arnall A (2015) What is carbon? Conceptualis-
ing carbon and capabilities in the context of community seques-
tration projects in the global South. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Clim 
Change 6:627–641
UNEP (2021) State of finance for nature report
van der Horst D, Evans J (2010) Carbon claims and energy land-
scapes: exploring the political ecology of biomass. Landsc Res 
35:173–193
Vermeulen S, Bossio D, Lehmann J, Luu P, Paustian K, Webb C, Augé 
F, Bacudo I, Baedeker T, Havemann T (2019) A global agenda 
for collective action on soil carbon. Nat Sustain 2:2–4
Watt R (2021) The fantasy of carbon offsetting. Environ Polit 
30:1069–1088
Wei J, Chen H, Cui X, Long R (2016) Carbon capability of urban 
residents and its structure: evidence from a survey of Jiangsu 
Province in China. Appl Energy 173:635–649
Whitmarsh L, Seyfang G, O’Neill S (2011) Public engagement with 
carbon and climate change: to what extent is the public ‘carbon 
capable’? Glob Environ Chang 21:56–65
Yumashev D, Janes-Bassett V, Redhead JW, Rowe EC, Davies J (2022) 
Terrestrial carbon sequestration under future climate, nutrient 
and land use change and management scenarios: a national-scale 
UK case study. Environ Res Lett 17:114054
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
