Trans Inst Br Geogr. 2022;47:529–546.	 		 		|	529
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tran1	|	INTRODUCTION
Compost	 is	seen	 as	black	 gold	 among	 food	 producers.	 However,	 the	process	 of	creating,	 distributing,	 and	 using 	
compost	 in	an	urban	 setting	 has	received	 limited	 attention	 within	 the	social	 sciences	 broadly	 and	within	 geography 	
in	particular.	 This	 is	despite	 an	increasingly	 robust	 realm	 of	waste	 and	 discard	 studies	 within	 the	academy	 (Davies, 	Received:	13	October	2020	|	Revised:	29	September	2021	|	Accepted:	21	November	2021
DOI:	10.1111/tran.12523		
ARTICLE
Creating careful circularities: Community composting in 
New York City
Oona Morrow1 |   Anna Davies2
This	is	an	open	access	article	under	the	terms	of 	the	Creat	 ive	Commo	 ns	Attri	 butio	 n-	NonCo	 mmerc	 ial-	NoDerivs	License,	which	permits	use	and	distribution	in	any	
medium,	provided	the	original	work	is	properly	cited,	the	use	is	non- 	commercial	and	no	modifications	or	adaptations	are	made.
The	information,	practices	and	views	in	this	article	are	those	of 	the	author(s)	and	do	not	necessarily	reflect	the	opinion	of 	the	Royal	Geographical	Society	(with	IBG).	
©	2021	 The	Authors.	Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers	published	by	John	 Wiley	&	Sons	Ltd	on	behalf 	of	Royal	Geographical	Society	(with	 The	Institute	of 	
British	Geographers).1Rural	Sociology	Group,	 Wageningen	
University	and	Research,	 Wageningen,	
The	Netherlands
2Department	of 	Geography,	School	
of	Natural	Sciences,	 Trinity	College	
Dublin,	 The	University	of 	Dublin,	
Dublin,	Ireland
Correspondence
Oona	Morrow,	Rural	Sociology	Group,	
Wageningen	University	and	Research,	
Wageningen,	 The	Netherlands.
Email:	Oona.morrow@wur.nl
Funding information
European	Commission,	Horizon	
2020	Framework	Programme,	H2020	
Excellent	Science,	H2020	European	
Research	Council	(Grant	number:	
646883).Abstract
While	 matters	 of	food	 waste	 and	soil	have	 become	 vital	 research	 arenas,	 compost	
remains	 the	Cinderella	 of	human	 geographical	 enquiry.	 In	response,	 this	paper	
brings	 compost	 to	the	centre	 of	debates	 at	the	intersection	 of	diverse	 economies	
and	circular	 economy.	 In	particular,	 the	concept	 of	community	 composting	 and	
the	care	 involved	 in	such	 practices	 is	used	 to	offset	 and	problematise	 the	techno-
scientific	 bias	in	circular	 economy	 discourses.	 Extending	 feminist	 perspectives	 on	
care	 in	soil	studies,	 this	paper	 focuses	 on	the	careful	 circularities	 that	are	realised	
through	 community	 composting	 in	New	 York	 City.	 This	 case	 study	 provides	 not	
only	 a	material	 space	 for	examining	 community	 composting	 but	also	 a	unique	
opportunity	 to	consider	 the	colliding	 worlds	 of	worth	 that	 operate	 in	and	around	
urban	 sustainability	 transitions	 to	zero	 waste.	 Drawing	 empirical	 insights	 from	
interviews,	 participant	 observation,	 and	document	 analysis,	 this	paper	 argues	 for	
a	sensitisation	 of	circular	 economy	 policy	 and	research	 to	matters	 of	care	 and	di-
verse	 economies	 as	a	means	 to	better	 understand	 motivations,	 justifications,	 and	
outcomes	 of	efforts	 to	reorient	 food	 systems	 onto	 more	 sustainable	 pathways.	 We	
argue	 that	 privileging	 care	 in	this	way	 helps	 to	shift	 focus	 away	 from	 dominant	
narratives	 of	"scaling-	 up"	towards	 sustainability	 to	a	more	 relational	 perspective	
that	 sees	 transformation	 in	connecting,	 deepening,	 and	even	 scaling-	 down.	 This	
means	 attending	 to	the	micro	 as	well	 as	macro	 transformations	 needed	 to	enact	
the	required	sustainability	transitions.
KEYWORDS
care,	circular	economy,	community	composting,	diverse	economies,	New	 York	City

530 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
2012;	 Evans,	 2012;	 Gregson	 &	Crang,	 2010;	 Gregson	 et	al.,	2015).	 Diversified	 practices	 of	organic	 waste	 management, 	
including	 community,	 municipal,	 and	 commercial	 composting,	 are	emerging	 and	 new	 spaces,	 relations,	 and	 infra-
structures	 for	creating,	 processing,	 and	 utilising	 urban	 compost	 are	being	 constructed.	 As	policy	 commitments	 to	
zero	 waste	 and	 circular	 economies	 proliferate,	 this	 inattention	 to	compost	 in	urban	 food	 systems	 becomes	 increas -
ingly	untenable.
In	response,	 this	 paper	 focuses	 on	the	form,	 function,	 and	 practices	 of	New	 York	 City's	 network	 of	community 	
composting	 initiatives.	 In	doing	 so	it	brings	 together	 debates	 at	the	intersection	 of	circular	 economy	 and	diverse	 econ-
omies	 in	order	 to	create	 constructive	 dialogue.	 Concentrating	 on	the	care	 involved	 in	community	 composting,	 this	
paper	 offsets	 and	 problematises	 the	technoscientific	 and	 capitalocentric	 bias	 in	many	 circular	 economy	 discourses 	
to	date	 (following	 Gregson	 et	al.,	2015;	 Hobson,	 2016;	 Hobson	 &	Lynch,	 2016).	 Drawing	 on	empirical	 insights,	 this	
paper	 argues	 that	 a	sensitisation	 of	circular	 economy	 policy	 and	 research	 to	matters	 of	care	 (Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa, 	
2015),	 as	it	is	practised	 through	 diverse	 economic,	 material,	 and	 social	 engagements	 in	community	 composting,	 is	
needed	 to	understand	 potential	 pathways	 to	sustainable,	 regenerative,	 and	circular	 food	 systems.	 Privileging	 care	 in	
this	way,	 we	argue,	 helps	 to	crystallise	 the	kinds	 of	material	 and	affective	 relationships	 needed	 to	enact	 sustainability 	
transformations.
Following	 an	explanation	 of	the	context	 for	the	research	 on	which	 this	paper	 is	based,	 we	review	 existing	 research 	
on	composting	 and	on	the	circular	 economy,	 identifying	 a	research	 gap	in	the	understanding	 of	the	social	 dimensions 	
of	sustainability	 in	community	 composting,	 and	 in	circular	 economy	 narratives	 more	 broadly.	 Drawing	 on	empirical 	
data	 generated	 through	 policy	 analysis	 and	semi- 	structured	 interviews	 with	 policy	 makers	 and	community	 composters, 	
alongside	 participant	 observation	 in	four	 community	 composting	 sites	 in	New	 York	 City,	 this	 paper	 engages	 recent 	
scholarship	 on	care	 in	cities	 (Power	 &	Williams,	 2020)	 and	 soil	(Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2015).	 We	find	 the	more-	 than- 	
human	 entanglements	 of	care,	 affect,	 and	materiality	 evident	 in	this	scholarship	 also	 permeate	 practices	 of	community 	
composting.	 However,	 these	 ethics	 and	qualities	 are	rarely	 admitted	 in	decision-	 making	 about	 systems	 of	organic	 waste 	
management.
2	|	THE CONTEXT FOR COMMUNITY COMPOSTING IN NEW YORK CITY
Community	 composting	 in	New	 York	 City	 (NYC),	 including	 the	four	 specific	 sites	 explored	 in	this	 paper,	 is	not	a	
new	 phenomenon.	 It	has	an	extended	 history	 affected	 by	broader	 changes	 in	food	 and	waste	 practices.	 As	such,	 this	
section	 provides	 a	brief	 context	 for	community	 composting	 in	NYC.	 Composting	 predates	 the	circular	 economy 	
agenda,	 however	 the	metabolic	 processes	 which	 break	 down	 the	carbon	 and	 nitrogen	 in	food	 scraps	 and	 garden 	
waste,	 and	 return	 these	 elements	 to	the	soil,	 might	 be	described	 as	the	original	 circular	 economy.	 These	 are	the	
kinds	 of	regenerative	 metabolic	 cycles	 that	 circular	 economy	 innovations	 aspire	 to.	Composting	 techniques	 range 	
from	 indoor	 vermiculture	 (worm-	 based)	 and	 bokashi	 (bacteria	 fermented)	 composting,	 to	small-	 scale	 backyard	 ac-
tivities	 and	 neighbourhood,	 municipal,	 or	regional-	 scale	 composting	 facilities	 (Boldrin	 et	al.,	2009).	 These	 features 	
make	 composting	 in toto	 one	of	the	most	 diverse	 and	 accessible	 set	of	practices	 that	 could	 contribute	 to	the	enact-
ment	 of	a	more	 circular	 economy.	 Large	 centralised	 (municipal	 and	 commercial)	 facilities	 provide	 efficiency	 and	
economies	 of	scale	 for	those	 charged	 with	 organic	 waste	 management;	 however,	 the	benefits	 of	these	 systems	 can	be	
far	removed	 from	 residents,	 even	 when	 compost	 is	distributed	 back	 to	them.	 Furthermore,	 these	 systems	 depend	 on	
existing	 linear	 infrastructures	 for	urban	 waste	 management,	 including	 fleets	 of	trucks,	 and	 industrial	 waste	 trans-
fer	and	 processing	 facilitates.	 This	 creates	 socially	 and	 spatially	 unjust	 environmental	 burdens	 for	the	low	income 	
and	 minority	 communities	 who	 host	 the	majority	 of	waste	 transfer	 stations	 (NYC	 Environmental	 Justice	 Alliance, 	
NRDC,	2018).
Community	 composting	 is	“the	 notion	 that	 organics	 [shorthand	 for	organic	 food	 waste]	 are	processed	 as	close	 to	the	
sources	 where	 they	 are	generated	 to	capture	 the	benefits	 of	both	 the	process	 and	the	finished	 product	 for	the	commu-
nity”	 (Clark,	 2015,	 p.	32).	Community	 composting	 enterprises	 operate	 at	a	variety	 of	operational	 scales,	 with	 complex	
and	simple	 technologies;	 non-	 profit,	 cooperative,	 social	 enterprise,	 and	for-	profit	 business	 models;	 and	through	 syner -
gistic	 partnerships	 (e.g.,	 with	 community	 gardens,	 urban	 farms,	 local	 businesses,	 as	well	 as	waste	 haulers	 and	industrial	
composters).	 This	 diversity	 is	exemplified	 by	community	 composting	 in	New	 York	 City.	 What	 unites	 this	 sector	 is	a	
socio-	 material	 configuration	 that	is	designed	 to	maximise	 community	 involvement	 and	community	 benefits,	 which	 may	
include	 “social	 inclusion	 and	empowerment,	 greener	 neighbourhoods,	 improved	 local	 soils,	 enhanced	 food	 security	 and	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 531
MORROW and DAVIES
fewer	 food	 deserts,	 less	truck	 traffic	 hauling	 garbage,	 more	 local	 jobs,	 and	increased	 composting	 know-	 how	 and	skills	
within	the	local	workforce	that	is	reinforced	in	the	next	generation”	(ILSR,	2020).
2.1	|	Compost in New York
The	 New	 York	 City	 Compost	 Project	 (NYCCP)	 was	founded	 by	the	Department	 of	Sanitation	 (DSNY)	 in	1993	 with	 the	
mission	 of	rebuilding	 “NYC's	 soils	 by	providing	 New	 Yorkers	 with	 the	knowledge,	 skills,	 and	opportunities	 they	 need	 to	
produce	 and	use	compost	 locally”	 (DSNY,	 2020).	 As	an	intermediary	 organisation,	 the	DSNY	 Bureau	 of	Recycling	 and	
Sustainability,	 which	 administers	 the	NYCCP,	 helps	 leverage	 the	passion	 and	skill	 of	a	growing	 network	 of	grassroots	
sustainability	 innovations	 in	community	 recycling,	 including	 the	Lower	 East	 Side	 Ecology	 Center	 (since	 1986)	 and	Grow	
NYC	 (since	 1970).	 Both	 organisations	 provide	 community	 education	 around	 sustainability	 and	have	 longstanding	 food	
scrap	 collection	 programmes	 at	farmers	 markets.	 The	NYCCP	 complements	 these	 and	activities	 at	community	 gardens	
by	providing	 training	 and	 technical	 assistance.	 In	2014	 alone,	 2,470 New	 Yorkers	 participated	 in	NYCCP	 composting	
workshops	 (DSNY,	 2015).	 NYCCP	 is	well	 known	 for	their	 Master	 Composter	 training	 programme,	 which	 has	equipped	
hundreds	 of	New	 Yorkers	 with	 the	knowledge	 and	skills	 to	start	 their	 own	 community	 composting	 operations	 in	New	
York	 and	 beyond.	 Between	 2014	 and	 2016,	 as	part	 of	the	municipality's	 growing	 commitment	 to	zero	 waste	 and	 the	
OneNYC	 sustainability	 goal	 of	providing	 composting	 services	 for	every	 New	 Yorker,	 the	NYCCP	 received	 additional	
funding	 from	 DSNY	 which	 resulted	 in	24	new	 full-	time	 positions	 dedicated	 to	compost	 outreach	 and	 education,	 col-
lecting	 neighbourhood	 foods	 scraps	 through	 local	 organic	 food	 waste	 recovery	 programmes	 (LORP),	 and	the	up-	scaling	
of	seven	 community	 composting	 demonstration	 and	 education	 sites	 across	 the	five	boroughs	 (DSNY,	 2015).	 Figure	 1	
provides	 an	overview	 of	the	multi-	 scalar	 governance	 arrangements	 that	community	 composting	 in	NYC	 is	embedded	 in.
FIGURE 1 Community	composting	governance	arrangement	in	New	York	CityFIG. 1. LEGEND  
 
Community compos/g415ng case study 
 
 
Communi ty compos/g415ng site  
 OFFICE OF THE MAYOR 
(Budget setting and policy  priorities) 
CITY CO UNCIL COMMITTEE ON  
SANITATION & SOLID WASTE  
(Holds DSNY accountable and responds to citizen concerns) RESIDENT LED SOLID 
WASTE ADVISORY  
BOARDS  (In each Borough) 
RESIDENTIAL CURBSIDE ORGANICS  
COLLECTION (Operated by  DSNY) 
ORGANIC WASTE EDUCATION  
& OUTREACH 
NYC COMPOST PROJECT (NYCCP) BUREAU OF RECYCLING &  
SUSTAINABILITY  DEPARTMENT OF SANITATI ON (DSNY)  
RESIDENT LED 
COMPOSTING 
IN 
COMMUNITY
GARDENS 
BIG REUSE 
Queens  BROOKLYN 
BOTANICA L
GARDENS 
& Redhook 
Communit y Farm
NEW YORK  
BOTANICAL
GARDENS 
Bronx EARTH 
MATTER 
Governors Island* 
(*city managed 
national park)
SNUG HARBOR  
BOTANI CAL 
GARDENS 
Staten Island  LOWER EAST  
SIDE
ECOLOGY 
CENTRE
Manhattan
QUEENS  
BOTANICA L
GARDENS 
Queens  GROW  
NYC 
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

532 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
This	 increased	 investment	 in	community	 composting	 through	 the	NYCCP	 occurred	 alongside	 a	robust	 investment	
in	residential	 kerb- 	side	 organic	 waste	 collection	 that	 began	 in	2014.	 It	accompanied	 new	 waste	 regulations	 to	help	 the	
city	become	 zero	 waste	 by	2030,	 including	 an	organic	 food	 waste	 ban	for	commercial	 food	 businesses	 (via	composting,	
anaerobic	 digestion,	 or	donation)	 (Baptista,	 2018;	 City	 of	New	 York:	 NYC	 Mayors	 Office	 of	Sustainability,	 2016;	 City	 of	
New	 York,	 2014,	 2015,	 2016;	 City	 of	New	 York:	 NYC	 Food	 Policy,	 2016;	 DSNY:	 Bureau	 of	Waste	 Prevention,	 Recycling	
and	Reuse	2001;	DSNY,	2006).	 This	has	led	to	an	experimental	and	multi- 	scalar	approach	to	composting	in	New	 York.
Community	 composters	 and	their	 allies	 have	 driven	 the	transition	 to	municipal	 composting	 in	New	 York.	 Since	 its	
inception,	 the	NYCCP,	 and	the	multiple	 grassroots	 sustainability	 organisations	 it	funds,	 have	 been	 recognised	 as	critical	
partners	 in	facilitating	 the	behaviour	 change,	 education,	 and	community	 outreach	 necessary	 to	make	 composting	 acces -
sible	 to	a	diversity	 of	New	 Yorkers	 (DSNY,	 2015).	 Changing	 the	hearts,	 minds,	 and	habits	 of	New	 Yorkers	 and	turning	
them	 onto	 compost	 was	 deemed	 essential	 for	the	success	 of	residential	 kerb- 	side	 organic	 waste	 collection	 (Baptista,	
2018;	 Buckel,	 2013).	 These	 changes	 took	 place	 in	what	 can	be	described	 as	a	“compost	 friendly”	 policy	 environment	 that	
began	 under	 the	Bloomberg	 administration	 (the	 City	 of	New	 York,	 2011)	 and	continued	 (until	 recent	 budget	 cuts)	 under	
the	DeBlasio	 administration	 (the	 City	 of	New	 York,	 2014,	 2015;	 2016).	 Public	 investment	 in	composting	 has	been	 on	the	
decline	 since	 2018,	 when	 the	phased	 roll	out	of	kerb- 	side	 organics	 collection	 (a	voluntary	 and	free	service	 for	residents)	
came	 to	a	halt.	 In	the	proposed	 2021 municipal	 budget,	 all	funding	 for	kerb- 	side	 and	community	 composting	 was	cut.	
These	 cuts	 were	 justified	 by	the	COVID-	 19	emergency	 and	the	high	 cost,	 US$1,400	 per	ton,	of	kerb- 	side	 organics	 collec-
tion	 (Citizens	 Budget	 Commission,	 2016).	 This	 high	 cost	was	attributed	 to	low	participation	 rates	 (Goldenberg	 &	Muoio,	
2020).	 An	economic	 argument	 for	defunding	 the	already	 frugal	 community	 composting	 programme	 was	never	 made.	 In	
July	 2020,	 thanks	 to	sustained	 grassroots	 activism	 through	 the	#saveourcompost	 campaign,	 US$2.86 million	 was	restored	
to	community	 composting	 at	all	seven	 NYCCP	 sites	 (NRDC,	 2020).	 In	April	 2021,	 funding	 for	kerb- 	side	 collection	 and	
GrowNYC	 was	restored,	 and	funding	 for	community	 composting	 was	expanded	 –	 	however,	 the	waste	 equity	 demands	 of	
composters	and	environmental	justice	advocates	remain	unanswered	(City	of 	New	 York,	2021).
Prior	 to	the	current	 crisis,	 New	 York's	 composting	 economy	 was	 thriving.	 In	2017,	 there	 were	 more	 than	 200	com-
munity	 composting	 sites	 at	community	 gardens	 across	 the	city.	 A	decentralised	 network	 of	Master	 Composters,	 trained	
by	NYCCP,	 were	 actively	 engaged	 in	creating	 new	 compost	 operations,	 and	providing	 informal	 training	 and	technical	
support	 to	their	 friends	 and	neighbours.	 Micro-	 haulers	 were	 collecting	 commercial	 and	residential	 organic	 food	 waste	
by	bike	 and	composting	 locally	 when	 possible.	 Municipal	 contracts	 for	organic	 waste	 hauling,	 processing,	 and	compost -
ing	were	 awarded	 to	private	 sector	 actors,	 who	 had	an	economic	 incentive	 to	build	 the	composting	 infrastructure	 that	
the	metropolitan	 region	 needs	 (DSNY,	 2012),	 as	well	 as	grassroots,	 non-	 profits,	 and	cooperative	 enterprises	 in	the	social	
and	solidarity	 economy,	 who	 created	 green	 jobs	 and	improved	 their	 neighbourhoods	 by	composting	 locally.	 The	 com-
post	 actors	 in	this	field	 are	incredibly	 diverse	 in	terms	 of	their	 technologies	 and	methods,	 their	 economic	 and	funding	
models,	 and	the	scales	 at	which	 they	 operate.	 Within	 this	diverse	 economy	 (Gibson- 	Graham,	 2008;	 Gibson- 	Graham	 &	
Dombroski,	2020),	new	material	and	social	relations,	that	privilege	an	ethic	of 	care,	are	being	realised.
Realising	 social	 and	 environmental	 justice	 in	New	 York's	 circular	 economy	 depends	 on	generating	 a	more	 holistic	
understanding	 of	the	diverse	 economies,	 materialities,	 and	ethics	 of	community	 composting.	 These	 dimensions	 are	ab-
sent	 in	circular	 economy	 research,	 which	 has	focused	 primarily	 on	business-	 led	technological	 efficiencies	 and	economic	
growth	 over	 social	 and	ecological	 sustainability	 (for	similar	 critiques,	 see	Friant	 et	al.,	2020;	 Hobson,	 2016).	 Municipal	
policy-	 makers	 are	disciplined	 by	similar	 logics	 of	economic	 and	administrative	 efficiency	 that	 form	 part	 of	a	neoliberal	
governing	 environment	 (Hird	 et	al.,	2014).	 Within	 this	context,	 community	 composting	 enterprises	 must	 justify	 their	
existence,	 and	 respond	 to	critiques	 that	 the	sector	 is	not	scalable	 to	meet	 the	enormity	 of	New	 York's	 organic	 waste	
stream,	 merely	 offering	 boutique	 solutions	 for	a	select	 section	 of	society,	 and	therefore	 unworthy	 of	public	 investment.	
The	 benefits	 of	community	 composting	 are	rarely	 visible	 to	those	 who	 are	not	intimately	 involved	 in	the	practice.	 As	a	
result,	 the	"added- 	value"	 that	composting	 might	 bring	 to	communities	 is	rarely	 part	 of	decision	 matrices.	 This	 paper	 aims	
to	rectify	 this	through	 a	deep	 reading	 of	community	 composting	 in	NYC	 informed	 by	emerging	 literature	 on	circularity,	
composting,	and	care.
3	|	COMPOSTING THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY WITH A FEMINIST ETHIC 
OF CARE
Circular	 economy	 scholarship	 and	practice	 has	been	 repeatedly	 criticised	 for	a	lack	 of	attention	 to	the	social	 dimensions 	
of	sustainability	 (Hobson,	 2016;	 Moreau	 et	al.,	2017;	 Pla-	Julián	 &	Guevara,	 2019).	 Closing	 loops,	 without	 attending	 to	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 533
MORROW and DAVIES
social	 impacts,	 equity,	 justice,	 ethics,	 practices,	 or	values,	 will	not	spur	 the	just	transitions	 that	 are	so	urgently	 needed 	
(Friant	 et	al.,	2020).	 This	 is	a	significant	 lacuna	 in	research,	 considering	 the	sustainability	 goals	 of	circular	 economy 	
(Ellen	 MacArthur	 Foundation,	 2012).	 The	roots	 of	asocial	 circular	 economy	 narratives	 can	be	traced	 back	 to	the	emer-
gence	 of	political	 economy	 as	a	scientific	 approach	 (Cardoso,	 2018).	 Tracing	 the	evolution	 of	the	concept,	 Friant	 et	al.	
(2020)	 show	 how	 the	social,	 ethical,	 and	ecological	 concerns	 that	 were	 once	 at	the	core	 of	the	emerging	 circular	 econ-
omy	 discourse	 in	permaculture	 and	ecological	 design	 during	 the	1970s	 were	 slowly	 written	 out	by	the	technocentric 	
and	capitalocentric	 approach	 that	 thrived	 in	the	field	 of	industrial	 ecology	 and	the	neoliberal	 climate	 of	the	1980s	 and	
1990s.	 In	the	21st	 century,	 the	circular	 economy	 agenda	 has	been	 primarily	 policy-	 led	rather	 than	 academic	 or	activist- 	
driven,	 with	 advocacy	 groups	 commissioning	 private	 sector	 consultancies	 to	articulate	 the	characteristics	 of	circular 	
economies	 (Ellen	 Macarthur	 Foundation,	 2012)	 that	 talk	the	language	 of	power	 and	attend	 primarily	 to	material	 flows. 	
The	 paucity	 of	attention	 to	the	social	 dimensions	 of	circular	 economy	 policies	 and	practices	 is	problematic	 and	leads 	
us	to	take	seriously	what	it	means	to	participate	in	one	eddy	of	the	circular	economy,	that	of	community	composting.
Advocates	 of	a	circular	 food	 economy	 (such	 as	Jurgilevich	 et	al.,	2016)	 have	 identified	 the	limits	 of	the	linear	 food	
system,	 calling	 for	a	redesign	 which	 reduces	 waste,	 reuses	 food	 (where	 safe	 to	do	so),	makes	 good	 use	of	by-	products 	
from	food	processes	and	food	waste	(where	it	is	not	possible	to	design	them	out),	and	recycles	nutrients.	 Where	it	is	not 	
possible	 to	reduce	 or	prevent	 food	 waste,	 circular	 economy	 models	 aim	to	revalorise	 it,	bringing	 it	back	 into	 production 	
circuits	 (SAPEA,	 2020).	 Numerous	 technical	 studies	 exist	 on	large- 	scale	 energy	 recovery	 (biomethane)	 or	fertiliser	 dis-
tillation	 from	 anaerobic	 digestion	 (AD)	 processes	 (e.gIngrao	 et	al.,	2018;	 Peng	 &	Pivato,	 2019),	 and	 include	 life-	cycle 	
assessments	 of	these	 mechanisms	 (Slorach	 et	al.,	2019).	 To	date,	 research	 adopting	 circular	 economy	 framings	 around 	
end-	of-	life	food,	 particularly	 in	relation	 to	composting	 (see	 Stoknes	 et	al.,	2018),	 has	been	 dominated	 by	attention	 to	
technical	 solutions,	 environmental	 benchmarks,	 and	economic	 benefits.	 Yet,	as	already	 identified	 in	critiques	 of	circular 	
economy	 research	 and	practice	 more	 generally	 (see	 Hobson,	 2016;	 Hobson	 &	Lynch,	 2016),	 complex	 matters	 of	social 	
practice	 and	value,	 and	particularly	 how	 those	 practices	 and	values	 intersect	 with	 matters	 of	care	 in,	of,	and	for	commu-
nities,	 are	rarely	 prioritised.	 This	 stimulated	 Fratini	 et	al.	(2019)	 to	ask	whether	 the	circular	 economy	 imaginary	 can	be	
an	opportunity	 for	socially	 inclusive	 and	environmentally	 desirable	 urban	 transitions.	 Exploring	 the	case	 of	community 	
composting	 in	New	 York,	 as	a	circular	 economy	 innovation	 that	 explicitly	 addresses	 the	social	 concerns	 such	 as	labour, 	
health,	 equity,	 care,	 education,	 participation,	 and	community	 well-	 being,	 begins	 to	fill	this	critical	 gap	in	circular	 econ-
omy	scholarship.
3.1	|	Socialising compost: Managing food waste
There	 is	growing	 public	 and	 scientific	 concern	 in	the	management	 of	food	 waste.	 This	 includes	 attention	 to	socio- 	
technical	 innovations	 to	reduce	 food	 waste	 and	loss	in	the	food	 supply	 system	 (Swannell	 et	al.,	2019),	 as	well	 as	grass-
roots	 innovations	 which	 reduce	 consumer	 waste,	 and	extend	 the	useful	 life	of	edible	 food,	 for	example	 through	 surplus 	
food	 redistribution	 (Davies,	 2019).	 While	 food	 waste	 continues	 to	receive	 increasing	 attention	 from	 geographers	 and	
social	 scientists	 (Evans,	 2012),	 with	 a	growing	 interest	 in	the	affective,	 ethical,	 and	 more-	 than-	 human	 engagements 	
with	 food	 waste	 (Mattila	 et	al.,	2019;	 Turner,	 2019),	 social	 scientific	 research	 on	composting	 is	in	its	infancy,	 even	 in	the	
dynamic	 field	 of	discard	 studies	 (Hawkins,	 2006;	 Schaffer,	 2016).	 There	 is	a	small	 body	 of	research	 examining	 the	social 	
practices,	 embodied	 and	affective	 encounters,	 and	ethical	 entanglements	 related	 to	home	 composting	 (Abrahamsson 	
&	Betroni,	 2014;	 Ames	 &	Cook,	 2020;	 Kinnunen,	 2017),	 and	composting	 toilets	 (Dimpfl	 &	Moran,	 2014;	 Hawkins,	 2006;	
Pickering,	 2010).	 But	few	researchers	 have	 examined	 the	social	 dimensions	 of	composting	 beyond	 the	household,	 with 	
the	exception	of	one	study	on	commoning	and	social	innovation	in	urban	composting	(Swagemakers	et	al.,	2018).
Meanwhile,	 in	existing	 research	 on	community	 composting,	 we	notice	 the	dominant	 circular	 economy	 focus	 on	tech-
noscientific	 matters	 of	scale	 and	efficiency.	 Where	 the	practice	 has	been	 considered	 (e.g.,	 Adhikari	 et	al.,	2010;	 Pai	et	al.,	
2019;	 Slater	 &	Aiken,	 2015),	 decentralised	 or	community	 composting	 schemes	 are	described	 as	an	alternative	 to	the	high	
capital	 investments	 and	complex	 logistics	 required	 by	centralised	 composting	 systems.	 Indeed,	 while	 centralised	 systems	
offer	 effective	 means	 to	divert	 large	 volumes	 of	organic	 material,	 research	 in	Chicago	 found	 that	community	 composting	
in	public	 parks	 was	a	viable	 means	 of	diverting	 substantial	 amounts	 of	food	 waste,	 as	a	complementary	 intervention	 to	
waste	 diversion	 programmes	 (Pai	 et	al.,	2019).	 In	a	similar	 vein,	 Adhikari	 et	al.	(2010)	 found	 that	 on-	site	treatment	 of	
urban	 organic	 waste	 using	 practices	 such	 as	community	 composting	 can	lower	 management	 costs	 as	well	 as	greenhouse	
gas	emissions	by	more	than	one-	 third	in	Europe	and	Canada.
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

534 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
The	social	 dimensions	 of	community	 composting	 are	taken	 up	explicitly	 by	Slater	 and	Aiken	 (2015),	 who	 in	their	 re-
search	 on	community	 composting	 in	the	UK	identified	 a	diverse	 sector	 where	 composting	 was	a	complementary	 activity	
to	help	 achieve	 wider	 environmental	 or	social	 objectives.	 These	 objectives	 include:	 increasing	 awareness	 and	 actions	
relating	 to	recycling	 and	reuse,	 or	supporting	 people	 to	develop	 a	healthier	 diet	or	learn	 meaningful	 life	and	work	 skills.	
They	 found	 that	 outputs	 from	 community	 composting	 were	 far	more	 expansive	 than	 simple	 metrics	 relating	 to	the	scale	
of	diversion	 from	 landfill.	 These	 included	 education	 events,	 volunteers,	 and	placements	 alongside	 the	skills	 and	supports	
that	 community	 composting	 activities	 provided	 to	community	 gardens	 and	kitchens.	 Slater	 and	Aiken	 (2015)	 argue	 that	
the	standardised	 measurement	 and	comparison	 of	different	 community	 composting	 operations	 with	 existing	 commer -
cial,	 large- 	scale,	 and	highly	 institutionalised	 composting	 processes	 is	not	only	 challenging	 but	also	 conceptually	 flawed.	
In	the	absence	 of	agreement	 over	 measurement	 processes,	 they	 argue	 it	is	important	 to	“consider	 the	logic	 and	purposes	
of	the	organizations	 themselves	 from	 the	‘inside	 out’	 …	to	assess	 their	 work	 against	 their	 objectives”	 (Slater	 &	Aiken,	
2015,	 p.	1098).	 Following	 this	approach,	 we	explore	 in	this	paper	 the	practices	 and	outcomes	 of	community	 composting	
in	New	 York	 City,	 focusing	 particularly	 on	the	important	 role	of	care	 involved	 in	such	 practices	 as	a	means	 to	offset	 and	
problematise	the	dominant	technoscientific	bias	in	circular	economy	discourses.
3.2	|	Careful circularities: loving compost
Moving	 beyond	 the	technocentric	 preoccupation	 with	 scale	 and	 efficiency	 in	composting	 requires	 a	different	 concep-
tual	framework,	 one	that	 is	able	 to	accommodate	 sustainability	 impacts	 beyond	 efficiency,	 and	acknowledges	 and	privi-
leges	 the	affective,	 material,	 and	ethical	 doing	 of	care	 (Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2011).	 The	diverse	 sustainability	 benefits	 of	
community	 composting	 –	 	such	 as	enhancing	 social	 cohesion,	 and	 individual	 and	 environmental	 wellbeing	 –	 	remain	
overlooked	 because	 of	a	capitalocentric	 framing	 in	circular	 economy	 narratives	 that	 privileges	 economic	 productivity	
and	efficiency,	 commodity	 production	 and	exchange,	 and	limitless	 growth.	 As	countless	 feminist	 scholars	 have	 noted	
(Cameron	 &	Gibson-	 Graham,	 2003;	 FADA,	 2020),	 this	framing	 marginalises	 and	devalues	 care	 work,	 defined	 here	 as	the	
paid	 and	unpaid	 labours	 of	caring	 for	people	 and	planet,	 “an	affective	 state,	 a	material	 vital	 doing,	 and	an	ethico-	 political	
obligation”	 (Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2011,	 p.	90).	The	 marginalisation	 of	the	ethics	 and	values	 attached	 to	care	 work	 has	
prompted	 recurring	 calls	 for	an	ethic	 of	care	 (Fisher	 &	Tronto,	 1990).	 Making	 careful	 circularities	 visible	 thus	 requires	
a	radical	 rethinking	 of	economy	 and	waste	 in	circular	 economy	 research.	 Adopting	 a	careful	 circularities	 lens,	 we	can	
glimpse	 what	 other	 transformations	 occur	 at	the	level	 of	everyday	 practices,	 affect,	 and	emotions,	 such	 as	cultural	 and	
ethical	norms	around	responsibility,	care,	and	repair.
We	depart	 from	 previous	 research	 on	circular	 economy	 and	 community	 composting	 to	emphasise	 the	practice	
(Macgregor,	 2011),	 ethics	 (Fisher	 &	Tronto,	 1990),	 and	materialities	 of	care	 (Krzywoszynska,	 2019;	 Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	
2015)	 as	critical	 to	understanding	 sustainability	 benefits.	 We	take	 inspiration	 from	 scholars	 of	waste	 ethics	 (Hawkins,	
2006)	 and	soil	ecology	 (Krzywoszynska,	 2019;	 Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2015),	 who	 have	 drawn	 on	feminist	 ethics	 of	care,	
science	 and	technology	 studies,	 and	feminist	 materialism	 to	examine	 the	careful	 interdependencies	 and	interrelations	
that	 occur	 within	 waste,	 soils,	 and	food	 systems.	 These	 perspectives	 privilege	 the	role	 of	attentiveness,	 responsiveness,	
and	mutual	 vulnerability	 in	the	multispecies	 doing	 of	care	 in	science	 and	everyday	 life.	Along	 these	 lines,	 we	argue	 that	
community	 composting	 offers	 an	opportunity	 for	relating	 to	waste	 differently	 (Hawkins,	 2006),	 through	 passionate	 im-
mersion	 (Van	 Dooren	 et	al.,	2016)	 and	play	 (Turner,	 2019)	 that	 invites	 alternative	 ways	 of	loving	 and	living	 with	 organic	
waste,	rather	than	managing	it	out	of 	existence.
Feminist	 materialist	 approaches	 that	 attend	 to	vibrant	 materialism,	 affect	 and	emotion,	 and	interspecies	 care	 are	
especially	 well	 suited	 to	understanding	 the	more-	 than-	 human	 entanglements	 and	 ethical	 engagements	 of	commu-
nity	 composting.	 These	 approaches	 have	 been	 widely	 applied	 to	theorise	 the	social,	 emotional,	 and	 ethical	 dimen-
sions	 of	sustainability	 transformations	 related	 to	food	 and	 eating	 (Hayes- 	Conroy	 &	Hayes- 	Conroy,	 2010),	 diverse 	
food	 economies	 (Beacham,	 2018),	 waste	 (Hawkins,	 2006),	 food	 waste	 (Turner,	 2014,	 2019),	 community	 gardening 	
(Cameron	 et	al.,	2011),	 household	 composting	 (Kinnunen,	 2017),	 and	 soil	care	 (Krzywoszynska,	 2019;	 Puig	 de	la	
Bellacasa,	 2015).	 Feminist	 materialist	 approaches	 to	care	 emphasise	 the	importance	 of	attending	 to	the	transforma-
tions	 that	 occur	 at	emotional,	 visceral,	 affective,	 and	embodied	 levels	 –	 	and	see	these	 as	important	 ethical	 and	politi-
cal	openings	 for	rethinking	 our	relationship	 with	 food	 and	waste.	 The	 framework	 of	careful	 circularity	 privileges	 the	
doing	 of	care	 in	circular	 economy	 and	 draws	 from	 feminist	 materialist	 approaches	 to	embodiment	 and	 emotion,	 to	
attend	 to	the	social,	 material,	 and	affective	 relations	 in	community	 composting	 which	 invite	 new	 material	 sensitivi-
ties,	affective	stances,	and	ethical	relations	with	waste.
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 535
MORROW and DAVIES
Social,	 embodied,	 and	 ethical	 concerns	 are	nearly	 absent	 in	the	scientific	 literature	 on	composting	 and	 circular	
economy,	 which	 tends	 to	focus	 much	 more	 on	feasibility,	 evaluation,	 and	matters	 of	economic	 and	material	 efficiency	
(Adhikari	 et	al.,	2010),	 although	 they	 are	present	 in	research	 on	food	 waste	 and	home	 composting	 (Ames	 &	Cook,	 2020;	
Kinnunen,	 2017;	 Turner,	 2014).	 These	 concerns	 led	discard	 studies	 scholars	 to	question	 the	moralising	 calls	 for	“zero	
waste”	 and	circular	 economy	 ambitions	 to	design	 a	world	 without	 waste	 (Hawkins,	 2006;	 Kinnunen,	 2017;	 Song,	 2016).	
What	 might	 be	equally	 important	 is	cultivating	 a	different	 relationship	 to	waste,	 that	 rests	 on	an	ethic	 of	care,	 mainte -
nance,	 and	repair	 (Martínez,	 2017)	 and	refuses	 the	“dominant	 ethos	 of	disposal,	 distance,	 and	denial”	 (Hawkins,	 2006,	
p.	122)	 that	 has	transformed	 waste	 from	 “the	 unavoidable	 material	 surplus	 of	living”	 (Kinnunen,	 2017,	 p.	67)	to	abject	
matter	and	environmental	burden.
Attending	 to	care	 as	a	property	 of	community	 composting	 permits	 attention	 to	other	 social	 values	 in	circular	 economy	
scholarship.	 There	 has	been	 far	less	discussion	 of	the	social	 and	ethical	 implications	 of	circularity,	 even	 as	food,	 compost,	
waste,	 and	soil	are	increasingly	 theorised	 as	sites	 for	practising	 a	more-	 than-	 human	 ethics	 of	care	 and	transforming	 our	
relations	 with	 the	material	 world	 in	both	 agri-	 food	 studies	 (Beacham,	 2018;	 Morrow,	 2021;	 Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2019)	
and	discard	 studies	 (Hawkins,	 2006).	 Following	 Friant	 et	al.	(2020)	 and	Pla-	Julián	 and	Guevara	 (2019),	 we	see	an	urgent	
need	 to	bring	 these	 social	 dimensions,	 and	care	 specifically,	 back	 into	the	description	 and	analysis	 of	circular	 economies.	
In	this	paper	 we	apply	 the	perspective	 of	careful	 circularity	 to	explore	 the	diverse	 economies,	 materialities,	 ethics,	 and	
values	 of	community	 composting	 in	New	 York,	 thereby	 addressing	 the	absence	 of	research	 on	the	social	 dimensions	 of	
community	composting	and	circular	economy	more	broadly.
4	|	METHODS
The	 qualitative	 data	 that	 this	 paper	 draws	 on	is	the	result	 of	research	 with	 community	 composting	 initiatives	 con-
ducted	 over	 three	 months	 in	the	summer	 of	2017.	 The	 research	 was	 completed	 as	part	 of	a	broader	 international 	
research	 project	 about	 food	 sharing	 in	cities	 (Davies,	 2019).	 The	 New	 York	 City	 Compost	 Project	 (NYCCP)	 was	 se-
lected	 as	a	case	 study	 because	 of	the	interaction	 between	 diverse	 actors	 in	the	collection,	 redistribution	 (i.e.,	 sharing), 	
and	 governance	 of	compost.	 There	 are	seven	 NYCCP	 sites	 in	total	 and	 four	 of	these	 were	 visited.	 These	 sites	 were 	
selected	 for	their	 geographic	 and	 operational	 diversity	 (see	 Table	 1).	They	 included	 well-	 established	 sites	 like	 Red	
TABLE 1	 New	York	City	Compost	Project	demonstration	sites	studied
Host (location) Composting techniques Composting toolsComposting 
capacity
Brooklyn	Botanical	
Gardens	@	Red	
Hook	Farm	
(Brooklyn)Windrows,	aerated	static	pile Food	scrap	containers,	shovels,	brooms,	
wheelbarrows,	screen,	solar-	 	and	wind-	 powered	
air	blower,	solar	panels,	wind	turbine225+	tonsa
BIG	Reuse	(Queens) Aerated	static	pile,	windrows Food	scrap	containers,	Gore	cover,	temperature	and	
oxygen	probes,	blower,	skid	steer,	Jay-	 Lor	mixer,	
Toter-	 Tipper,	screen,	thermometers650+	tonsb
Earth	Matter	Compost	
Learning	Center	
(Governors	Island)Aerated	static	pile,	windrows,	
tumblers,	in-	 vessel	systems,	3	bin	
systems,	bokashi	composting,	
chicken	assisted	deep	litter,	worm	
bins,	and	much	moreFood	scrap	containers,	skid	steer,	Jay-	 Lor	mixer,	
blowers,	thermometers,	shovels,	numerous	
compost	devices480+	tonsc
Lower	East	Side	
Ecology	Center	
(Manhattan)In-	vessel	system,	windrows Food	scrap	containers,	compost	containers,	skid	
steer,	truck,	thermometer250+	tonsd
aSeehttp://www.added	 -	value.org/compo	 st/
bSee	https://stati	 c1.squar	 espace.com/stati	 c/5548e	 d90e4	 b0b0a	 763d0	 e704/t/5a4eb	 b27c8	 30254	 7a557	 3fb6/15151	 09160	 628/Rethe	 rford	 -	McCar	 ronPa	 perv7	 -	26-	17.
pdf,http://www.bigre	 use.org/how-	 do-	we-	proce	 ss-	food-	 scrap	 s-	to-	make-	 compo	 st/
cSeehttp://www.nycfo	 odpol	 icy.org/earth	 -	matte	 r-	ny/
dSeehttps://www1.nyc.gov/asset	 s/donat	 e/about/	 partn	 ershi	 p/lower	 easts	 ideec	 ology	 center.shtml
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

536 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
Hook	 Community	 Farm	 and	the	Lower	 East	 Side	 Ecology	 Center,	 as	well	 as	newer	 operations	 like	the	Earth	 Matter 	
and	BIG	Reuse.
Participant	 observation	 took	 place	 during	 weekly	 volunteer	 shifts	 at	three	 NYCCP	 community	 composting	 sites	 in	
Brooklyn,	 Queens,	 and	 on	Governor's	 Island.	 This	 method	 allowed	 for	extensive	 user	 engagements	 and	 hands- 	on	ex-
perience	 with	 compost,	 eliciting	 data	 on	the	everyday	 practices,	 embodied	 experiences,	 and	materialities	 of	community	
composting.	 During	 this	time,	 Oona	 worked	 with	 composters	 to	hand	 sort	and	chop	 organic	 waste,	 build	 and	turn	 com-
post	 piles,	 and	sift,	bag,	 and	distribute	 finished	 compost	 to	community	 members.	 Through	 these	 experiences	 she	became	
attuned	 to	the	embodied	 and	visceral	 dimensions	 of	composting,	 although	 visceral	 methods	 (Hayes- 	Conroy,	 2010)	 were	
not	an	initial	 part	 of	our	research	 design.	 She	also	 attended	 food	 scrap	 donations	 in	Brooklyn	 and	Manhattan.	 During	
all	of	these	 activities	 she	had	informal	 chats	 with	 composters,	 food	 scrap	 donors,	 and	compost	 users	 who	 readily	 shared	
the	emotions	 and	 bodily	 sensations	 that	 composting	 provoked.	 It	was	 not	possible	 to	volunteer	 at	the	NYCCP	 site	in	
Manhattan;	 instead,	 a	site	visit,	 composting	 workshop,	 and	interview	 were	 completed.	 Field	 notes	 were	 recorded	 as	user	
engagements	 and	served	 as	an	important	 starting	 point	 for	identifying	 emergent	 themes	 for	data	 analysis.	 These	 four	
NYCCP	sites	are	summarised	in	 Table	1	and	discussed	below.
Eight	 semi- 	structured	 interviews	 and	more	 than	 ten	informal	 chats	 were	 conducted	 with	 key	staff	members	 of	the	
NYCCP,	 as	well	 as	entrepreneurs,	 policymakers,	 and	 city	employees	 working	 on	waste	 and	 circular	 economy	 in	New	
York.	 To	gain	 a	sense	 of	the	broader	 policy	 landscape	 that	 shapes	 New	 York's	 composting	 economy,	 public	 policy	 doc-
uments,	 industry	 reports	 and	websites,	 and	news	 articles	 were	 also	 examined.	 The	interviews	 were	 transcribed	 and	an-
alysed	 in	NVivo	 through	 two	rounds	 of	coding.	 First,	 with	 predetermined	 codes	 including:	 goals	 and	motivations;	 food	
waste;	 history;	 policy,	 rules,	 and	regulation;	 scale	 and	sustainability.	 These	 codes	 were	 developed	 together	 with	 an	in-
ternational	 research	 team	 to	facilitate	 cross- 	case	 comparisons	 and	 summaries.	 The	 second	 round	 of	coding	 drew	 on	
the	context- 	specific	 themes	 and	concerns	 identified	 in	field	 notes,	 and	these	 focused	 on	economies,	 material	 flows	 and	
encounters,	 diverse	 economies,	 and	embodied	 experiences	 of	labour	 and	care.	 Interviewees	 are	quoted	 anonymously	 or	
by	name,	according	to	their	wishes.
5	|	CAREFUL CIRCULARITIES IN COMMUNITY COMPOSTING
In	this	section	 we	draw	 out	the	complex	 performances	 of	care	 observed	 in	the	creation	 and	distribution	 of	compost. 	
From	 the	perspective	 of	careful	 circularity,	 we	consider	 how	 the	diverse	 economies	 and	materialities	 of	community 	
composting	 can	generate	 positive	 economic,	 environmental,	 and,	 particularly,	 social	 transformations.	 In	this	way	 we	
demonstrate	 empirically	 what	 might	 be	gained	 by	expanding	 theoretical	 conceptions	 of	a	circular	 economy	 to	include 	
considerations	 of	care	 –	 	care	 for	oneself,	 for	the	wider	 community	 and	 environment,	 and	 with	 more-	 than-	 human 	
others.	 The	 economic	 practices	 and	 material	 flows	 at	each	 community	 composting	 site	are	embedded	 in	circuits	 of	TABLE 2	 Economies	of	community	composting	at	NYCCP	sites
Host Funding modelMaterial 
transactions Labour Site ownership
Brooklyn	Botanical	
Gardens	@	Red	Hook	
Community	Farm	
(Brooklyn)City-	 funded
Barter	
relationship	
with	food	
cooperativeDonated	browns	and	
greens
Gifted	compostWaged	unionised	labour
Alternative	paid	labour	
from	Green	City	Force
Volunteer	labourCity	property	–	 	managed	via	
Greenthumb
BIG	Reuse	(Queens) City-	 funded Donated	browns	and	
greens
Gifted	compostWaged	labour
Volunteer	labourCity	property	–	 	managed	via	
Greenthumb
Earth	Matter	(Governors	
Island)City-	 funded Donated	browns	and	
greens
Gifted	compostWaged	labour
Volunteer	labourCity-	 managed	National	Park
Lower	East	Side	Ecology	
Center	(Manhattan)City-	 funded
Compost	sold	
at	farmers'	
marketDonated	browns	and	
greens
Gifted	compostWaged	labour
Volunteer	labourCity	property	–	 	East	River	
Park	and	Fireboat	House,	
accessed	in	exchange	for	
horticulture	services
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 537
MORROW and DAVIES
care	 that	 span	 a	number	 of	subjects,	 sites,	 and	spaces:	 households	 carefully	 sorting	 their	 organic	 waste;	 care	 for	and	
with	 more-	 than-	 human	 composting	 companions;	 care	 for	urban	 trees,	 soils,	 and	 environments;	 care	 for	the	health 	
of	neighbours	 near	 and	far	whose	 bodies	 carry	 the	unequal	 environmental	 burden	 of	our	linear	 waste	 management 	
system;	and	care	for	community.
5.1	|	Economies and care in community composting
While	 there	 is	increasing	 recognition	 of	the	role	of	cities	 in	the	circular	 economy	 (Fratini	 et	al.,	2019),	 there	 is	less	explo-
ration	 of	the	role	of	cities	 in	redistributing	 the	wealth	 and	resources	 necessary	 for	a	just	transition	 to	not	just	a	circular	
economy	 but	also	 a	circular	 and	 regenerative	 society	 that	 is	founded	 on	social	 and	 environmental	 justice,	 resilience,	
and	 plenitude	 (Friant	 et	al.,	2020).	 There	 is	an	assumption	 in	circular	 economy	 literature	 that	 policy-	 makers	 should	
support	 those	 circular	 economy	 innovations	 that	 have	 an	economic	 rationale,	 and	promise	 efficiency,	 profit,	 and	scale	
(Ellen	 Macarthur	 Foundation,	 2012).	 Yet,	 as	Hobson	 (2016)	 convincingly	 argues,	 this	economic	 rationale	 risks	 perpetu-
ating	 the	current	 business-	 as-	usual	 approach,	 particularly	 when	 the	economy	 is	defined	 in	terms	 of	capital	 and	growth,	
rather	 than	 livelihoods	 and	sufficiency.	 Worse,	 it	may	 eclipse	 the	regenerative	 work	 that	 many	 grassroots	 sustainability	
initiatives	 are	engaged	 in,	potentially	 undervaluing,	 underfunding,	 and	 undermining	 the	transformative	 potential	 of	
these	 community-	 based	 activities.	 A	diverse	 economies	 lens	 (Gibson-	 Graham,	 2008)	 is	therefore	 useful	 for	appreciating	 a	
wider	 range	 of	economic	 activity	 in	circular	 economy,	 including	 non-	 monetary	 benefits	 evident	 in	the	multispecies	 care	
work	 of	community	 composting,	 through	 which	 organic	 waste,	 people,	 communities,	 worms,	 and	urban	 soils	 become	
“matters	 of	care”	 (Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2011).	 Moving	 beyond	 a	capitalocentric	 view	 of	the	economy	 within	 the	circular	
economy	 allows	 for	greater	 recognition	 of	the	caring	 and	regenerative	 labours	 that	 are	invisible	 to,	excluded	 from,	 or	
devalued	in	relation	to	capitalism	(Holmes,	 2018;	Moreau	et	al.,	2017).
At	the	NYCCP	 compost	 sites	 studied,	 careful	 circularities	 are	being	 realised	 through	 paid	 and	unpaid	 labour,	 non-	
market	 exchanges,	 the	donation	 of	materials,	 and	the	gifting	 and	sharing	 of	compost.	 These	 economic	 practices	 are	em-
bedded	 in	a	broader	 diverse	 economy	 of	community	 composting,	 in	which	 public	 funding	 and	property,	 and	community	
participation	 play	 a	significant	 role.	 All	NYCCP	 compost	 sites	 are	run	by	non-	 profit	 organisations	 and,	 as	a	condition	 of	
public	 funding,	 NYCCP	 compost	 must	 remain	 a	public	 good.	 Together	 these	 make	 up	the	diverse	 economies	 of	commu-
nity	composting	(see	 Table	2).
5.2	|	Labour
The	labour	 of	composting	 at	NYCCP	 is	conducted	 collectively,	 in	collaboration	 with	 volunteers,	 staff,	 youth,	 and	more-	
than-	 human	 compost	 companions	 who	 metabolise	 organic	 matter,	 weave	 fungal	 webs,	 and	aerate	 compost	 with	 their	
movements.	 These	 joint	 labours	 are	educational	 experiences,	 through	 which	 participants	 learn	 to	care	 for	compost	 and	
its	inputs	 through	 passionate	 immersion	 (Van	 Dooren	 et	al.,	2016)	 and	play	 (Turner,	 2019)	 with	 more-	 than-	 human	 com-
post	 companions.	 This	 echoes	 Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa's	 (2019)	 observations	 of	the	affective	 and	embodied	 ways	 that	humans	
come	 to	know	 and	care	 for	soil.	 However,	 Pitt	(2018)	 questions	 the	extent	 to	which	 such	 encounters	 necessarily	 lead	 to	
more	 caring	 relations.	 Food	 provisioning	 is	often	 driven	 by	anthropocentric	 notions	 of	care	 (Morrow,	 2021).	 This	 leads	
Pitt	to	situate	 more-	 than-	 human	 encounters	 on	a	spectrum	 from	 caring	 to	killing,	 that	 recognises	 the	ambivalence	 of	
killing	 some	 non-	 humans,	 like	slugs	 (Ginn,	 2014),	 in	order	 to	care	 for	others.	 Similarly,	 research	 on	household	 compost-
ing	has	found	 that	 encounters	 with	 organic	 waste,	 smells,	 and	pests	 can	disrupt	 the	labours	 of	household	 sustainability	
(Ames	 &	Cook,	 2020).	 Through	 hands-	 on	experiences	 and	passionate	 immersion	 in	the	compost	 pile,	 participants	 learn	
to	be	attentive	 and	responsive	 to	diverse	 materialities	 (plastic	 bags,	 elastic	 bands,	 fruit	 stickers,	 maggots)	 in	the	waste	
stream.	 Importantly,	 the	convivial	 act	of	composting-	 together	 stimulates	 curiosity,	 surprise,	 and	joint	 reflections	 on	how	
to	be	a	“good	 composter.”	 Using	 finished	 compost	 to	tend	 vegetable	 patches	 and	urban	 trees	 is	another	 way	 of	experienc-
ing	these	 benefits.	 These	 labours	 help	 residents	 understand	 and	appreciate	 the	benefits	 of	composting,	 and	also	what	 can	
and	cannot	be	composted	(Buckel,	2013).
Under	 the	leadership	 of	David	 Buckel,	 the	BBG	 NYCCP	 site	at	Red	 Hook	 Community	 Farm	 has	developed	 a	low	
carbon	 and	labour-	 intensive	 approach	 to	composting.	 This	 model	 began	 through	 a	unique	 collaboration	 with	 Park	 Slope	
Food	 Coop.	 Members	 of	the	Coop	 volunteer	 for	three	 hours	 each	 month	 in	a	variety	 of	coop	 jobs,	 including	 unloading,	
restocking,	 childcare,	 and	cleaning.	 However,	 there	 are	currently	 more	 members	 than	 jobs.	 This	 allows	 the	Food	 Coop	 to	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

538 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
redistribute	 surplus	 labour	 to	various	 community	 projects.	 The	Coop	 approached	 Red	Hook	 Community	 Farm	 to	donate	
their	 organic	 waste.	 In	exchange	 for	composting	 services	 at	the	farm,	 Coop	 members	 contribute	 to	the	collective	 labour	
of	processing	 their	 waste.	 It	is	through	 this	exchange	 and	access	 to	abundant	 voluntary	 labour	 that	David's	 slow	 compost	
approach	took	root.
Another	 important	 source	 of	composting	 labour	 is	the	Americorp	 programme	 Green	 City	 Force.	 This	 programme	 re-
cruits	 young	 adults	 living	 in	public	 housing	 to	the	green	 economy,	 providing	 paid	 hands- 	on	training	 in	green	 enterprises	
that	 benefit	 the	communities	 in	which	 they	 live.	 Participants	 are	regular	 volunteers	 at	the	Brooklyn	 site,	 where	 they	
create	 compost	 for	their	 urban	 farm	 at	nearby	 NYCHA	 public	 housing.	 Each	 week	 they	 run	a	barter	 market	 at	the	farm,	
where	 resident	 can	pay	for	fresh	 organic	 vegetables	 with	 their	 time	 (volunteering	 on	the	farm)	 or	with	 food	 scraps	 (to	
feed	 the	compost).	 Their	 participation	 ensures	 that	composting	 skills,	 labour,	 and	materials	 reach	 the	most	 disadvantaged	
New	 Yorkers.	 This	 is	an	example	 of	a	careful	 circularity,	 where	 material	 and	labour	 flows	 are	designed	 around	 principles	
of	social	 justice	 and	solidarity	 rather	 than	 efficiency	 and	profit.	 The	participation	 of	young	 people	 of	colour	 is	critical	 to	
further	 diversifying	 the	sustainability	 movement	 and	ensuring	 that	 composting	 is	accessible	 and	accountable	 to	those	
communities	 who	 continue	 to	carry	 the	unequal	 environmental	 burden	 of	municipal	 waste	 management	 (New	 York	 City	
Environmental	Justice	Alliance,	2020).
Community	 composting	 is	a	kind	 of	care	 work	 that	 is	socially	 and	environmentally	 necessary.	 However,	 like	other	
forms	 of	care	 work	 it	is	often	 undervalued.	 Green	 jobs	 in	the	grassroots	 sustainability	 movements	 like	urban	 agriculture	
(Reynolds,	 2015)	 and	community	 composting	 are	often	 done	 as	volunteer	 work	 or	poorly	 compensated	 "labours	 of	love"	
by	people	 with	 the	socio- 	economic	 privilege	 to	do	so.	This	 limits	 the	diversity	 of	the	sustainability	 movement,	 and	can	
lead	 to	blind	 spots	 around	 racial	 and	economic	 justice.	 As	Guy	 Schaffer	 and	Sandy	 Nurse	 have	 argued,	 in	relation	 to	the	
youth-	 led	composting	 enterprise	 BK	Rot,	 if	composting	 is	valuable	 environmental	 work,	 it	must	 be	compensated	 as	such	
(Schaffer,	 2016,	 2017).	 The	 current	 manager	 of	the	Brooklyn	 NYCCP	 site	is	an	alumnus	 of	Green	 City	 Force,	 where	 he	
trained	 with	 his	predecessor	 David.	 As	an	employee	 of	BBG	 he	holds	 a	union	 contract	 (and	 the	benefits	 that	 have	 been	
secured	 through	 collective	 bargaining	 by	the	labour	 union	 DC	37	Local	 374).	 This	 is	a	small	 step	 in	ensuring	 that	 the	
caring	and	regenerative	labours	of 	the	circular	economy	are	accessible,	inclusive,	and	fairly	valued.
5.3	|	Transactions
The	 distribution	 of	compost	 is	another	 way	 in	which	 social	 and	economic	 benefits	 are	realised.	 All	NYCCP	 sites	 have	
the	mandate	 to	distribute	 compost	 to	community	 greening,	 where	 compost	 circulates	 through	 wider	 circuits	 of	environ-
mental	 care.	 Recipients	 include	 Parks	 as	well	 as	community	 groups.	 The	Lower	 East	 Side	 Ecology	 Center	 works	 closely	
with	 residents	 who	 steward	 the	trees	 in	their	 neighbourhood.	 And	 the	Big	Reuse	 has	an	online	 portal	 through	 which	
community	 groups	 can	request	 compost.	 They	 have	 adopted	 a	comparatively	 loose	 definition	 of	community	 group	 –	 	as	
any	group	 of	more	 than	 two	people	 who	 are	doing	 something	 for	their	 community.	 When	 someone	 makes	 a	request	 for	
compost,	 they	 receive	 a	phone	 call	from	 a	NYCCP	 employee	 who	 asks	 them	 about	 their	 composting	 needs	 and	knowl-
edge.	Through	this	process	they	actively	foster	new	community	collaborations	around	local	needs.
And	 if	we	know	 that	they	 are	just	one	person	 we	always	 like	try	and	"hey,	 why	 don't	 you	ask	your	 neighbour	
if	she	needs	 some	 too	and	then	 you	can	be	a	community	 group?"	 And	 like	giving	 people	 the	gumption,	 you	
know,	 and	kind	 of	like	the	carrot	 to	talk	to	their	 neighbours	 about	 compost	 that's	 free	–	 	because	 everybody	
loves	free	stuff.	(Staff,	Big	Reuse)
The	power	 of	compost- 	sharing	 to	facilitate	 community	 was	observed	 during	 a	compost	 pick	 up	at	Big	Reuse.	 Here	 Oona 	
encountered	 an	energetic	 white	 man	 from	 Brooklyn,	 who	 was	the	self-	appointed	 neighbourhood	 tree	steward	 of	his	block.	 He	
waters	 the	trees,	 cleans	 garbage	 out	of	the	beds,	 and	yells	 at	people	 for	using	 it	as	a	dog	toilet.	 For	the	first	time	 he	is	picking	 up	
free	compost.	 Having	 community	 compost	 will	require	 him	to	enrol	 his	neighbours	 into	practices	 of	tree	care	 as	well,	 poten-
tially	 shifting	 a	policing	 relationship	 to	a	caring	 one.	 Making	 community-	 based	 environmental	 care	a	condition	 for	accessing 	
community	 compost	 has	the	potential	 to	further	 incentivise	 forms	 of	collective	 care.	 It	also	resources	 the	caring	 activities	 that	
many	residents	already	engage	in.
In	Brooklyn,	 David	 was	more	 selective	 about	 the	community	 groups	 he	distributed	 compost	 to.	Community	 groups	
must	 prove	 they	 are	a	non-	 profit.	 Recipients	 included	 a	food	 pantry	 that	 grows	 fresh	 vegetables	 for	clients;	 urban	 farms	
at	NYCHA	 public	 housing	 run	by	Green	 City	 Force;	 and	 the	adjacent	 youth-	 run	Red	 Hook	 Community	 Farm.	 These	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 539
MORROW and DAVIES
transactions	 allow	 the	operation	 to	close	 the	loop	 on	its	circular	 food	 economy	 in	the	most	 local	 way	 possible,	 while	 dis-
tributing	compost	to	places	where	they	believe	it	achieves	the	maximum	social	impact.
The	non-	 market	 transactions	 that	 occur	 around	 community	 composting	 are	about	 more	 than	 simply	 “closing	 loops”	
or	keeping	 resources	 at	their	 highest	 economic	 value	 for	as	long	 as	possible.	 They	 are	about	 circulating	 resources	 where	
they	 are	most	 needed,	 according	 to	the	logics	 of	care,	 social	 justice,	 and	 solidarity.	 The	 materials	 (e.g.,	 compost,	 food	
scraps,	 weeds,	 wood	 chips	 and	shavings,	 leaves,	 coffee	 chaff,	 etc.)	 that	flow	 so	freely	 through	 the	community	 composting	
economy	 have	 been	 stripped	 of	their	 exchange	 value,	 instead	 they	 are	gifted,	 bartered,	 and	shared.	 The	resulting	 compost	
is	a	protected	 public	 good	 that	cannot	 be	exchanged	 for	money.	 Transforming	 waste	 into	a	commons	 facilitates	 collective	
forms	 of	care.	 This	 logic	 stands	 in	sharp	 contrast	 to	the	circular	 economy	 discourse	 of	revalorising	 waste	 as	a	commodi-
fied	resource	(Ellen	Macarthur	Foundation,	2012).
Preserving	 non-	 market	 spaces	 of	circular	 economy	 is	necessary	 for	realising	 the	broader	 (social,	 economic,	 and	envi-
ronmental)	 sustainability	 aims	 of	circularity	 (Moreau	 et	al.,	2017;	 Pla-	Julián	 &	Guevara,	 2019).	 Pursuing	 an	economic	 ra-
tionale	 alone	 will	impede	 circular	 economy	 agendas	 from	 addressing	 socio- 	economic	 and	environmental	 justice	 (Friant	
et	al.,	2020).	 Public	 funding	 is	essential	 to	resourcing	 these	 spaces	 of	possibility,	 while	 fairly	 compensating	 the	care	 work	
of	community	 composting,	 and	ensuring	 that	 these	 “caring	 infrastructures”	 (Morrow	 &	Parker,	 2020)	 and	green	 jobs	 are	
accessible	and	inclusive	to	diverse	urban	residents.
5.4	|	Material encounters and care in community composting
The	 environmental	 injustice	 of	our	current	 linear	 waste	 economy,	 and	the	presumed	 benefits	 of	shifting	 to	a	circular	
economy,	 can	be	understood	 through	 the	lens	 of	materiality.	 The	 socio-	 technical	 configuration	 of	waste	 management	
brings	 together	 diverse	 materialities,	 such	 as	waste	 infrastructure	 (transfer	 stations,	 trucks,	 and	 bins),	 the	pollutants	
that	 fill	our	air	and	 accumulate	 in	our	bodies,	 causing	 asthma	 and	 other	 diseases,	 and	 the	vital	 materialism	 of	waste	
itself	 –	 	as	an	unstable,	 diverse,	 and	potentially	 toxic	 entity	 (Hird,	 2013).	 The	materialities	 of	waste	 are	felt	most	 acutely	
around	 waste	 transfer	 stations.	 Seventy-	 five	percent	 of	the	city's	 waste	 is	trucked	 into	just	three	 neighbourhoods	 –	 	North	
Brooklyn,	 Southeast	 Queens,	 and	the	South	 Bronx	 –	 	for	processing	 before	 travelling	 to	landfill,	 incineration,	 recycling,	
anaerobic	digester,	or	industrial	compost	(NRDC,	 2018).	As	one	interviewee	stated:
It	results	 in	a	lot	of	truck	 traffic	 and,	 you	know,	 associated	 issues.	 Asthma	 in	particular	 is	really	 high	 in	North	
Brooklyn	 I	think	 and	the	South	 Bronx	 too.	I	think	 between	 the	two	they're	 like	within	 the	Top	5	most	 hospi-
talisations	for	asthma	in	the	city	if 	not	the	country.	It's	pretty	intense.	(City	council	staff)
However,	 one	of	the	unintended	 consequences	 of	the	municipal	 kerb- 	side	composting	 programme	 was	increased	 truck 	
traffic	to	these	same	neighbourhoods.
[DSNY]	 just	did	a	bunch	 of	new	 contracts	 with	 private	 waste	 transfer	 stations	 for	organics	 [organic	 food	 waste] 	
processing	 as	part	of	increasing	 the	programme	 …	eight	 out	of	ten	of	them	 went	 to	facilities	 in	those	 three	 dis-
tricts.	So	they're	just	increasing	what's	going	there	every	day.	(City	council	staff)
Even	 the	most	 high-	 tech	 innovations	 for	processing	 organic	 waste,	 such	 as	anaerobic	 digesters,	 depend	 on	existing	 waste 	
infrastructure	 (e.g.,	 trucks)	 to	move	 waste	 “someplace	 else”	 and	thus	 reinforce	 unjust	 waste	 mobilities	 (Davies,	 2012)	 and	geo-
graphic	 inequalities.	 Certainly,	 “simply	 ‘adding	 compost’	 to	an	unsustainable	 and	environmentally	 unjust	 waste	 management 	
systems	 does	 not	lead	 to	sustainable	 or	just	urban	 transformations”	 (Morrow,	 in	press).	 Examining	 the	flows,	 relationalities, 	
and	geographies	 that	develop	 around	 the	materiality	 of	organic	 waste	 offers	 a	way	into	thinking	 about	 the	possibility	 of	more 	
just	transitions	 in	socio-	 technical	 configurations	 such	 as	community	 composting,	 and	the	broader	 waste	 management	 sys-
tems	these	practices	are	embedded	in. 	
Most	 folks	 agree	 that	 the	more	 decentralised	 and	local	 organics	 [organic	 food	 waste]	 recovery	 [is]	the	better, 	
because	 less	is	going	 on	trucks,	 material's	 not	going	 as	far	away,	 it's	just	better	 for	the	environment.	 And	 from 	
a	community-	 building	 standpoint	 more	 of	the	resources	 that	are	in	the	community	 stay	there	 instead	 of	going 	
somewhere	else.	(David,	NYCCP,	Brooklyn)
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

540 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
Community	 composting	 brings	 people	 into	contact	 with	 a	diverse	 set	of	materialities,	 including	 soil,	 worms,	 microbes, 	
chickens,	 goats,	 sweaty	 bodies,	 food	 scraps,	 bins,	 bicycles	 and	tricycles,	 shovels	 and	pitchforks,	 trucks,	 blowers,	 tarps,	 ther-
mometers,	 and	the	mix	of	ingredients	 called	 browns	 (dry,	 carbon)	 and	greens	 (wet,	 nitrogen)	 that	make	 up	compost.	 Keeping 	
these	 organic	 materials	 local,	 by	redistributing	 the	benefits	 of	compost	 to	urban	 food	 growing,	 trees,	 and	soils,	 offers	 a	way	
of	“closing	 the	loop”	 or	at	least	 ensuring	 that	the	benefits	 and	responsibilities	 for	such	 resources	 are	shared	 locally	 and	not	
transformed	into	burdens	elsewhere.
Public	 organic	 food	 waste	 collection	 for	community	 composting	 also	 stages	 new	 encounters	 that	 bring	 residents	 into	
contact	 with	 the	diverse	 materialities	 that	 make	 up	their	 organic	 waste	 stream.	 Rather	 than	 hiding	 organic	 waste	 at	the	
bottom	 of	the	bin,	community	 composting	 celebrates	 food	 scraps	 and	the	people	 who	 donate	 them.	 At	farmers	 markets	
and	compost	 drop- 	offs	across	 the	city,	 people	 can	be	found	 hanging	 out,	talking	 trash,	 depositing	 their	 frozen	 food	 scrap	
sculptures,	 and	critically	 reflecting	 on	the	consumption	 habits	 that	led	to	them	 standing	 there	 red-	handed	 with	 a	bag	full	
of	mouldy	strawberries	from	halfway	around	the	world.
And	 then	 you	have	 folks	 that	 are	like	giving	 us	like	whole	 frozen	 strawberries	 because	 they	 just	like	think	
it's	bad.	 It	would	 normally	 go	in	their	 garbage	 but	they're	 putting	 it	in	there	 and	they're	 like,	 "I	feel	so	much	
better	 about	 that."	 And	 then	 it	allows	 a	time	 for	reflection	 because	 it's	almost	 like	when	 you	go	like	for	con-
fession.	 It's	like	you	"come	 to	the	toter	 [bin]"	 and	you	see	what	 you're	 putting	 in	there,	 and	if	we're	 there	 we	
get	to	engage	with	you	–	 	"Hey,	thanks,	what's	this?	Oh,	wow.	Okay."	(NYCCP	staff,	Queens)
Food	 scrap	 donation	 can	be	a	moment	 for	confessing	 our	food	 waste	 sins,	 providing	 a	sense	 of	relief 	(Ames	 &	Cook,	 2020). 	
But	it	is	also	a	chance	 for	exchange,	 education,	 and	reflection.	 Participants	 might	 take	 home	 a	neglected	 plant	 or	even	 food	
that	looks	OK,	or	trade	advice	on	how	to	use	up	ingredients	and	food	scraps	in	the	kitchen.
One	 of	the	critical	 roles	 of	community	 composting,	 especially	 in	the	eyes	 of	the	city,	 is	community	 education	 and	
engagement.	 One	 of	the	primary	 modes	 of	engagement	 is	volunteering.	 Volunteers	 come	 to	compost	 sites	 to	be	with	 the	
waste,	 compost,	 and	soil	and	get	their	 hands	 dirty,	 creating	 visceral	 contexts	 for	engagement	 with	 food	 and	the	material-
ities	 of	food	 becoming	 compost	 (Ames	 &	Cook,	 2020).	 Rather	 than	 disappearing	 our	waste	 through	 kerb- 	side	collections	
which	 ultimately	 ends	 up,	out	of	sight	 and	mind,	 in	a	landfill,	 incinerator	 or	anaerobic	 digester,	 community	 composting	
allows	 people	 to	participate	 in	the	diverse	 economy	 of	composting.	 In	Brooklyn,	 the	process	 starts	 with	 dumping	 out	a	
bin	of	food	 scraps,	 onto	 a	base	 of	browns	 (wood	 chips,	 leaves).	 Volunteers	 wear	 rubberised	 gloves	 and	sort	through	 the	
colourful	 and	putrid	 collection	 by	hand	 to	remove	 plastic	 bags	 and	elastics,	 and	break	 up	large	 objects,	 like	watermelon	
rinds,	 using	 a	spade.	 Stomping,	 squishing,	 smashing	 and	generally	 mucking	 around	 in	decay	 seems	 to	satisfy	 a	desire	
for	play	 for	those	 involved.	 Playing	 with	 food	 waste	 (Turner,	 2019)	 is	a	form	 of	sensuous	 and	passionate	 immersion	 (Van	
Dooren	 et	al.,	2016),	 through	 which	 participants	 come	 to	love	 rather	 than	 fear	the	vitality	 of	compost.	 The	windrow	 pile	
is	then	 built	 up	and	up,	with	 layers	 of	browns	 and	finished	 compost	 to	seal	it	off	from	 the	ever-	 present	 threat	 of	rats	and	
seagulls.	 The	 materialities	 of	living	 with	 organic	 waste	 in	a	densely	 populated	 city	create	 new	 encounters	 with	 urban	
nature,	some	desirable,	others	less	so.
At	the	Brooklyn	 site,	 more	 than	 2000	 volunteers	 are	involved	 in	composting	 each	 year.	 Many	 are	drawn	 to	the	site	
through	 the	online	 platform	 NYCares	 –	 	out	of	curiosity	 and	 a	desire	 to	act	against	 climate	 change.	 Others	 come	 for	
the	pleasure	 and	conviviality	 of	composting	 with	 others.	 Hand-	 turning	 compost	 is	fast	spreading	 as	the	best	 free	work 	
out	in	Brooklyn.	 Care	 for	community	 and	planet	 is	certainly	 one	motivation	 for	volunteering,	 but	for	many	 it	is	not	
the	main	 reason	 for	showing	 up,	at	least	 not	initially.	 It	is	through	 the	embodied	 labours	 of	composting	 that	 volun-
teers	 come	 to	come	 care	 about	 compost,	 soil,	 waste	 management	 systems,	 food	 waste,	 worms,	 and	their	 more-	 than- 	
human	 composting	 companions.	 Numerous	 composters	 described	 this	as	a	process	 of	“falling	 in	love”	 with	 compost. 	
When	 compost	 services	 were	 cut	by	the	mayor,	 composters	 expressed	 pain	 and	 “heartbreak”	 when	 they	 thought	 of	
their	food	scraps	going	to	landfill.
The	“slow	 compost”	 approach,	 where	 annually	 225+	 tons	 of	compost	 are	processed	 entirely	 by	hand,	 is	a	deliberate	
nod	to	the	sensuous	 visceral	 encounters	 that	slow	 food	 stages,	 as	sites	 for	realising	 new	 relations	 to	our	local	 food	 system	
through	 the	body	 (Buckel,	 2013;	 Hayes- 	Conroy	 &	Hayes- 	Conroy,	 2010).	 Visceral	 encounters	 with	 the	materiality	 of	or-
ganic	 waste	 can	also	be	transformative.	 These	 encounters	 offer	 opportunities	 for	what	 Hawkins	 and	Potter	 describe	 as	“a	
kind	 of	intimacy	 and	enchantment	 with	 the	sensuousness	 and	vitality	 of	rubbish”	 (2006,	 p.	111).	 When	 such	 encounters	
occur	 at	the	community	 compost	 sites,	 volunteers	 are	described	 as	“jazzed”	 and	 overcoming	 revulsion	 and	 disgust	 to	
make	 space	 for	curiosity	 and	wonder,	 as	David	 recalls,	 “oh,	 this	isn't	 yucky.	 Oh,	this	is	wonderful.”	 The	affective	 swerve	
from	 yuck	 to	wonderful	 we	observed	 in	community	 composting	 contrasts	 with	 Ames	 and	Cook	 (2020),	 who	 find	 that	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 541
MORROW and DAVIES
households	 involved	 in	composting	 are	debilitated	 by	their	 visceral	 reactions	 of	disgust	 towards	 the	presence	 of	decay	 in	
their	 otherwise	 clean	 and	sanitary	 homes.	 This	 points	 to	the	importance	 that	 a	public	 and	convivial	 setting	 may	 play	 in	
stimulating	 play,	 experimentation,	 and	curiosity	 around	 social	 norms	 of	engagement	 with	 food	 waste.	 As	suggested	 by	
Rankin	 (2019),	 it	is	possible	 to	feel	mixed	 emotions	 in	our	visceral	 engagements	 with	 compost;	 emotions	 can	ebb	and	flow	
over	 time	 and	across	 different	 spaces.	 Acknowledging	 this	complexity	 would	 mean	 designing	 compost	 opportunities	 that	
invite	a	diversity	of 	bodies,	emotions,	and	affective	states.
To	make	 time	 for	these	 visceral	 encounters,	 inefficiency	 is	deliberately	 cultivated.	 David	 refused	 to	adopt	 labour-	
saving	 technologies	 (such	 as	skid	 steers)	 that	 many	 of	his	colleagues	 around	 the	city	have	 brought	 into	 their	 operations.	
He	viewed	 such	 technologies	 as	an	unnecessary	 use	of	fossil	 fuels,	 requiring	 too	much	 maintenance	 and	safety	 training,	
and	creating	 barriers	 to	community	 engagement.	 David	 was	also	very	 passionate	 about	 the	sustainability	 lessons	 we	can	
learn	from	the	labour	of 	community	composting	and	the	physicality	of 	care.
One	 of	the	challenges	 for	developing	 sustainable	 practices,	 whether	 it's	recovering	 organic	 material	 for	the	
purposes	 of	making	 compost	 or	whether	 it's	more	 generally	 making	 sure	 that	 the	negative	 impact	 you	have	
on	other	human	beings	and	the	Earth	is	more	minimal.	 Talking	about	it	is	so	easy.	(David)
To	reflect	 this	priority,	 everything	 in	Brooklyn	 is	done	 carefully	 by	hand,	 creating	 intentionally	 slow,	 artisanal,	 and	
physically	 demanding	 systems.	 Year	 round,	 10–	30	volunteers	 turn	 up	Saturdays	 to	turn,	 move,	 and	sift	tons	 of	compost, 	
with	 pitchfork,	 wheelbarrow,	 shovel,	 and	screens.	 Where	 other	 compost	 operations	 use	a	machine	 sifter,	 this	operation 	
has	a	screen	 frame	 that	 hangs	 over	 wheelbarrows.	 Finished	 compost	 is	used	 on	the	farm	 or	bagged	 and	 delivered	 to	
community	 greening	 projects.	 During	 sifting,	 people	 of	all	ages	 and	backgrounds	 stand	 shoulder	 to	shoulder,	 listening 	
to	hip	hop,	and	gently	pushing	finished	compost	through	the	screen.	During	this	process	we	pick	out	fruit	stickers	and 	
elastics	 which	 failed	 to	decompose	 and	 hand	 rescue	 the	worms.	 The	 worms	 are	returned	 to	live	in	a	new	 pile.	 This	
slow	 time	 was	a	much-	 needed	 opportunity	 for	us	to	escape	 the	heat	 of	the	day,	 pause,	 and	reflect	 on	our	lives	 together 	
and	share	 anxieties	 about	 what	 was	coming	 “next”	 –	 	whether	 it	was	climate	 change,	 the	end	of	school	 or	work,	 or	an	
apartment	lease.
Through	 slow	 composting,	 the	physical	 and	bodily	 burden	 of	“taking	 care”	 of	one's	 own	 community's	 waste	 is	expe -
rienced.	 The	weight	 of	this	waste	 is	literally	 on	our	shoulders,	 backs,	 and	knees,	 and	carrying	 it	forces	 our	bodies	 to	slow	
down	 and	make	 time	 for	composting,	 a	necessary	 labour	 of	soil	care	 (Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 2015),	 by	cultivating	 attentive -
ness	(Krzywoszynska,	2019)	toward	composting	processes	and	waste	itself.
5.5	|	Visibility, values, and the precarious benefits of community composting for a 
circular economy
The	 previous	 sub-	sections	 have	 illustrated	 how	 community	 composting,	 in	its	diverse	 organisational	 forms,	 works	 by	
engendering	 a	suite	 of	material	 interactions	 with	 food	 waste,	 compost,	 soil,	 and	technologies.	 By	doing	 so,	NYCCP	 pro-
vides	 far	more	 than	 a	service	 for	the	collection	 and	management	 of	food	 waste.	 In	direct	 contrast	 to	the	commercial	 and	
municipal	 kerb-	 side	collection	 of	organic	 waste	 and	the	mega-	 facility	 composting	 infrastructures	 which	 are	exacerbating	
socio-	 environmental	 injustices,	 community	 composting	 ensures	 the	value	 of	end-	of-	life	food	 remains	 within	 the	territo-
rial	communities	 that	 create	 it.	Community	 composting	 provides	 material	 sustenance	 for	soils	 in	community	 gardens	
and	other	 spaces	 that	 embody	 a	circular	 and	regenerative	 approach	 to	food	 production	 and	consumption	 (Davies,	 2020).	
It	also	 facilitates	 the	re-	enchantment	 of	waste	 through	 multisensory	 engagements	 with	 more-	 than-	 human	 others	 in	the	
vital	 and	valuable	 processes	 of	organic	 decomposition.	 Essentially,	 the	diverse	 economies	 of	community	 composting	 and	
the	material	 interactions	 it	fosters	 combine	 to	generate	 positive	 economic,	 environmental,	 and,	 particularly,	 social	 trans-
formations	 within	 the	sites	 of	community	 composting	 and	their	 environs	 which	 exceed	 conventional	 waste	 management	
across	multiple	dimensions.
However,	 this	reading	 of	the	multivalent	 benefits	 and	values	 of	community	 composting	 only	 counts	 if	it	is	part	 of	
evaluative	 mechanisms.	 It	is	widely	 documented	 that	 municipal	 waste	 management,	 including	 food	 waste,	 has	ele-
vated	 material	 and	economic	 efficiency	 as	the	main	 metrics	 of	evaluation	 (Davies	 &	O'Callaghan-	 Platt,	 2008).	 While 	
circular	 economy	 narratives	 potentially	 offer	 the	opportunity	 to	look	 beyond	 these	 arenas	 of	value,	 to	date	 interpreta-
tions	 have	 tended	 to	focus	 on	how	 circularising	 economies	 can	support	 the	extraction	 of	even	 more	 economic	 value 	
from	 existing	 systems	 (Gregson	 et	al.,	2015).	 Political	 commitments	 on	the	part	 of	governments	 (when	 viewed	 as	a	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

542 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
singular	 institutional	 organism)	 remain	 wedded	 to	the	primacy	 of	the	market,	 even	 within	 recent	 conceptions	 of	a	
green	 new	 deal	 (Galvin	 &	Healy,	 2020).	Yet,	 as	this	paper	 has	shown,	 it	is	possible	 to	do	things	 differently	 at	a	more 	
cellular	 level	 within	 the	organism	 of	government	 and	for	diverse	 economies	 of	composting	 to	co-	exist.	 Nonetheless 	
this	is	a	precarious	 co-	existence,	 as	illustrated	 by	the	2020	 budget	 cuts.	 Yet,	as	Gregson	 et	al.	(2015)	 note,	 the	diversity 	
of	interpretations	 of	circular	 economies	 means	 that	 there	 are	inevitably	 collisions	 of	morality,	 materiality,	 and	mar-
ket	logics	that	create	political	contestation.
At	the	time	 of	fieldwork,	 community	 composting	 in	NYC	 was	a	site	of	diverse	 economic	 practice	 and	material	 trans -
formation,	 transforming	 waste	 and	decay	 into	life.	It	illustrated	 diverse	 economic	 models	 that	help	 redistribute	 the	bene -
fits	and	burdens	 of	these	 transformations	 in	more	 just	and	sustainable	 ways.	 Importantly,	 community	 composting	 creates	
sites	 for	social	 transformations,	 from	 the	affective,	 emotional,	 and	visceral	 engagements	 with	 waste	 becoming	 compost	
that	 makes	 participants	 feel	enlivened,	 to	the	personal	 and	ethical	 reflections	 on	the	daily	 practices,	 habits,	 and	wider	
systems	 of	provisioning	 that	generate	 waste.	 The	simple	 act	of	“sorting”	 food	 waste,	 prior	 to	composting	 it,	can	be	a	start-
ing	place	 for	reflection.	 At	the	neighbourhood	 level,	 community	 composting	 is	enrolled	 in	all	kinds	 of	transformations,	
from	 growing	 food,	 to	taking	 care	 of	trees,	 to	bringing	 people	 together	 to	negotiate	 collective	 responsibility	 for	their	
compost.	 Community	 composting	 is	also	 a	place	 where,	 unsurprisingly,	 people	 build	 community.	 Making	 the	“compost	
connection”	 as	many	 interviewees	 referred	 to	the	process	 of	closing	 the	loop	 between	 waste,	 resources,	 and	food,	 is	about	
much	 more	 than	 returning	 nutrients	 to	the	soil.	 It	is	about	 connecting	 by	doing	 this	work	 together.	 The	collective	 action	
of	caring	 for	compost	 together,	 or	the	sense	 of	accomplishment	 one	feels	 after	 turning	 300	pounds	 of	food	 waste	 by	hand,	
can	generate	discussions	of 	enacting	wider	changes	together.
Holding	 space	 for	these	 practices,	 keeping	 them	 funded,	 and	drafting	 policies	 that	 protect	 and	incentivise	 them	 are	
the	result	 of	decades	 of	collective	 action	 by	citizens	 groups	 such	 as	SWAB	 and	the	citizens	 committee	 for	New	 York,	 en-
vironmental	 justice	 and	waste	 advocacy	 groups,	 composters,	 gardeners,	 and	their	 city	council	 representatives.	 Collective	
action	 that,	 in	light	 of	the	COVID-	 19	pandemic,	 is	needed	 more	 than	 ever	 if	the	processes	 are	to	survive	 austerity	 mea-
sures	in	NYC.
6	|	CONCLUSION
This	 paper	 has	illustrated	 how	 community	 composting	 in	the	NYCCP	 creates	 connections	 through	 diverse	 economic	
practices	 and	new	 socio-	 material	 interactions	 between	 people	 and	organic	 food	 waste.	 To	understand	 these	 interactions	
and	address	 a	scientific	 gap	concerning	 the	social	 dimensions	 of	circular	 economy	 we	have	 developed	 the	perspective	 of	
careful	 circularity.	 This	 approach	 privileges	 the	multispecies	 doing	 of	care,	 and	can	help	 researchers	 attend	 to	social,	 ma-
terial,	 and	affective	 relations	 and	transformations	 in	circular	 economy	 projects.	 Community	 composting	 creates	 time	 and	
space	 for	cultivating	 an	ethics	 of	care	 toward	 organic	 waste,	 human	 and	more-	 than-	 human	 others,	 shifting	 subjectivities,	
as	well	as	everyday	waste	practices.
However,	 these	 transformations	 currently	 fly	below	 the	radar	 of	a	regime	 seeking	 economic	 growth	 and	 effi-
ciency.	 Having	 identified	 the	type	 of	benefits	 that	 community	 composting	 generates,	 we	believe	 it	is	important	 to	
examine	 more	 closely	 what	 it	would	 mean	 to	develop	 a	system	 of	governance	 that	 is	able	 to	build	 these	 benefits	 into	
evaluations	 of	policy	 and	 practice.	 In	particular,	 the	practicalities	 of	implementing	 a	care	 ethics	 approach,	 and	 the	
multispecies	 alliances	 and	sensitivities	 it	will	 demand,	 should	 be	articulated	 in	greater	 detail	 in	future	 work.	 Given 	
the	nature	 of	benefits	 around	 care	 and	 circularity,	 this	 will	 need	 to	be	more	 than	 a	technical	 matter	 of	methodol-
ogies	 and	 must	 involve	 wider	 consideration	 of	value	 and	 judgement.	 Such	 value	 judgements	 are	not	absent	 from 	
existing	 systems,	 but	they	 are	rarely	 explicit.	 However,	 we	agree	 with	 Hinrichs	 (2014)	 that	 explicit	 examination	 of	
power,	 politics,	 and	 governance,	 which	 collectively	 shape	 the	allocation	 of	value,	 is	necessary	 to	get	to	the	bottom 	
of	injustice	 in	food	 systems.	 Foundational	 questions	 regarding	 values	 and	 ethics	 must	 accompany	 questions	 about 	
who	 gets	 to	shape	 and	operationalise	 governing	 systems	 and	interpretations	 of	sustainability	 (Smith	 &	Stirling,	 2010;	
Thompson,	2010).
Supporting	 transitions	 towards	 more	 careful	 circularities	 means	 grappling	 with	 messy,	 complex,	 and	 contested 	
criteria	 that	 are	not	easily	 identified	 or	captured	 by	existing	 rationalities	 and	technologies	 of	food	 waste	 governance. 	
Community	 composting,	 as	practised	 in	NYC	 and	articulated	 in	this	paper,	 provides	 an	actually	 existing	 demonstra-
tion	 of	the	kinds	 of	positive	 effects	 and	 affects	 that	 can	be	generated.	 However,	 without	 changes	 in	wider	 systems 	
of	food	 and	 waste	 governance	 and	 environmental	 ethics,	 these	 impacts	 will	 go	unnoticed	 and	 uncounted.	 We	sense 	
the	stirrings	 of	these	 changes	 in	the	compost	 pile,	 and	 welcome	 further	 research	 on	the	numerous	 ways	 in	which 	
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 543
MORROW and DAVIES
multispecies	 care,	 play,	 and	attentiveness	 are	opening	 up	pathways	 for	more	 joyful,	 responsive,	 and	environmentally 	
just	approaches	to	sustainability.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We	dedicate	 this	paper	 to	the	memory	 of	David	 Buckel	 and	all	of	the	people,	 food	 scraps,	 and	soils	 he	cared	 for.	We	thank	
all	of	the	interviewees	 who	 generously	 shared	 their	 passion	 and	expertise	 in	composting.	 Parts	 of	this	manuscript	 were	
written	 at	the	2019	 Community	 Economies	 Research	 and	Writing	 Retreat	 at	Punti	 di	Vista	 and	the	support	 of	the	Julie	
Graham	 Community	 Economies	 Research	 Fellowship	 is	gratefully	 acknowledged.	 The	 research	 on	which	 this	paper	 is	
based	 is	part	 of	SHARECITY,	 which	 was	funded	 by	the	European	 Research	 Council	 (ERC)	 under	 the	European	 Union's	
Horizon	 2020	 research	 and	innovation	 programme	 (grant	 agreement	 no.	646883).	 We	thank	 the	reviewers	 for	their	 gener-
ous	feedback	and	excellent	suggestions.	All	errors	remain	our	own.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The	 data	 that	 support	 the	findings	 of	this	study	 are	available	 on	request	 from	 the	corresponding	 author,	 OM.	 The	 data	
are	not	publicly	 available	 due	to	restrictions,	 e.g.,	 their	 containing	 information	 that	 could	 compromise	 the	privacy	 of	
research	participants.
ORCID
Oona Morrow  	https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0434-8923	
REFERENCES
Abrahamsson,	 S.	&	Bertoni,	 F.	(2014)	 Compost	 politics:	 experimenting	 with	 togetherness	 in	vermicomposting.	 Environmental Humanities,	
4(1),	125–	 148.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1215/22011	 919-	3614962
Adhikari,	 B.K.,	 Trémier,	 A.,	Martinez,	 J.	&	Barrington,	 S.	(2010)	 Home	 and	community	 composting	 for	on-	site	treatment	 of	urban	 organic	 waste:	
perspective	 for	Europe	 and	Canada.	 Waste Management and Research,	 28(11),	 1039–	 1053.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1177/07342	
42X10	 373801
Ames,	 E.	&	Cook,	 A.	(2020)	 Food	 becoming	 compost:	 encountering	 and	negotiating	 disgust	 in	household	 sustainability.	 Australian Geographer,	
51(3),	325–	 339.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/00049	 182.2020.1786944
Baptista,	 A.I.	(2018)	 Residential	 curbside	 organic	 waste	 collection	 program:	 innovation	 for	sustainability.	 In:	D’Almeida,	 A.C.	 (Ed.)	 Smarter 
New York City: how city agencies innovate.	 New	 York,	 NY:	Columbia	 University	 Press,	 pp.	181–	 203.	Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.7312/
dalm1	 8374
Beacham,	 J.	(2018)	 Organising	 food	 differently:	 towards	 a	more-	 than-	 human	 ethics	 of	care	 for	the	Anthropocene.	 Organization,	 25(4),	 533–	 549.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/13505	 08418	 777893
Boldrin,	 A.,	Andersen,	 J.K.,	 Møller,	J.,	Christensen,	 T.H.	 &	Favoino,	 E.	(2009)	 Composting	 and	compost	 utilization:	 accounting	 of	greenhouse	
gases	 and	global	 warming	 contributions.	 Waste Management and Research,	 27(8),	 800–	 812.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1177/07342	
42X09	 345275
Buckel,	D.	(2013)	 Why	big	and	small	organics	recyclers	need	each	other.	BioCycle,	54,	1–	 5.
Cameron,	 J.	&	Gibson- 	Graham,	 J.K.	(2003)	 Feminising	 the	economy:	 metaphors,	 strategies,	 politics.	 Gender, Place and Culture,	 10(2),	 145–	 157.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/09663	 69032	 00007	 9569
Cameron,	 J.,	Manhood,	 C.	&	Pomfrett,	 J.	(2011)	 Bodily	 learning	 for	a	(climate)	 changing	 world:	 registering	 differences	 through	 performative	
and	collective	research.	Local Environment,	16(6),	493–	 508.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/13549	 839.2011.573473
Cardoso,	 J.	(2018)	 The	circular	 economy:	 historical	 grounds.	 In:	Delicado,	 A.,	Domingos,	 N.	&	de	Sousa,	 L.	(Eds.)	 Changing societies: legacies 
and challenges. Vol. iii. The diverse worlds of sustainability.	 Lisbon,	 Portugal:	 Imprensa	 de	Ciências	 Sociais,	 pp.	115–	 127.	 Available	 from:	
https://doi.org/10.31447/	 ics97	 89726	 715054.04
Citizens	 Budget	 Commission.	 (2016)	 Can we have our cake and compost it too: an analysis of organic waste diversion in New York City.	 Available	
from:	https://cbcny.org/resea	 rch/can- 	we-	have- 	our-	cake-	 and- 	compo	 st-	it-	too	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
City	 of	New	 York.	 (2011)	 PlaNYC: update April 2011.	 Available	 from:	 http://www.nyc.gov/html/plany 	c/downl	 oads/pdf/publi	 catio	 ns/
planyc_2011_planyc_full_report.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
City	 of	New	 York.	 (2014)	 PlaNYC: progress report 2014.	 Available	 from:	 http://www.nyc.gov/html/plany 	c2030/	 downl	 oads/pdf/140422_PlaNY	
CP-	Report_FINAL_Web.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
City	 of	New	 York.	 (2015)	 One New York: the plan for a strong and just city.	 Available	 from:	 http://www.nyc.gov/html/oneny 	c/downl	 oads/pdf/
publi	 catio	 ns/OneNYC.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
City	of 	New	 York.	(2016)	OneNYC 2016 progress report.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1007/s1339	 8-	014-	0173-	 7.2
City	 of	New	 York.	 (2021)	 A recovery for all of us: mayor De Blasio announces return of curbside composting, major expansions of community 
composting, reuse, and hazardous waste disposal programs.	 Available	 from:	 https://www1.nyc.gov/offic	 e-	of-	the-	mayor/	 news/294-	 21/
recov 	ery-	all-	us-	mayor 	-	de-	blasi	 o-	retur	 n-	curbs	 ide-	compo	 sting 	-	major 	-	expan	 sions	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

544 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
City	 of	New	 York:	 NYC	 Food	 Policy.	 (2016)	 Food metrics report 2016.	 Available	 from:	 http://www1.nyc.gov/asset	 s/foodp	 olicy/	 downl	 oads/
pdf/2016-	 Food-	 Metri	 cs-	Report.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
City	 of	New	 York:	 NYC	 Mayor’s	 Office	 of	Sustainability.	 (2016)	 New York City’s Roadmap to 80x50.	 Available	 from:	 http://www1.nyc.
gov/asset	 s/susta	 inabi	 lity/downl	 oads/pdf/publi	 catio	 ns/NewYo	 rkCit	 y’sRoad	 mapto	 80x50_20160	 926_FORWE	 Bpdf 	[Accessed	 15th	 Oct	
2021].
Clark,	N.	(2015)	 The	business	of 	community	composting.	BioCycle,	56,	no.1	(January	2015),	32.
Davies,	 A.R.	 (2012)	 Geography	 and	the	matter	 of	waste	 mobilities.	 Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,	 37(2),	 191–	 196.	 Available	
from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-	 5661.2011.00472.x
Davies,	A.R.	(2019)	Urban food sharing.	Bristol:	Policy	Press.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvkj	 b30n
Davies,	 A.R.	 (2020)	 Food	 sharing.	 In:	Duncan,	 J.,	Carolan,	 M.	&	Wiskerke,	 J.S.C.	 (Eds.)	 Routledge handbook of sustainable and regenerative food 
systems.	London:	Routledge,	pp.	204-	 217.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.4324/97804	 29466823
Davies,	 A.R.	 &	O‘Callaghan-	 Platt,	 A.	(2008)	 Does	 money	 talk?	 Waste	 charging	 in	the	Republic	 of	Ireland:	 government,	 governance	 and	
performance.	 Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning,	 10(3),	 271–	 287.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1080/15239	 08080 	
2242753
Dimpfl,	 M.	&	Moran,	 S.	(2014)	 Waste	 matters:	 compost,	 domestic	 practice,	 and	 the	transformation	 of	alternative	 toilet	 cultures	 around	
Skaneateles	 Lake,	 New	 York.	 Environment and Planning D: Society and Space,	 32(4),	 721–	 738.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1068/
d15112
DSNY.	 (2006)	 Comprehensive solid waste management plan: executive summary.	 Available	 from:	 https://dsny.cityo	 fnewy 	ork.us/wp- 	conte	 nt/
uploa	 ds/2017/12/about_swmp_exec_summa	 ry_0815.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
DSNY.	 (2012)	 Local Law 42: a 2012 assessment of composting opportunities in NYC.	 Available	 from:	 https://dsny.cityo	 fnewy 	ork.us/wp- 	conte	 nt/
uploa	 ds/2017/12/about_2012-	 asses	 sment 	-	of-	compo	 sting 	-	oppor	 tunit	 ies_0815.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
DSNY.	 (2015)	 2014 NYC community composting report.	 Available	 from:	 https://dsny.cityo	 fnewy 	ork.us/wp- 	conte	 nt/uploa	 ds/2017/12/
about_2014- 	commu	 nity- 	compo	 sting 	-	repor	 t-	LL77_0815.pdf 	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
DSNY.	 (2020)	 Community composting.	 Available	 from:	 https://www1.nyc.gov/asset	 s/dsny/site/our- 	work/reduc	 e-	reuse 	-	recyc	 le/commu	 nity-	
compo	 sting	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
DSNY 	Bureau	 of	Waste	 Prevention,	 Reuse	 and	 Recycling	 (2001)	 Composting	 in	New	 York	 City	 -	 	A	complete	 program	 history.	 Available 	
from:	 https://dsny.cityo	 fnewy 	ork.us/wp- 	conte	 nt/uploa	 ds/2017/12/about_2001- 	compo	 sting 	-	in-	nyc_0815.pdf 	[Accessed	 15th	 Oct	
2021].
Ellen	 Macarthur	 Foundation.	 (2012)	 Towards the circular economy Vol.1: economic and business rationale for a circular economy.	 Cowes:	
Ellen Macarthur	Foundation.
Evans,	 D.	(2012)	 Beyond	 the	throwaway	 society:	 ordinary	 domestic	 practice	 and	a	sociological	 approach	 to	household	 food	 waste.	 Sociology,	
46(1),	43–	 45.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/00380	 38511	 416150
FADA.	 (2020)	 Feminist degrowth reflections on COVID- 19 and the politics of social reproduction.	 Available	 from:	 https://www.degro	 wth.
info/en/2020/04/femin	 ist-	degro	 wth- 	colla	 borat	 ive-	fada-	 refle	 ction	 s-	on-	the-	covid	 -	19-	pande	 mic-	 and-	 the-	polit	 ics-	of-	socia	 l-	repro	 ducti	 on/	
[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Fisher,	B.	&	 Tronto,	J.	(1990)	 Toward	a	feminist	theory	of 	caring.	In:	Abel,	E.E.	&	Nelson,	M.	(Eds.)	Circles of care.	Albany,	NY:	SUNY 	Press.
Fratini,	 C.F.,	 Georg,	 S.	&	Jorgensen,	 M.S.	 (2019)	 Exploring	 circular	 economy	 imaginaries	 in	European	 cities:	 a	research	 agenda	 for	the	gov-
ernance	 of	urban	 sustainability	 transitions.	 Journal of Cleaner Production,	 228,	 974–	 989.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclep	
ro.2019.04.193
Friant,	 M.C.,	 Vermeulen,	 W.J.	 &	Salomone,	 R.	(2020)	 A	typology	 of	circular	 economy	 discourses:	 navigating	 the	diverse	 visions	 of	a	contested	
paradigm.	Resources, Conservation and Recycling,	161,	104917.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resco	 nrec.2020.104917
Galvin,	 R.	&	Healy,	 N.	(2020)	 The	Green	 New	 Deal	 in	the	United	 States:	 what	 it	is	and	how	 to	pay	for	it.	Energy Research and Social Science,	 67,	
101529.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101529
Gibson- 	Graham,	 J.K.	 (2008)	 Diverse	 economies:	 performative	 practices	 for	‘other	 worlds’.	 Progress in Human Geography,	 32(5),	 613–	 632.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/03091	 32508	 090821
Gibson- 	Graham,	 J.K.	&	Dombroski,	 K.	(2020)	 The handbook of diverse economies.	 Northampton,	 MA:	 Edward	 Elgar.	 Available	 from:	 https://
doi.org/10.4337/97817	 88119962
Ginn,	 F.	(2014)	 Sticky	 lives:	 slugs,	 detachment	 and	more-	 than-	 human	 ethics	 in	the	garden.	 Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,	
39(4),	532–	 544.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12043
Goldenberg,	 S.	&	Muoio,	 D.	(2020,	 January	 7).	Wasted	 Potential:	 New	 York	 City’s	 food	 recycling	 failures	 exacerbate	 climate	 crisis.	 POLITICO,	
1–	6.	Available	 from:	 https://www.polit	 ico.com/state	 s/new- 	york/city-	 hall/story/	 2020/01/07/waste	 d-	poten	 tial-	new- 	york- 	citys 	-	food-	 recyc	
ling-	 failu	 res-	exace	 rbate 	-	clima	 te-	crisi	s-	1237743	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Gregson,	 N.	&	Crang,	 M.	(2010)	 Materiality	 and	waste:	 inorganic	 vitality	 in	a	networked	 world.	 Environment and Planning A: economy and 
Space,	42,	1026–	 1032.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1068/a43176
Gregson,	 N.,	Crang,	 M.,	Fuller,	 S.	&	Holmes,	 H.	(2015)	 Interrogating	 the	circular	 economy:	 the	moral	 economy	 of	resource	 recovery	 in	the	EU.	
Economy and Society,	44,	218–	 243.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/03085	 147.2015.1013353
Hawkins,	G.	(2006)	The ethics of waste: how we relate to rubbish.	Oxford:	Rowman	&	Littlefield.
Hawkins,	G.	&	Potter,	E.	(2006)	 Waste	matter:	potatoes,	thing-	 power	and	biosociality.	Cultural Studies Review,	12(1),	104–	 115.
Hayes- 	Conroy,	 A.	(2010)	 Feeling	 slow	 food:	 visceral	 fieldwork	 and	empathetic	 research	 relations	 in	the	alternative	 food	 movement.	 Geoforum,	
41(5),	734–	 742.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geofo	 rum.2010.04.005
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

   | 545
MORROW and DAVIES
Hayes- 	Conroy,	 A.	&	Hayes- 	Conroy,	 J.	(2010)	 Visceral	 difference:	 variations	 in	feeling	 (slow)	 food.	 Environment and Planning A: economy and 
Space,	42(12),	2956–	 2971.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1068/a4365
Hinrichs,	 C.C.	 (2014)	 Transitions	 to	sustainability:	 a	change	 in	thinking	 about	 food	 systems	 change?	 Agriculture and Human Values,	 31,	143–	
155.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1007/s1046	 0-	014-	9479-	 5
Hird,	 M.J.	 (2013)	 Waste,	 landfills,	 and	an	environmental	 ethic	 of	vulnerability.	 Ethics and the Environment,	 18(1),	 105–	 124.	 Available	 from:	
https://doi.org/10.1353/een.2013.0005
Hird,	 M.J.,	 Lougheed,	 S.,	Rowe,	 R.K.	 &	Kuyvenhoven,	 C.	(2014)	 Making	 waste	 management	 public	 (or	falling	 back	 to	sleep).	 Social Studies of 
Science,	44(3),	441–	 465.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/03063	 12713	 518835
Hobson,	 K.	(2016)	 Closing	 the	loop	 or	squaring	 the	circle?	 Locating	 generative	 spaces	 for	the	circular	 economy.	 Progress in Human Geography,	
40(1),	88–	 104.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/03091	 32514	 566342
Hobson,	 K.	&	Lynch,	 N.	(2016)	 Diversifying	 and	de-	growing	 the	circular	 economy:	 radical	 social	 transformation	 in	a	resource- 	scarce	 world.	
Futures,	82,	15–	 25.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futur 	es.2016.05.012
Holmes,	 H.	(2018)	 New	 spaces,	 ordinary	 practices:	 circulating	 and	sharing	 within	 diverse	 economies	 of	provisioning.	 Geoforum,	 88,	138–	 147.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geofo	 rum.2017.11.022
ILSR.	(2020)	Available	from:	https://ilsr.org/compo	 sting/	 what-	 is-	commu	 nity- 	compo	 sting/	[Accessed	8th	March	2020]
Ingrao,	 C.,	Faccilongo,	 N.,	Di	Gioia,	 L.	&	Messineo,	 A.	(2018)	 Food	 waste	 recovery	 into	energy	 in	a	circular	 economy	 perspective:	 a	comprehen-
sive	review	 of	aspects	 related	 to	plant	 operation	 and	environmental	 assessment.	 Journal of Cleaner Production,	 184,	 869–	 892.	 Available	
from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclep	 ro.2018.02.267
Jurgilevich,	 A.,	Birge,	 T.,	Kentala-	 Lehtonen,	 J.,	Korhonen,	 K.,	Pietikäinen,	 J.,	Saikku,	 L.	et	al.	(2016)	 Transition	 towards	 circular	 economy	 in	
the	food	system.	Sustainability,	8,	69.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.3390/su801	 0069
Kinnunen,	 V.	(2017).	 Bokashi	 composting	 as	a	matrixal	 borderspace.	 In:	Kinnunen,	 V.	(Ed.)	 Valtonen, living ethics in a more- than- human 
world.	Rovaniemi,	Finland:	University	of 	Lapland,	66–	 74.
Krzywoszynska,	 A.	(2019)	 Caring	 for	soil	life	in	the	Anthropocene:	 the	role	of	attentiveness	 in	more-	 than-	 human	 ethics.	 Transactions of the 
Institute of British Geographers,	44(4),	661–	 675.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12293
MacGregor,	S.	(2011)	Beyond mothering earth: ecological citizenship and the politics of care.	 Vancouver,	BC:	UBC	Press.
Martínez,	F.	(2017)	 Waste	is	not	the	end.	For	an	anthropology	of 	care,	maintenance	and	repair.	Social Anthropology,	25(3),	346–	 350.	Available	
from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/1469-	 8676.12436
Mattila,	 M.,	Mesiranta,	 N.,	Närvänen,	 E.,	Koskinen,	 O.	&	Sutinen,	 U.M.	 (2019)	 Dances	 with	 potential	 food	 waste:	 organising	 temporality	 in	
food	waste	reduction	practices.	Time & Society,	28(4),	1619–	 1644.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/09614	 63X18	 784123
Moreau,	 V.,	Sahakian,	 M.,	van	Griethuysen,	 P.	&	Vuille,	 F.	(2017)	 Coming	 full	circle:	 why	 social	 and	institutional	 dimensions	 matter	 for	the	
circular	economy.	Journal of Industrial Ecology,	21(3),	497–	 506.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12598
Morrow,	 O.	(in	press)	 Imagining	 alternative	 waste	 futures	 through	 community	 composting	 in	New	 York	 City.	 In:	Sorkin,	 M.	&	Johnson,	 A.	
(Eds.)	 New York steady state volume 1: homegrown.	 New	 York,	 NY:	Terreform	 Center	 for	Advanced	 Urban	 Research.	 Available	 from:	 http://
www.terre	 form.info/home- 	grown/
Morrow,	 O.	(2021)	 Ball	 jars,	 bacteria,	 and	 labor:	 co-	producing	 nature	 through	 cooperative	 enterprise.	 Food and Foodways,	 29(3),	 264–	 280.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/07409	 710.2021.1943615
Morrow,	 O.	&	Parker,	 B.	(2020)	 Care,	 commoning	 and	collectivity:	 from	 grand	 domestic	 revolution	 to	urban	 transformation.	 Urban Geography,	
41(4),	607–	 624.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/02723	 638.2020.1785258
New	 York	 City	 Environmental	 Justice	 Alliance	 (2020)	 Waste	 equity.	 Available	 from:	 https://www.nyc- 	eja.org/campaigns/solid- 	waste-	 transfer-	
stations/	[Accessed	8th	May	2020].
NRDC.	 (2018)	 New York City is finally cleaning up its commercial garbage industry.	 Available	 from:	 https://www.nrdc.org/stori	 es/new- 	york-	
city-	final	 ly-	clean	 ing-	its-	comme	 rcial	-	garba	 ge-	industry	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
NRDC.	 (2020)	 Press release: NRDC: NYC FY2021 budget cut’s essential sanitation services.	 Available	 from:	 https://www.nrdc.org/media/	
2020/20063	 0-	1	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Pai,	S.,	Ai,	N.	&	Zheng,	 J.	(2019)	 Decentralized	 community	 composting	 feasibility	 analysis	 for	residential	 food	 waste:	 a	Chicago	 case	 study.	
Sustainable Cities and Society,	50,	101683.
Peng,	 W.	&	Pivato,	 A.	(2019)	 Sustainable	 management	 of	digestate	 from	 the	organic	 fraction	 of	municipal	 solid	 waste	 and	food	 waste	 under	
the	concepts	 of	back	 to	earth	 alternatives	 and	circular	 economy.	 Waste and Biomass Valorization,	 10(2),	 465–	 481.	 Available	 from:	 https://
doi.org/10.1007/s1264	 9-	017-	0071-	 2
Pickering,	 L.	(2010)	Toilets,	 bodies,	 selves:	 enacting	 composting	 as	counterculture	 in	Hawai’i.	 Body and Society,	 16(4),	 33–	55.	Available	 from:	
https://doi.org/10.1177/13570	 34X10	 383882
Pitt,	 H.	(2018)	 Questioning	 care	 cultivated	 through	 connecting	 with	 more-	 than-	 human	 communities.	 Social and Cultural Geography,	 19(2),	
253–	 274.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/14649	 365.2016.1275753
Pla-	Julián,	 I.	&	Guevara,	 S.	(2019)	 Is	circular	 economy	 the	key	to	transitioning	 towards	 sustainable	 development?	 Challenges	 from	 the	perspec-
tive	of 	care	ethics.	Futures,	105,	67–	 77.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futur 	es.2018.09.001
Power,	 E.R.	 &	Williams,	 M.J.	 (2020)	 Cities	 of	care:	 a	platform	 for	urban	 geographical	 care	 research.	 Geography Compass,	 14(1),	 e12474.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12474
Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 M.	(2011)	 Matters	 of	care	 in	technoscience:	 assembling	 neglected	 things.	 Social Studies of Science,	 41(1),	 85–	106.	 Available	
from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/03063	 12710	 380301
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

546 |   
MORROW and DAVIES
Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 M.	(2015)	 Making	 time	 for	soil:	 technoscientific	 futurity	 and	the	pace	 of	care.	 Social Studies of Science,	 45(5),	 691–	 716.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/03063	 12715	 599851
Puig	 de	la	Bellacasa,	 M.	(2019)	 Re-	animating	 soils:	 transforming	 human– 	soil	affections	 through	 science,	 culture	 and	community.	 Sociological 
Review,	67(2),	391–	 407.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/00380	 26119	 830601
Rankin,	 K.J.	(2019)	 Composting: a visceral geography, human geography (Honours), SGSC, University of Wollongong,	 2019.	 Available	 from:	
https://ro.uow.edu.au/thss/21	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Reynolds,	 K.	(2015)	 Disparity	 despite	 diversity:	 social	 injustice	 in	New	 York	 City‘s	 urban	 agriculture	 system.	 Antipode,	 47(1),	 240–	 259.	Available	
from:	https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12098
SAPEA,	 Science	 Advice	 for	Policy	 by	European	 Academies.	 (2020)	 A sustainable food system for the European Union.	 Berlin,	 Germany:	 SAPEA.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.26356/	 susta	 inabl	 efood
Schaffer,	 G.	(2016)	 Wasting space: composting for change in New York.	 Available	 from:	 https://edgee	 ffects.net/wasti	 ng-	space/	 [Accessed	 15th	
Oct	2021].
Schaffer,	 G.	(2017)	 Building	 community	 composting	 in	Bushwick,	 Brooklyn.	 Biocycle.	 Available	 from:	 https://www.biocy 	cle.net/build	 ing-	
commu	 nity- 	compo	 sting 	-	bushw	 ick-	brook	 lyn/	[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Slater,	 R.	&	Aiken,	 M.	(2015)	 Can’t	 you	count?	 Public	 service	 delivery	 and	standardized	 measurement	 challenges–	 the	case	 of	community	 com-
posting.	Public Management Review,	17(8),	1085–	 1102.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1080/14719	 037.2014.881532
Slorach,	 P.C.,	 Jeswani,	 H.K.,	 Cuéllar-	 Franca,	 R.	&	Azapagic,	 A.	(2019)	 Environmental	 and	economic	 implications	 of	recovering	 resources	 from	 food	
waste	in	a	circular	economy.	Science of the Total Environment,	693,	133516.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scito	 tenv.2019.07.322
Smith,	 A.	&	Stirling,	 A.	(2010)	 The	politics	 of	social- 	ecological	 resilience	 and	sustainable	 socio-	 technical	 transitions.	 Ecology and Society,	 15(1),	
11.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-	 03218	 -	150111
Song,	 T.	(2016)	 An	impossible	 ideal:	 the	use	and	misuse	 of	zero	 waste.	 In:	Mauch,	 C.	(Ed.)	 A future without waste? Zero waste in theory and 
practice.	 RCC	 Perspectives:	 transformations	 in	Environment	 and	Society,	 no.	3,	15–	25.	RCC	 Perspectives:	 transformations	 in	Environment	
and	 Society,	 Munich,	 Germany:	 Rachel	 Carson	 Center	 for	Environment	 and	 Society.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.5282/rcc/7544	
[Accessed	15th	Oct	2021].
Stoknes,	 K.,	Wojciechowska,	 E.,	Jasińska,	 A.,	Gulliksen,	 A.	&	Tesfamichael,	 A.A.	 (2018)	 Growing	 vegetables	 in	the	circular	 economy:	 cul-
tivation	 of	tomatoes	 on	green	 waste	 compost	 and	 food	 waste	 digestate.	 Acta Horticulture,	 1215,	 389–	 396.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.
org/10.17660/	 ActaH	 ortic.2018.1215.71
Swagemakers,	 P.,	Dolores,	 M.,	Garcia,	 D.	&	Wiskerke,	 J.S.C.	 (2018)	 Socially-	 inclusive	 development	 and	value	 creation:	 how	 a	composting	 proj-
ect	in	Galicia	(Spain)	‘hit	the	rocks’.	Sustainability,	10,	2040.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.3390/su100	 62040
Swannell,	 R.,	Hall,	 M.F.,	 Tay,	R.	&	Quested,	 T.	(2019)	 The	food	 waste	 atlas:	 an	important	 tool	to	track	 food	 loss	and	waste	 and	support	 the	cre-
ation	 of	a	sustainable	 global	 food	 system.	 Resources, Conservation and Recycling,	 146,	 534–	 535.	 Available	 from:	 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scito	 tenv.2019.07.322
Thompson,	P.	(2010)	The agrarian vision: sustainability and environmental ethics.	Lexington,	KY:	University	of 	Kentucky	Press.
Turner,	B.	(2014)	Food	waste,	intimacy	and	compost:	the	stirrings	of 	a	new	ecology.	Scan: journal of Media Arts Culture,	11(1),	1–	 11.
Turner,	 B.	(2019)	 Playing	 with	 food	 waste:	 experimenting	 with	 ethical	 entanglements	 in	the	Anthropocene.	 Policy Futures in Education,	 17(7),	
770–	 784.	Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1177/14782	 10318	 776851
Van	Dooren,	 T.,	Kirksey,	 E.	&	Münster,	 U.	(2016)	 Multispecies	 studies	 cultivating	 arts	of	attentiveness.	 Environmental Humanities,	 8(1),	 1–	23.	
Available	from:	https://doi.org/10.1215/22011	 919-	3527695
How to cite this article:	Morrow,	O.	&	Davies,	A.	(2022)	Creating	careful	circularities:	Community	composting	in 	
New	York	City.	Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,	47,	529–	 546.	Available	from:	https://doi.
org/10.1111/tran.12523
 14755661, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12523 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [05/10/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

