Ecosystems and People
ISSN: 2639-5916 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tbsm22
Creating alternative future trajectories for carbon
farming through a relational lens: pathways
towards transformative social-ecological change
in the European Union
Susanna Barrineau, Thao Do & Neil Powell
To cite this article: Susanna Barrineau, Thao Do & Neil Powell (2025) Creating alternative
future trajectories for carbon farming through a relational lens: pathways towards
transformative social-ecological change in the European Union, Ecosystems and People, 21:1,
2461535, DOI: 10.1080/26395916.2025.2461535
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/26395916.2025.2461535
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
View supplementary material 
Published online: 11 Feb 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 638
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tbsm22
RESEARCH: A RELATIONAL TURN IN SUSTAINABILITY
Creating alternative future trajectories for carbon farming through 
a relational lens: pathways towards transformative social-ecological change 
in the European Union
Susanna Barrineaua,b, Thao Dob and Neil Powellb
aUniversity of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore, DC, Australia; bCenter for Health and Sustainability, Department of Women’s and 
Children’s Health, Uppsala University, Sweden
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates how futures thinking and relational thinking may expand practices 
and strategies in agriculture that aim for sustainability. Using carbon farming as a case where 
relational thinking is brought into conversation with futures thinking, we explore how 
imaginaries of sustainability transformations can be further expanded to include ways of 
knowing, being, and doing that imagine more radical, relational, and ethical futures. Based on 
the analysis of a diverse empirical material including European Union reports, focus group 
discussions, and workshops with carbon farming stakeholders in Sweden using the futures 
method Causal Layered Analysis, this paper offers a critical relational lens for approaching 
and evaluating strategies and practices that aim for sustainability transformations in agricul -
tural systems.
KEY POLICY HIGHLIGHTS
●Assumptions and norms found in carbon farming as a European Union strategy are 
dominated by economic goals under the remit of eco-managerialism. These deny deep 
transformation.
●The futures tool Causal Layered Analysis (CLA) can help illustrate the worldviews and 
paradigms at work in current policy and practice discourse and facilitate a deep examina -
tion of the qualities of strategies and frameworks aiming to address climate and related 
social-ecological crises.
●Futures thinking and relational thinking are a joint resource for the current climate and 
agricultural policy paradigm to expand imaginaries for what is possible in agricultural 
futures.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 12 October 2023  
Accepted 25 January 2025  
EDITED BY
Paula Novo
KEYWORDS
Carbon farming; relational 
futures; CLA; soil; 
transformation; imagination; 
possibility
1.Introduction
Nature is an important ally in our fight against cli-
mate change. 
- European Green Deal – Delivering on Our Targets 
(2021 , p. 22) 
Carbon farming is a strategy presented in European 
Union (EU) policy documents to mitigate intersecting 
crises related to climate change, degrading soil health, 
and food security, to name a few (EU, European 
Commission n.d.). This paper explores current EU pol-
icy on carbon farming, as well as agriculture and nature- 
based solutions more broadly, and draws further on 
insights from carbon farming stakeholders in Sweden. 
Agriculture and linked food systems are simultaneously 
major contributors to overlapping social-ecological 
crises and hugely vulnerable to the effects of these crises 
(Paustian et al. 1997 ; Campbell et al. 2017 ; Béné 2020 ; 
van der Ploeg 2020 ; McGreevy et al. 2022 ; Clapp 2023 ). 
Deep socio-ecological transformation of these systems is necessary, where not only what land management 
methods and accompanying schemes are changed, but 
how these changes happen, are significant (O’Brien  
2018 ; IPBES 2019 ; Wamsler et al. 2021 ; Bentz et al.  
2022 ; Vogel and O’Brien 2022 ). Yet, the kinds of 
changes set into motion through different policy frame -
works and processes have fallen far short of the neces -
sary deep transformations (O’Brien 2018 ; Wamsler 
et al. 2021 ). Against this backdrop, we draw on theore -
tical insights from relational thinking and argue for 
futures thinking to accompany this inquiry into the 
emerging strategies and practices of carbon farming. 
Our findings indicate that assumptions and norms 
found in carbon farming are dominated by economic 
goals under the remit of eco-managerialism, which 
frames and constrains what is possible.
The ‘relational turn’ prompts an examination of 
relationships and the patterns of relations at work, 
emphasizing that a focus on human agency is 
CONTACT Susanna Barrineau 
 susanna.barrineau@research.usc.edu.au
This article has been corrected with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/26395916.2025.2461535ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
2025, VOL. 21, NO. 1, 2461535
https://doi.org/10.1080/26395916.2025.2461535
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), 
which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article 
has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
inadequate for the kinds of deep social-ecological 
transformations currently needed (West et al. 2020 ). 
Futures thinking and anticipation as well as research 
that reflect on time and temporality are fields of study 
that can help bring a critical gaze to how relation -
ships are organized in carbon farming. They do so in 
two key ways which we discuss in this paper: 1) they 
help explore the complex interplay of human-more- 
than-human forces that shape futures (Granjou et al.  
2017 ; Groves 2017 ), and the diverse temporalities that 
make up presents (Adam 1998 ; Poli 2011 ; Facer 2019 ) 
and, 2) they draw attention to the ethical imperatives 
of being in relationships of interdependence (Rose  
2012 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ; Whyte 2021 ). These 
elements speak to the distribution of capacities to 
influence futures and form a critical relational lens 
for reflection into the relational qualities of carbon 
farming strategies and possibilities for alternative 
futures.
With these perspectives which we refer to as rela-
tional thinking and futures thinking, we take a closer 
look at carbon farming to make sense of the logics 
that are at work in trying to promote these land 
management practices at European, Member State, 
and more local levels. Carbon farming incentivizes 
the management of plants and soils to sequester 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) (Dumbrell et al. 2016 ; 
Baumber et al. 2019 ; Mattila et al. 2022 ) and is con-
sidered a viable practice for rebuilding soil health and 
mitigating and adapting to climate change (Bradford 
et al. 2019 ; Paustian et al. 2019 ).1 The sustainable 
management of soils that carbon farming promotes 
is considered a key part of the EU’s roadmap to 
climate neutrality (Verschuuren 2018 ; Montanarella 
and Panagos 2021 ) and is moreover promoted as 
a ‘green business model’ (McDonald et al. 2021 , 
p. 49), with pilot projects happening at different 
scales in different parts of the EU.2 Inspired by 
Krzywoszynska and colleagues’ (Krzywoszynska  
2019 ; Krzywoszynska et al. 2020 ; Krzywoszynska 
and Marchesi 2020 ) work around the practical ethics 
of soil care and by the thematic focus of this special 
issue, we work with this paper’s research questions in 
relation to EU and Swedish contexts: What are the 
logics at work in the carbon farming contexts, and 
what possibilities do they generate and which do they 
proscribe? How can futures thinking surface relational 
thinking that expands the imaginaries at work in 
carbon farming contexts? We work with the futures 
method causal layered analysis (CLA) (Inayatullah  
1998 ; Milojević and Inayatullah 2015 ) to unpack cur-
rent policy and practice discourse. CLA illustrates the 
worldviews and paradigms at work and facilitates 
a deep examination of the qualities of carbon farming 
strategies and frameworks. While largely conceptual 
in nature, this paper contributes to reflexive practice 
by highlighting the tensions and ethical questions to which the relational and futures perspectives call our 
attention. We argue that connecting futures and rela-
tional thinking can not only provide important criti-
cal nuance to agricultural climate strategies, but also 
support a cultivation of possibility thinking (Facer  
2023 ) that enriches imagination of agricultural 
futures.
We begin by outlining the capacity of futures 
thinking to make visible relational thinking, empha -
sizing their joint potential to depart from ‘business as 
usual’ sustainability pathways and to open up new 
ways of thinking and doing, and exemplify this with 
the theoretical and practical provocation to ‘think 
with soils’ (Salazar et al. 2020 ). Using CLA, we then 
present findings from the analysis of EU documents 
as well as workshops and focus groups with carbon 
farming stakeholders in Sweden. Next, we discuss key 
tensions from these findings including the kinds of 
knowledges seen as legitimate and who and what are 
absent in current discourses. We conclude with dis-
cerning a possibility space and opportunity for reim -
agination where we identify seeds of possible 
alternative futures (Poli 2011 ; Bennett et al. 2016 ). 
This paper thus aims to offer a critical relational lens 
to how we can approach and evaluate strategies and 
practices working towards transformative social- 
ecological change in the agricultural context.
2.Deepening the relational through futures 
and time
To provide a critical and imagination-spurring 
account of carbon farming, we work with two con-
nected strands of thinking emerging from futures 
thinking, anticipation, and research that reflect on 
time and temporality (hereon referred to collectively 
as ‘futures thinking’) that help deepen our relational 
inquiry into carbon farming. We engage with rela-
tional thinking as an approach that has an explicit 
analytical and conceptual focus on ‘patterns of rela-
tions, produced within dynamic intersecting pro-
cesses’ (DeLanda 2006 in West et al. 2020 , p. 310). 
With such an analytical lens, it becomes possible to 
engage with a broader spectrum of epistemologies 
and ontologies that decenter the human and ‘allows 
us to investigate conditions of possibility’ (Powell  
2013 in Darnhofer 2020 , p. 515), to explore how 
relations enable or hinder change and how these 
relations are stabilized or undone (Darnhofer 2020 , 
p. 519). We argue for the importance of futures 
thinking that helps us think relationally and are par-
ticularly interested in emphasizing and exploring the 
attention to possibility that futures and relational 
perspectives jointly offer. This leads us to the two 
strands: The first strand engages with the anticipation 
of futures and how anticipation shapes and is shaped 
by human and more than human relationships. 2
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
The second strand proposes that the relational nature 
of time is important for how futures can be imagined. 
Together, we propose that these strands form 
a critical relational lens by working as a foundation 
for reflection into both the relational qualities of 
carbon farming strategies and possibility thinking 
for alternative futures. We conclude this section by 
‘thinking with soils’ to exemplify this critical rela-
tional lens in the context of agricultural futures.
2.1. Socio-materiality of anticipation
The first strand supports inquiry into the socio- 
material aspects of anticipating futures. Simply put, 
how we think, feel, and live toward futures is co- 
constituted by the material living earth system 
(Granjou et al. 2017 ). The nonhuman, including 
environments, are therefore not static backgrounds 
for human activity, but agents in crafting shared 
futures (Granjou and Salazar 2016 ). Representations 
and imaginaries of futures, including their diverse 
knowledge practices, social actions, and normative 
frameworks, are already stitched into material envir -
onments (Groves 2017 ; also see; Ingold 1993 ). 
Anticipation is thus both biophysical and cultural 
(Bussey 2014b , 2019 ), shaped by not just cognitive 
data, but a wide range of bodily ‘senses’ that tunes in 
to the emergent and novel quality of a context 
(Bussey 2019 , p. 66). These perspectives on anticipa -
tion can help make sense of ‘how certain futures 
become explicit objects of common concern, and 
how capabilities to influence these processes, and 
with them, the present as well as the future, are 
differentially distributed’ (Groves 2017 , p. 31). In 
other words, exploring the socio-materiality of antici -
pation reveals the inequalities in influencing indivi -
dual and collective futures by deciding which aspects 
of the social and natural worlds become relevant.
We find Groves’s (2017 ) demonstration of ‘lived’ 
futures and ‘empty’ futures illustrative of how differ -
ent ‘modes of anticipation’ organize relationships in 
an issue space. Outlining a case around building new 
energy infrastructure, Groves exemplifies a dominant 
mode of anticipation that is organized around pre-
dicting and optimizing responses for energy-secure 
futures. These are ‘empty’ futures, where anticipation 
is based on knowledge practices and socio-technical 
infrastructures that legitimize quantifiable forecasting 
and focus on a restricted set of variables, plotting the 
future on a ‘single predictable trajectory’ (Groves  
2017 , p. 34). In this way, empty futures as an antici -
patory mode attempt to tame particular kinds of 
uncertainties about futures. This contrasts with 
‘lived futures’ visible in a community-owned renew -
able energy project. In this context, ‘rhythms of living 
conducted in places and within communities form 
[anticipation’s] material and affective basis’ where ‘connection and attachment make it possible to deal 
with uncertainty’ (Groves 2017 , p. 35). Empty and 
lived futures demonstrate how the material organiza -
tion of capacities to influence futures prioritize dif-
ferent knowledge practices (e.g. quantitative or 
experiential and embodied) and, therefore, distribu -
tion of expertise (e.g. distant and standardized or 
embedded in place and affective). Modes of anticipa -
tion have political implications for who participates 
in creating futures as can be seen in empty futures 
where hegemonic forms of anticipation converge 
(Adams et al. 2009 , p. 248). In the case of anticipating 
futures in the carbon farming context, we are there -
fore able to pose a set of questions about 1) what gets 
erased (e.g. the kinds of problems seen as pro-
blems), 2) what is made visible in the modes of 
anticipation (e.g. how carbon rather than other 
GHGs came to be central), and 3) the kinds of rela-
tionships to the future these modes create (e.g. how 
capabilities to influence presents and futures are dis-
tributed). These questions can help probe into the 
relational qualities of carbon farming.
We now turn our focus to the second strand 
within futures thinking to add nuance to the tem-
poral politics of making futures by drawing attention 
to the relational.
2.2. Time as relational
Building on the first strand, here we approach futures 
thinking as a field that makes explicit the relational 
nature of time (Adam 1998 ; Adam and Groves 2007 ; 
Inayatullah 2008 ; Milojević 2008 ; Loewen Walker  
2014 ; Bussey 2017 ). In such an approach, we see 
presents as complex, made up of diverse temporal 
experiences that are visible, unseen, and latent 
(Adam 1998 ; Poli 2011 ; Facer 2019 ) where how we 
approach time matters for futures imaginaries. For 
example, linear clock time is an approach to time 
accompanying industrialism, capitalism, and coloni -
alism. Linear clock time forms a powerful conceptual 
unit that ‘constitutes the deep structure of the taken- 
for-granted knowledge associated with the industrial 
way of life, creating the by now accustomed sem-
blance of certainty and control’ (Adam 1998 in 
Milojević 2008 , p. 333). This ‘hegemonic time’ nor-
malizes time as a commodity, and in so doing, deva -
lues the environment and futures (Adam 1998 ; 
Milojević 2008 , p. 333 −334; see also see also Puig 
de la Bellacasa 2015 ).
Yet, non-linear times and the relationships formed 
within and by those times create the ‘stems of multi -
ple futures’ (Terry et al. 2024 , p. 5). This means that 
looking beyond hegemonic time opens up for witnes -
sing and participating in temporal diversity and alter -
native futures outside the regime of commodified 
time. ‘Time as kinship’, where kinship is ‘an ethic of ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 3
shared responsibility’ in opposition to linear time, is an 
example of how Indigenous persons have articulated 
climate change through changes in kinship relation -
ships (Whyte 2021 , p. 39–40). In her ethnographic 
work, Rose (2012 , p. 131) illustrates the temporal 
patterns at play in the coevolution of flying foxes and 
myrtaceous flora that ‘intersect to form dense knots of 
embodied time’. She argues that these knots of embo -
died time are sites of mutuality, interconnectedness 
and become visible if we are open to the experiences 
of nonhuman groups and the histories and futures told 
by the knots formed by their lives. These examples of 
alternative temporalities foreground questions of how 
we want to live in ‘the world of multispecies differ -
ences and connectivities’ (Rose 2012 , p. 135). Mutual 
interdependence forms the basis for an ethical 
approach to relationships which demand responsibility 
and attentiveness (Rose 2012 ; Whyte 2021 ). In these 
examples, we can start to scratch the surface of the 
heterogeneity of temporalities, which includes ecologi -
cal time, kinship patterns, rhythms, clocks, and which 
all co-exist. Within this temporal diversity, we begin to 
glimpse the complexity of a ‘thick present’ where mul-
tiple layers of reality provide the ingredients for creat -
ing futures (Poli 2011 ). This includes aspects which are 
visible but also latent – ‘seeds’ of different futures (Poli  
2011 , p. 74) which are powerful sources of possibility 
thinking.
2.3. Opening agricultural futures
As we will describe further in our methods, futures 
thinking can assist in examining the multiple layers 
of presents, helping us to deepen futures and shed 
light on deep unconscious stories that shape future 
trajectories (Inayatullah 1998 ; Camrass 2020 ). What 
we see as crucial at this stage is that, through bringing 
into focus how different approaches to time affect our 
anticipatory capacities, thinking with futures and the 
relational is mutually enriching. In connecting these 
two strands, we summarize two key elements that 
support a critical examination of carbon farming as 
a futures-making practice. First, how we anticipate 
futures forms relationships with uncertainty, creates 
actions in the present, and plays a role in how we 
move through time (Adams et al. 2009 ). Modes of 
anticipation shape what and whose temporalities – 
whether it is knots of embodied time, lived futures or 
linear clock time – become seen, how problems are 
shaped as collective concerns, and therefore who gets 
to participate in shaping futures. A socio-material 
perspective on anticipating futures can thus help us 
to consider what is at work in shaping, stabilizing, 
and undoing human and more-than-human relations 
created by different visions of and actions toward 
futures. Second, we recognize the ethical imperative 
that emerges from our mutual interdependence within human and more-than-human relationships 
which problematizes dominant temporalities and 
expands notions of who counts as agents in making 
futures. It is this thick present of lived futures which 
we see as invitation to explore the possibilities that 
emerge when we view agency to create futures as 
a collective endeavor and which we argue offers 
a rich foundation from which to explore carbon 
farming. We thus move to the context of agricultural 
futures to add nuance to these futures and relational 
perspectives by delving into the invitation to ‘think 
with soils’ (Salazar et al. 2020 ).
We see generative openings for agricultural 
futures and carbon farming with the provocation 
to ‘think with’ soils which prompts reflection on 
the collective endeavor of knowledge production 
(Staffa et al. 2022 ) surrounding the capacity of soils 
to sequester carbon. From this perspective, soils are 
seen as ‘dynamic ecologies in the becoming of which 
human beings are implicated, with whom they are 
shaped, and on which they depend’ (Krzywoszynska 
and Marchesi 2020 , p. 194). Thinking with soils, 
therefore, requires putting relations into focus, as 
soils and what constitutes them can no longer be 
conceived of as predetermined, if indeed they ever 
were seen as such (see Krzywoszynska et al. 2020 ). 
Seeing soils simply as a resource to be managed and 
without any of its own agency, or as a site of prac -
tical engagement with the physical imbalance of 
greenhouse gases, is insufficient to support deeper 
transformations towards sustainability. This line of 
thinking aligns with the theoretical and political 
work of Darnhofer (2020 ) in the context of agricul -
ture and farms, which has begun to conceptualize 
how relational thinking opens possibilities for reim -
agining farms. From this perspective, farms are not 
static sites of human management but are webs of 
interactions where also the agency of nonhumans 
contributes to ‘unpredictable dynamics of becoming’ 
(2020 , p. 507).
This move to decenter the human is generative in 
the context of agricultural futures because it allows us 
to move away from ‘human separation and domina -
tion’ (Davies 2021 , p. 16) towards alternative ways of 
relating to each other in these contexts. Ethical action 
with soils acknowledges our dependency on soil eco-
systems and our mutual shaping of each other which 
is an emergent process, where how we affect and are 
affected by soils is unpredictable and nonlinear and 
has the potential to shift into unknown directions. 
Ethical action must therefore be speculative. 
Speculative engagement is an invitation to imagine 
beyond the status quo and, crucially, it is an ethical 
engagement with human-soil relations that ‘may 
open a route toward a practical and life-restoring 
onto-politics across scales’ (Krzywoszynska and 
Marchesi 2020 , p. 194). Carbon farming may 4
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
therefore be conceptualized as a site of diverse human 
and more-than-human agents who are in reciprocal 
and sometimes collaborative relationships rather than 
managerial and controlling ones. The present context 
of carbon farming becomes a site of possibility, rather 
than predetermined futures. With a relational lens on 
carbon farming, we can also begin to make sense of 
the ‘soil realities’ that are acted upon, and which ones 
are marginalized (Krzywoszynska and Marchesi 2020 , 
p. 194).
However, as discussed earlier, hegemonic 
approaches to time and modes of anticipation come 
together to create the dominant operating logics for 
creating futures. To begin to make sense of this in the 
context of carbon farming, it is thus important to 
understand drivers for futures in carbon farming 
and what constitutes the deeper layers of this agricul -
tural context. We have, so far, introduced relational 
and futures perspectives as theoretical resources for 
our study. We now work with the futures method 
CLA to identify drivers for futures and, further, to 
problematize current ways of talking about and acting 
for sustainable futures. In this way, we deepen our 
approach to futures to help us see the thick present 
and begin to explore the seeds of alternatives to 
business-as-usual.
3.Methods
Futures thinking supports reflection on presents in 
a deep, layered manner (Camrass 2020 ). Causal 
layered analysis (CLA) is an analytical method that 
has multiple uses, including mapping worldviews and 
core narratives and articulating transformed futures 
(Inayatullah 2022 ). It supports the deconstruction of 
issue areas and the imagination of alternative futures 
and policy actions through a layered analysis of dis-
courses that identifies the drivers or underpinnings of 
the issue area (Inayatullah 1998 ). It is by working also 
with these deeper layers and the complex underpin -
nings of issue areas that working with CLA aligns 
with the work of deep transformation called for in 
sustainability science and beyond (Wamsler et al.  
2021 ; Bentz et al. 2022 ). In the case of carbon farming, 
CLA can thus help illustrate the deeper worldviews 
and paradigms at work, including the underpinning 
ideas that organize relationships. As a heuristic device, 
CLA frames our examination of the qualities of carbon 
farming as a strategy to help the EU work towards the 
climate and sustainability goals outlined in the 
European Green Deal.
CLA is based on the idea that ‘the present is char -
acterized by phenomena working at different levels of 
depth, duration and visibility’ (Poli 2011 ; see, p. 70; 
Inayatullah et al. 2022 ; Inayatullah and Milojević  
2015 ). As a method, CLA has two main orientations. 
The first is a taxonomical deconstruction or description of issues or problems. The second is 
a more creative process of issue/problem reconstruc -
tion or reimagination. Inayatullah (1998 ) describes 
CLA as a way to undefine the future – it makes proble -
matic the units of analysis, unlinking thinking from 
current assumptions and challenging the existing 
logics at work in an issue context. It is a way to draw 
out different ways of knowing (Inayatullah 1998 ), 
being, and doing by focusing on layers and the ‘various 
streams of causality operating in unison upon an issue’ 
(Ramos 2003 , p. 36). Inayatullah (2008 ) argues that 
solutions can be deeper when we bring the per-
spectives of each of these levels to bear on our 
interventions. CLA thus helps to draw out the 
relationships between knowledge and action at 
work in the carbon farming context.
There are four layers in CLA: the litany layer , 
which focuses on descriptions and shallow accounts 
of issues without critique; the system layer which 
considers the social, technological, economic, envir -
onmental, and political causations for the issue or 
problem; the worldview layer which provides an 
opportunity to examine the ideologies, discourses, 
paradigms, and values that underpin or challenge 
these systems of social organization; and the layer 
of metaphor and myth , which engages with the 
deeper stories and foundational narratives that give 
meaning to life. This CLA is based on relevant 
European Union policy documents and reports, 
focus group meetings, and workshops with carbon 
farming stakeholders in Sweden. We formulate ques -
tions for each of the four CLA layers that guide our 
reading of the material and illustrate how carbon 
farming is co-created in this context. These questions 
are: 1) Litany: What concepts are used to understand 
why the transition to carbon farming is needed? 2) 
System: What are the trends and drivers of carbon 
farming? Who is responsible for implementing these 
practices? 3) Worldview: What are the ideologies and 
discourses that underpin carbon farming? 4) Myth/ 
metaphor: What are the metaphors that make sense 
of the worldviews?
Our reading of the material through the CLA 
offers, first, a taxonomical reading (Bussey 2014a ). 
Here, we work with the first research question of 
exploring the logics at work in this carbon farming 
context and the possibilities that emerge or are 
excluded. Our goal is not to outline a single 
truth, but to illustrate the complexity of the policy 
arena and experiences and perceptions in relation 
to the field of carbon farming, containing tensions, 
contradictions, and hope. This rich description of 
the context is particularly important because it 
thickens the present, helping us to do some of the 
work that relational thinking demands by making 
explicit, and therefore allowing us to interrogate, 
concepts, language, and cultural myths in this ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 5
context which are performative in that they make 
the world (West et al. 2020 ). As Inayatullah (2004 , 
p. 71) argues:
The project here is to show that the real has come 
about for various reasons and that the coming about 
of a specific ‘present’ means the non-realisation of 
other ‘presents’. Thus, in any given moment, what-is 
is an imposition, a silencing of various ways of 
thinking, of doing, and a realisation of other ways 
of thinking. 
We continue to work with the CLAs in addressing this 
paper’s second research question where we consider how 
a futures lens surfaces the relational which may expand 
the imaginaries in this context. In this second step, we 
engage speculatively with broadening future visions 
where we identify a possibility space and opportunity 
for reimagination with the concept of relational futures. 
CLA thus allows us to move from deconstruction to 
reconstruction, where seeds of alternative futures help 
us explore alternative ‘hows’ of transformation.
Rather than top-down steered change processes, we 
stand behind the importance of communities them -
selves being the main drivers of transformation and 
the creation of alternative futures. The processual 
approach to CLA works from such a standpoint, 
where participatory processes aim to surface many 
alternative futures (Bussey 2014a ). Our use of CLA at 
this stage in our research did not engage with the 
participatory approach, and is simply descriptive. 
However, we are motivated by academic discussions 
around the importance of scholarly ‘thinking and writ-
ing as productive ontological interventions’ (Gibson- 
Graham 2008 , p. 614). For us as academics, this 
means that we see our role as thinkers and writers that 
can foreground ‘social and economic experiments [. . .] 
and helping proliferate them through research by ana-
lyzing, highlighting, and conceptualizing economic 
relations outside of the capitalist mainstream’ so that 
they become ‘more real and more credible as objects of 
policy and activism and thus open an imaginative space 
for alternatives’ (Gibson-Graham 2008 , p. 616). Our 
aim with using CLA to analyze and illustrate this carbon 
farming context is, therefore, not just to demonstrate 
a discouraging lack of deep transformation through 
familiar capitalist initiatives, but also to discern 
a possibility space and opportunity for reimagination 
where we identify seeds of possible alternative futures 
(Poli 2011 ; Bennett et al. 2016 ). We do this by exempli -
fying some of the openings for what we call ‘relational 
futures’ through an alternative, third CLA (see Table 6).
3.1. Data production
The data was produced from 74 EU publications, two 
focus group meetings, and three workshops held in 
Sweden. The events were conducted with the aim to co-design a serious game around carbon farming that 
could be played with different stakeholder groups, 
e.g. policy makers or mixed stakeholder groups, and 
frame processes for mutual learning. Game co-design 
as an iterative and systemic practice has the potential 
to support communities in working through complex 
relationalities that converge and emerge in climate 
futures, by engaging stakeholders in systematic ways 
(Flood et al. 2018 ; Powell et al. 2021 ). Serious games 
have been shown to provide an intervention platform 
that facilitates cross-boundary interactions, strength -
ens relationships between diverse stakeholders (for 
example, increased mutual trust and empathy), as 
well as supports an improved understanding among 
the participants of the complex issues at stake (Jean 
et al. 2018 ). These reasons motivated us to work with 
game co-design as a research approach and we detail 
the focus of the meetings below.
The EU documents were searched for on the web-
page of Publications Office of the European Union.3 
Documents published by the EU about climate, agri-
culture, and related topics are important sources for 
understanding the types of discourses and ideologies 
that have formed and legitimized carbon farming as 
a strategy (Omar and Thorsøe 2023 ). The interest was 
to find documents relating to soil carbon sequestra -
tion and carbon farming – these two being different 
since carbon farming relates to more than just 
sequestering carbon in soils, but to a host of co- 
benefits beyond that that are relevant for the future 
outcomes or impacts of carbon farming. To narrow 
down the results two main combinations of search 
terms were used, which are listed in Table 1.
Using titles and abstracts, these results were 
further narrowed down by excluding results that did 
not match any of the subject or key word criteria. 
This left 29 documents in the first search and 59 
documents in the second. 14 of the documents were 
duplicates leaving 74 documents to be included in 
our analysis (see Appendix B).
The 18 documents highlighted in green explicitly 
focus on ‘carbon farming’ and/or ‘soil carbon seques -
tration’; 32 documents highlighted orange consider 
agriculture, future soil sustainability, and often 
implicitly refer to soil carbon sequestration; and 22 
documents highlighted in yellow refer to nature’s or 
soils’ capacity to store carbon and are considered 
relevant albeit peripheral to the main focus of this 
research article, as they provide important policy 
context, e.g. the document on the European Green 
Deal speaks to: ‘Restoring nature and enabling bio-
diversity to thrive again offers a quick and cheap 
solution to absorb and store carbon’ (European 
Commission, D.-G. for C 2021 , p. 22). These cate-
gorizations are to make transparent the documents 
that do not explicitly mention soil carbon sequestra -
tion or carbon farming but that set the context for 6
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
the introduction of these types of nature-based solu-
tions in land use. During the document search, the 
inextricably connected yet semantically disconnected 
framing of carbon farming from the topics of soil 
management and its intended effects on climate, soil 
biodiversity, soil organic matter, soil structure, car-
bon sequestration, farmer livelihoods, and agricul -
tural politics became apparent. We interpret these 
documents as a reflection of the interwoven com -
plexity of human-soil relations and thus, distinct 
categorizations of them based purely on specific key-
words would be somewhat naïve and certainly repre -
sent a reductionist interpretation of them.
The other source of data for this paper comes from 
two focus groups and one workshop held in 2021, 
and two workshops held in 2022 in Sweden. The two 
focus groups gathered carbon farming stakeholders 
convened by the authors’ research group in online 
discussions over Zoom in June and September 2021. 
These stakeholders were identified through our pre- 
existing networks, online desk research, and the 
snowballing method (Colvin et al. 2016 ). They repre -
sented academia, public, private and civil society sec-
tors engaged in various issues connected to carbon 
farming and regenerative agriculture, including soil 
carbon research, NGOs supporting carbon farming 
pilot projects, climate compensation, and environ -
mental policy advisors. Each meeting lasted one and 
a half hours and involved 10–11 participants. The 
first meeting focused on surfacing multiple perspec -
tives on carbon farming and the opportunities and 
challenges associated with the development and 
implementation of frameworks for monitoring, 
reporting and verification of soil carbon sequestra -
tion. The second meeting focused on alternative 
approaches to certify carbon farming to support 
wider uptake of carbon farming practices in 
Sweden. In this session, we were not only interested 
in the technicality of certification but also the values 
and the motivation underpinning the certification. 
These two meetings were recorded on Zoom after 
the consent of the participating stakeholders, who 
were informed about the aims of the research, the 
use of the data collected and agreed to participate 
voluntarily before the meetings.The third occasion in 2021 was a two-day futures 
visioning workshop convened by a non-profit 
Swedish carbon farming initiative in December 
where farmers piloting carbon farming methods on 
their farms, agronomists, researchers, and represen -
tatives from the food production industry partici -
pated to discuss future visions of the Swedish food 
system that are based on carbon sequestration. The 
lead author participated in this workshop as partici -
pant-observer and note-taker. This workshop was 
part of another university’s project, and the lead 
author described our research project to the partici -
pants at large, gaining their written consent to parti -
cipate, observe, and report on our findings.
Finally, two workshops held in Uppsala, Sweden, 
by the authors’ research group in May and 
October 2022 convened stakeholders around an itera -
tive game co-design process that aimed to support 
discussions around opportunities and challenges in 
building sustainable agricultural systems. Both work -
shops were five hours long and involved 12 and 14 
participants respectively. The first workshop invited 
the generation of ideas for transformative pathways 
to which carbon farming may contribute, using rich 
pictures, working with picture cards, and inventing 
system shocks or disruptions. In the second work -
shop, stakeholders played the first game prototype, 
gave reflections on the process and input into the 
design and content of the game. The meetings were 
recorded with participant consent and transcribed. 
The meetings happened in both Swedish and 
English, and the quotes from participants speaking 
Swedish were translated by the authors.
3.2. Data analysis
To analyze the documents and the transcriptions 
with CLA, we worked with the steps for coding and 
analysis provided by Bishop and Dzidic (2014 ). 
Since the codes are already determined by the 
layers in the CLA – litany, system, worldview, 
and myth/metaphor – we proceeded by coding 
each layer in the transcripts and documents inde -
pendently. This involved a single read for each Table 1. Document Search Categories.
Search category Search 1 Search 2
Collection EU publications & Summaries of EU legislation EU publications & Summaries of EU legislation
Document Format PRINT & PDF PRINT & PDF
Corporate Author(s) European Commission & European Parliament European Commission & European Parliament
Languages English English
Document Year 2020 & 2021 & 2022 & 2023 & 2024 2020 & 2021 & 2022 & 2023 & 2024
Subject Climate change policy Soil improvement, Sweden, reform of the CAP, agricultural 
policy, farmer, common agricultural policy, soil protection, 
farming sector, land use, soil analysis, and sustainable 
agriculture
Key Words ‘carbon farming’ & ‘sequest’ ‘carbon farming’ & ‘sequest’
Number of Results 233 348ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 7
layer and also meant that the coding was an itera -
tive process where the allocation of codes was 
revisited through each reading. We used the pro-
cess of coding the litany in CAPS, system in italics , 
worldview as underlined, and myth/metaphor as 
bold . With the EU documents, we assigned each 
layer a color. Often, excerpts from the transcripts 
and documents were relevant for more than one 
layer, which we could easily notate within this 
coding process.
This step of coding between layers was followed by 
a thematic coding within layers. In this case, we 
looked for patterns or trends that responded to the 
question we assigned each layer. We constructed the-
matic maps by clustering excerpts that were themati -
cally related together on large paper. We then worked 
to convey the thematic maps in a consolidated form 
through the final CLAs which we present in the 
section below. In this way, CLA is an exercise of 
interpretive engagement, where we as the authors 
impose order through these layers to make sense of 
the competing narrative forces and tensions. As such, 
this is one reading where many might emerge. 
Furthermore, the layers are not mutually exclusive, 
nor is there an implied hierarchy with, for example, 
litany being the least important and myth/metaphor 
the most important.
4.A layered reading of carbon farming
The following tables (see Figure 1 and Appendix A) 
present the findings of the CLA from the material 
that aim to address the first part of our question: 
What are the logics at work in the carbon farming contexts? The tables aim for conciseness, tying 
together common threads in a summative way and 
are elaborated upon further in this section. In docu -
ments that do not explicitly mention ‘carbon farming’ 
(CF) or ‘soil carbon sequestration’ (the orange and 
yellow categories), the litany and system layer ques -
tions were interpreted considering the role of soils in 
transitioning to sustainable futures. This means that 
we use them to capture the elements important for 
context, such as what sustainable soil management 
means, and which actors are seen as responsible for 
enacting change.
On the litany layer (Table 2), we conceptualize the 
reasons for carbon farming and related futures. In 
general, the focus of the documents centered on 
meeting climate objectives which would in turn accel -
erate the transformation to a climate-resilient future. 
Here, key phrases such as ‘bringing nature back to 
agriculture’ (European Commission Directorate- 
General for Research and Innovation et al. 2020 , 
p. 34) and ‘nature is an important ally in our fight 
against climate change’ (European Commission, D.- 
G. for C 2021 , p. 22) are connected to futures that are 
climate neutral and sustainable. Drawing on the key 
concepts from the Swedish context, carbon farming is 
needed to mitigate the effects of and the vulnerability 
of farmers within industrial agriculture, monopolies, 
and a linear food system focused on profits. Action is 
crucial to stay within planetary boundaries, acknowl -
edging that we live in an interdependent and inter -
connected system. Future environmental 
sustainability is tied to creating an economic system 
that rewards action towards revitalizing ecosystems.
Figure 1. Combined CLAs.8
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
The system layer perspectives (Table 3) character -
ize the type of action carbon farming entails and 
considers the impacts of carbon farming as well as 
who is responsible for taking action. In the EU docu -
ments, a quick and cheap solution to absorb and store 
carbon is offered by measures that restore nature and 
enable biodiversity to thrive again. Soil health can 
improve through the monitoring of soil carbon, wide -
spread adoption of best management practices, and 
sustainable soil management. However, the system 
layer perspectives from the Swedish context demon -
strate a different language around carbon farming. 
Here, we see important drivers as community resili -
ence and thriving, resilient ecosystems. These are part 
of a prioritization of actions that enhance social, 
economic, and environmental co-benefits over farm -
ing methods that merely focuses on high yield quan -
tity. This means that climate benefits and sustainable 
livelihoods need to be in balance. Responsibility is 
spread widely, though actors such as researchers, 
policy makers, and industry are seen to hold the 
largest responsibility on the EU-level. The whole 
food chain – consumers, industry, farmers, consul -
tants, communities, policy-makers – play important 
roles in making the transition to carbon farming 
happen from the perspectives brought in the 
Swedish context. Furthermore, knowledge spreading, collaboration, and experimentation were named as 
key parts of any systemic transformation.
At the worldview layer (Table 4), we draw out 
some of the discourses and paradigms that underpin 
the litany and system layers perspectives. Control and 
mitigating risk are central aspects of the EU docu -
ments. Risk is characterized as irreversible changes to 
the biosphere where human societies and economies 
need to be aligned with Earth’s ecological systems. 
Human actions have led to the ‘unleashing unstop -
pable planetary forces with huge socio-economic con-
sequences’ which is an existential threat to the world 
(European Commission Directorate-General for 
Research and Innovation et al. 2020 , p. 3). Time is 
short to mitigate these risks, though some documents 
even expressed hope that ‘we can still turn the tide’ 
(European Commission Directorate-General for 
Environment 2022 , p. 6). Control manifests as so- 
called sustainable and circular management, under -
pinned by research to obtain robust estimates of the 
effects of different practices on soil carbon sequestra -
tion. These actions can reduce uncertainty and derive 
clear policy recommendations. To succeed in these 
types of management efforts involve increasing 
knowledge and subsequent knowledge transfer to 
maximize the potential of carbon sequestration, 
which is usually communicated through scientific Table 2. CLA findings, Litany layer.
Layer Guiding Question Applying CLA to EU documents
Litany What concepts are used to 
understand why the 
transition to carbon farming 
is needed?Climate neutrality and resilience, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), circular (bio)economy, reversing 
biodiversity loss, and transformation
Applying CLA to focus groups and workshops in Sweden
Industrial agriculture, planetary boundaries, vulnerability, linearity, monopolies, profitability, sustainability, 
resilience, climate change, and interconnected
Table 3. CLA findings, System layer.
Layer Guiding Question Applying CLA to EU documents
System - What are the trends 
and drivers of 
carbon farming? – 
Who is responsible 
for implementing 
these practices?- Climate change mitigation & adaptation, biodiversity restoration, long-term economic objectives, and soil services 
- Researchers (‘experts’), policy-makers (EU and Member States), industry, and citizens all over Europe
Applying CLA to focus groups and workshops in Sweden
- Community resilience, thriving, resilient ecosystems, climate benefits & sustainable livelihoods in balance, 
economic compensation, local economies governed by local policies, soil health, and soil productivity 
- Consumers, food industry, farmers, consultants, neutral or third-party administrators, whole food chain, policy 
makers, communities, and public-private partnerships
Table 4. CLA findings, Worldview layer.
Layer Guiding Question Applying CLA to EU documents
Worldview What are the ideologies and discourses 
that underpin these documents?Ecomodernism and managerialism – nature as a resource for society and the economy that can 
be managed through more scientific knowledge.
Applying CLA to focus groups and workshops in Sweden
What are the ideologies and discourses 
that underpin these focus group and 
workshop discussions?- ‘Evidence-based’ is an obstacle to taking action 
- Openness and flexibility with uncertainty 
- Diversity of methods and ability to experiment 
- Techno-optimism (better data leads to better decisions) 
- Collaboration, sharing, connections, networks 
- Holistic management based on the commodification of natureECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 9
and economic models. Finally, in framing nature as 
an important technology, ecosystem services may be 
harnessed to move the EU beyond business-as-usual, 
leading the EU instead to operate in a circular bioec -
onomy that increases its competitiveness and sustain -
ability. Agriculture is a business opportunity, and 
central to cultures and traditions of Europeans. Real 
mitigation needs to make economic sense – there 
needs to be incentives for land managers to adopt 
these practices. Some documents (e.g. European 
Commission Joint Research Centre et al. 2021 ) expli -
citly connected this move beyond business-as-usual 
as moving beyond neoliberal economic logic.
While risk mitigation and control are present in 
the focus group and workshop contexts, they are 
expressed with difference nuances. On the one 
hand, the phrase ‘right direction’ alludes to prac -
tices that mitigate climate change and lead to 
a host of social, economic, and environmental co- 
benefits. However, uncertainty of the relative suc-
cess of methods regarding carbon sequestration is 
an obstacle to moving in this direction, and tech -
nology has great promise in helping to measure 
progress. Thus, with better data harnessed by tech -
nological and scientific improvements, actors can 
make better decisions. As one focus group partici -
pant put it: ‘we have to somehow also trust in the 
development of this technology; we have to count on 
the technology that will exist in the future not only 
look at what we already have ’ (Participant, 
September 2021 Focus Group). The high-risk con-
text is characterized by uncertainty with regard to 
climate and economic instabilities, but also the risk 
of trying new farming methods with uncertain 
results. This uncertainty and associated risk creates 
the need to decrease complexity, opting for smaller, 
simpler, and concrete practices; something inspir -
ing, positive, and easy to communicate so that 
everyone understands. Care for soil health is thus 
underpinned by the need to produce yields and by 
the economic value of soil carbon. On the other 
hand, ‘evidence-based’ practices are expressed as an 
obstacle to doing good things where science cannot 
provide a clear pathway for transformation since, 
‘You are never going to have that high of resolution 
in the science and in climate accounting that is 
needed to kind of detect the differences between a good method and a bad method ’ (Participant, 
May 2022 Workshop). Under both discourses of 
the role of science, openness and flexibility to 
a diversity of farming methods and the ability to 
experiment are generally regarded as crucial char -
acteristics to any food system transformation due 
to the complexity of biological life.
At the fourth layer of analysis, the myth/metaphor 
layer (Table 5), the discursive tensions on the pre-
vious layers manifest in different forms of agency 
given to nature and humans. The EU documents 
paint a picture of humans embarking on a mission 
that will ‘keep us safely on Earth with healthy soils!’ 
(Veerman et al. 2020 , p. 4), drawing inspiration from 
humans’ mission to the moon. Here, ‘no future with -
out risks’ and ‘we can still turn the tide’ are mantras. 
In these depictions, nature is our tool to break the 
vicious cycle of living on environmental debt, where 
‘soil is a vast reservoir of carbon’ (European 
Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture 
and Rural Development 2021 , p. 4). Science is one 
compass, but profit through managing, maximizing, 
and optimizing is the other compass. In the voices 
from the Swedish context, we hear that the work to 
sequester carbon in soils is a ‘tug of war’ (Participant, 
May 2022 Workshop) between those whose want to 
do good on the ground and create good food systems 
and those who primarily see the financial potential 
and want to clean up or climate compensate their 
own businesses. In this struggle, some expressed the 
idea that carbon farming could be considered a kind 
of gateway drug4 to understanding the benefits of 
changing farming practices beyond profitability: 
‘maybe people go into it for the money but then they 
try it and after a few years they realize I am making 
more money without the, you know, I actually don’t 
need the economic incentive anymore to do it, because 
I see that these are actual benefits I get from doing this 
anyway ’ (Participant, May 2022 Workshop). 
Regarding the role of science in determining action, 
the perspective was voiced that, ‘The problem with 
data of course is that it is a double-edged sword. It can 
be enabling but also crippling ’ (Participant, May 2022 
Workshop). To add to this metaphor, ‘Going down 
the measurement road’ was regarded as problematic 
by some participants, seeing it as ‘a bit of a lottery for 
Table 5. CLA findings, Myth/Metaphor layer.
Layer Guiding Question Applying CLA to EU documents
Myth/Metaphor What are the metaphors 
that make sense of the 
worldviews?- Nature is our tool, science is our compass and humans are embarking on a mission to break the 
vicious cycle of living on environmental debt 
- Manage, maximize, optimize – economic growth/stability is the compass 
- ‘No future without risks’ – ‘we can still turn the tide’
Applying CLA to focus groups and workshops in Sweden
- Tug of war 
- Carbon farming is the gateway drug to changing farming practices beyond profitability 
- Double-edged sword of data10
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
the farmer whether his field comes out as a sink or 
a source’ (Participant, June 2021 Focus Group).
5.Futures in tension
Thus far, we have used CLA to deconstruct and 
present a snapshot of the carbon farming context 
based on EU documents and grassroots events in 
Sweden. These readings serve as a point of departure 
to work with our questions: What are the logics at 
work in the carbon farming contexts, and what possi -
bilities do they generate and which do they proscribe? 
How can futures thinking surface relational thinking 
that expands the imaginaries at work in carbon farm -
ing contexts? We turn now to this task by putting the 
CLA layers of both data sets in dialogue with each 
other.
Our results show that the ‘win-win’ of carbon 
farming denies the emergence of a relational para -
digm, and is oriented to linear, progressivist timelines 
(Adam 1998 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). At the litany 
layer of EU-level Table 2, climate change, resilience, 
and sustainability objectives are examples of key 
organizing concepts for action on the system layer – 
improving soil services, economic objectives, and 
finding good management strategies that respond to 
the litany concepts. The impacts of carbon farming 
are described as wide reaching and are reached by 
actions with quantifiably communicable results 
underpinned by an ecomodernist, managerialist 
worldview. The metaphor of a mission akin to 
humans’ moon mission establishes a foundational 
narrative rooted in the myth of (hu)man as scientific 
pioneer. This signals an attitude of ‘we can still turn 
the tide’. The stories of science as savior terraform the 
planet while viewing ‘nature’ as ‘out there’, strength -
ening the story of the separate human and ‘other’. 
The discourse of managing nature for sustainability 
oriented around economic goals on the litany and 
system layers finds resonance in the non- 
transformative worldview and myth layers. We see 
a myth layer that stabilizes hegemonic time, which 
aims to predict and optimize an empty future (Groves  
2017 ).
The CLA from the grassroots conversations sug-
gests the emergence of other systems, discourses, 
and myths, bringing our attention to overlapping 
tensions, which we attempt to cluster below. First, 
the disempowering myth of ‘science as savior’ sits 
uncomfortably with the metaphors of ‘tug of war’ 
and ‘the double-edged sword of data ’ in Table 5. 
The latter two metaphors illustrate the experiences 
of emerging alternative stories coming into conflict 
with the dominant technoscientific stories of pro-
gress. One of these dominant stories is present 
throughout the EU documents, depicting successful carbon farming using quantitative measurements 
around a restricted set of variables allowing results 
to be commensurable in the form of credits or 
points to ensure that soil carbon sequestration tar-
gets are met, and the economy is buoyed. 
Expressions of the importance of scientific cer-
tainty through ecomodernism and techno- 
optimism in the EU and grassroots results at the 
worldview layer uphold this story. Here, soil carbon 
measurements represent desired futures telling us 
stuff about ‘what soils are, who soil experts are, and 
what knowing and governing soils means’ (Kon 
Kam King and Granjou 2020 , p. 39). Retrieving 
accurate measurements is necessitated by politically 
and economically motivated climate goals, where 
soil is a resource, a sink, and an ally. What gets 
measured shapes relationships to soils by determin -
ing the kinds of evidence and knowledge seen as 
legitimate, necessarily affecting what is seen and 
what remains unseen. The dynamism of soil ecolo -
gies and their diverse temporalities, as well as the 
influence of those without access to scientific mea -
surement methods, are erased in the science as 
savior myth.
However, the third metaphor of Swedish- 
grassroots level in Table 5 of carbon farming as 
a gateway drug to practicing sustainable farming for 
reasons that go beyond economic benefits reflects the 
vision of waning economic values and the surfacing 
of other non-economic values instead. That data is 
a double-edged sword further is inviting a disruption 
of the binary between uncertainty and knowledge, 
where the capacities of openness and flexibility are 
regarded just as important as acting with certainty. 
The tensions expressed on the myth/metaphor layer 
from the grassroots perspective manifest also on the 
worldview layer. On the one hand, empirical data is 
valorized (be it in service of proving measurements to 
get rewards in a carbon market or for the own farm -
er’s sense of security about how a field is ‘doing’), but 
on the other hand, the limitations of the mainstream 
evidence-based culture of decision-making are 
acknowledged, turning the conversation to acting 
without all the so-called evidence in place. This ten-
sion highlights an alternative link between knowledge 
and action than the one dominated by evidence- 
based action, where the urgency to care for soils 
might instead be guided by diverse partial knowl -
edges as we learn from our attempts to respond to 
and care for soils with all means possible 
(Krzywoszynska et al. 2020 ). We thus see the different 
modes of anticipation present in the grassroots con-
versations, where the seeds of lived futures come up 
against emptied futures. The lived futures expressed 
in these conversations concern, for example, diversity 
in how we perform technology, how we eat, and how 
we see ourselves in relation to ecosystems, hinting at ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 11
the emergence of new ways to imagine agriculture 
and responding to a lively planet (see also Johansson 
et al. 2022 ).
At this stage, we move to trouble these CLAs by 
taking a speculative leap into what we see as seeds of 
alternative futures in the grassroots perspectives. In 
these seeds, we detect the multiple human and more- 
than-human relationships in carbon farming which 
generate and host a diversity of anticipatory modes 
and capabilities. We conceptualize these as seeds of 
possible relational futures that thicken the present 
and invite exploration into what is at stake by perpe -
tuating the hegemonic paradigms of sustainability in 
agricultural transitions. We create a third CLA that 
demonstrates these possible seeded layers (see 
Table 6).
The foregrounding of contextual experiences and 
knowledges represented by the summative commu -
nity resilience and local economies governed by local 
policies in the grassroots data gesture towards the 
need for responses that disrupt dominant linear tem-
poralities, making room for the openness and flex-
ibility of approaches called for by grassroots 
stakeholders, where taking time to care for soils 
might invite new roles for science and technology 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ). As an example, then, of 
possibilities seeded, one role of for science is to sup-
port us to engage care-fully in ecological dialogues 
which have a fundamentally different epistemological 
starting point, regarding ‘nature-as-process’ rather 
than ‘nature-as-universe’ (Latour 2018 , p. 80). 
Sciences in relational futures engage in what we con-
ceptualize as ecological dialogues with a spectrum of 
agents – mycorrhizal networks, humus, crops, pas-
tures, etc. – operating along a range of temporalities, 
engaging in ‘diversity on a high level ’ (Participant, 
December 2021 Workshop) and working more with 
a cyclical or rhythmic understanding of planetary 
forces that move in stark contrast to the confines of 
‘linear systems where things leave the earth and the 
production systems ’ (Participant, December 2021 
Workshop). Carbon farming in this possible future 
is thus organized around knowledges based in these 
kinds of dialogues, where participants respond to 
diverse temporalities of soils again and again. The 
shift from the desire for scientific certainty to ecological dialogues centers the relational, inviting 
us to conceive of a broader spectrum of ‘data’. The 
role of scientific inquiry becomes more clearly to 
develop ‘knowledge tools and practices that would 
empower and enable various soil workers, soil users, 
soil citizens – what we could call soil publics – to 
explore their soil relationalities’ (Krzywoszynska and 
Marchesi 2020 , p. 199).
In a possible carbon farming future, how we come 
to know soils gains a diversity that seeds new econo -
mies and societies. Relational thinking reminds us 
that our practical engagement, the ways we come to 
know about soil matter for how we care for soil, and 
how we care for soil informs how we know about soil 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ; Krzywoszynska et al. 2020 ; 
West et al. 2020 ). We argue that staying with this 
complexity of our practical engagement with soils can 
cultivate a temporal imagination that acts as 
a resource for possibility thinking (Facer 2023 ). The 
thriving and resilient ecosystems of the grassroots 
system layer are imbued with potentiality, where the 
alternative myth of soil as source – as a life source – 
rather than resource finds resonance. This imagina -
tive opening supports an attentiveness to the thick 
present and invites relational thinking. This is one of 
the foundations of working rigorously, hopefully, and 
response-ably with futures (Facer 2019 ).
6.Conclusion – futures seeded
The ways that futures are anticipated and imagined 
are not inconsequential, but open and close different 
pathways for farmers, practitioners, policy-makers, 
and other stakeholders. Using CLA, we have illu-
strated three snapshots of carbon farming – 
a hegemonic, a grassroots, and a possibilities seeded 
set of imaginaries. In this way, CLA illustrates the 
worldviews and paradigms at work in current policy 
and practice discourse and helps facilitate a deep 
examination of the qualities of strategies and frame -
works aiming to address climate and related social- 
ecological crises. We find seeds of lived futures and 
a transformative set of logics which are nested in 
non-transformative, empty futures, where grassroots 
actors struggle to work in creative and innovative 
ways to improve their local contexts. The EU Table 6. CLA – Seeds of possible relational futures in carbon farming.
Layer Guiding Question Possibilities seeded
Litany What concepts are used to understand why the 
transition to carbon farming is needed?Healing, responding to a lively planet, interdependence and transformation.
System What are the trends and drivers of carbon 
farming?Responsive and flexible economic and political systems, organized around 
a variety of ecological temporalities through ecological dialogues.
Who is responsible for implementing these 
practices?Practices determined by local actors in intersubjective processes.
Worldview What are the ideologies and discourses that 
underpin these concepts and systems?Response-able relationships with more-than-human beings and environments, 
working to become attuned to diverse temporalities
Myth/Metaphor What are the metaphors that make sense of the 
worldviews?- Seeding a new economy and society 
- Soil as source12
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
documents demonstrate a desire for transformation 
on the litany layer while the deeper layers reveal 
a non-transformative narrative. This narrative centers 
humans and foregrounds techno-scientific approaches 
to manage social-ecological challenges. The Swedish 
grassroots CLA also demonstrates language and world -
views that mirror the EU documents. However, these 
layers also illustrate tensions with the prevalent evi-
dence-based culture of current structures, acknowled -
ging the importance of experimentation in 
transformative processes and the heterogeneity of 
soils. Thus, by exploring the modes of anticipation 
and approaches to time, we observe a temporal politics 
that prioritizes predictive sciences and short-term eco-
nomic wins, and which denies the relational. The 
diverse, complex, and often ambiguous temporalities 
embedded in human-soil relations are rendered invi-
sible by linear timelines oriented by the demands of 
production and climate mitigation. The assumptions 
and norms present in the EU-level CLA thus deny 
deep transformation.
Yet this analysis also demonstrates seeds of 
alternative, relational futures that we build upon 
in the possibilities seeded carbon farming CLA. 
We argue that thinking with relational futures 
both highlights and enriches important concepts 
that could facilitate new imaginaries around 
human and more-than-human nature needed to 
navigate sustainability challenges in agriculture. 
The purpose of illustrating this possibility space 
with more radical and relational ontologies is to 
challenge and extend dominant conceptualizations 
of how agricultural transformations happen – to 
assist in ‘opening up the future’ (Milojević and 
Inayatullah 2015 , p. 154). With this, we recognize 
that these CLAs span over a wide variety of stake -
holders with different power and agency, where 
imagining and enacting alternatives is riskier for 
some than others. A relational futures lens does 
not resolve the desire for safety and control that 
is perceived to mitigate economic and ecological 
risks, and which is legitimated by global political 
climate goals. The CLAs illustrate the grassroots 
capacity to imagine and begin to enact different 
futures that depart from current hegemonic 
strictures.
Our aim is not to present this analysis of carbon 
farming as a naïve picture of the possibilities of 
‘simply’ reimaging this context through the lens of 
relational and futures thinking. Instead, this paper 
contributes a focus on time and temporalities that 
enriches relational perspectives. In this way, we 
hope that it can highlight some of the tensions and 
complexities of creating transformation in agriculture 
and how the substantialist assumptions that dominate 
are inadequate for the sustainability challenges we 
currently face. We argue that a focus on how anticipation shapes and is shaped by human and 
more than human relationships as well as on the 
relational nature of time offers a critical relational 
lens that can provide important nuance crucial to 
current climate and agricultural policy strategies. 
We find that relational futures can help draw atten -
tion to ‘previously underacknowledged or underva -
lued aspects of the world visible and valued’ (West 
et al. 2020 , p. 319), helping to take the complexity of 
agricultural transformations seriously. The concept of 
relational futures offers a lens through which to ask 
different questions about the futures we desire and 
how we collectively move towards those futures. By 
critically and speculatively broadening thinking and 
futures visions to include the dynamic and lively 
earth, relational futures offers vocabulary that invites 
us to engage with our challenges in alternative ways 
and can support us to reframe relationships with 
lands, soils, and ecosystems.
Notes
1. The focus in this paper is agriculture and soils, though 
forests and oceans, for example, are also contexts of 
carbon farming projects. For more detailed informa -
tion on carbon farming, see for example, the European 
Commission’s Technical Guidance Handbook (https:// 
op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/ 
b7b20495-a73e-11eb-9585-01aa75ed71a1/language-en ).
2. See for example, the Interreg North Sea region carbon 
farming project (https://northsearegion.eu/carbon- 
farming/ .), LIFE carbon farming (https://www.life- 
carbon-farming.eu/ .), and Carbon Action (https:// 
www.bsag.fi/en/carbon-action-en/ ).
3. https://op.europa.eu/en/home .
4. One definition of a gateway drug in this metaphorical 
context is ‘something that makes you more likely to try 
other things that are similar but more unusual or 
difficult’ https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/ 
english/gateway-drug .
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the Stiftelsen för Miljöstrategisk 
Forskning.
References
Adam B. 1998 . Timescapes of Modernity: the Environment 
and Invisible Hazards. London: Taylor & Francis Group.
Adam B, Groves C. 2007 . Future Matters: action, 
Knowledge, Ethics. Leiden: Brill.
Adams V, Murphy M, Clarke AE. 2009 . Anticipation: 
Technoscience, life, affect, temporality. Subjectivity. 28 
(1):246–265. doi: 10.1057/sub.2009.18 .
Baumber A, Metternicht G, Cross R, Ruoso L-E, Cowie AL, 
Waters C. 2019 . Promoting co-benefits of carbon ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 13
farming in Oceania: Applying and adapting approaches 
and metrics from existing market-based schemes. 
Ecosystem Serv. 39:100982. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoser.2019. 
100982 .
Béné C. 2020 . Resilience of local food systems and links to 
food security – a review of some important concepts in 
the context of COVID-19 and other shocks. Food Secur. 
12(4):805–822. doi: 10.1007/s12571-020-01076-1 .
Bennett EM, Solan M, Biggs R, McPhearson T, 
Norström AV, Olsson P, Pereira L, Peterson GD, 
Raudsepp-Hearne C, Biermann F, et al. 2016 . Bright 
spots: seeds of a good Anthropocene. Front Ecol 
Environ. 14(8):441–448. doi: 10.1002/fee.1309 .
Bentz J, O’Brien K, Scoville-Simonds M. 2022 . Beyond 
“blah blah blah”: exploring the “how” of transformation. 
Sustainability Sci. 17(2):497–506. doi: 10.1007/s11625- 
022-01123-0 .
Bishop BJ, Dzidic PL. 2014 . Dealing with wicked problems: 
conducting a causal layered analysis of complex social 
psychological issues. Am J Community Phychol. 53(1– -
2):13–24. doi: 10.1007/s10464-013-9611-5 .
Bradford MA, Carey CJ, Atwood L, Bossio D, Fenichel EP, 
Gennet S, Fargione J, Fisher JRB, Fuller E, Kane DA, 
et al. 2019 . Soil carbon science for policy and practice. 
Nat Sustainability. 2(12), Article 12. 1070–1072. doi: 10. 
1038/s41893-019-0431-y .
Bussey M. 2014a . CLA as process: mapping the theory and 
practice of the multiple. J Futures Stud. 18:45–58.
Bussey M. 2014b . Intimate futures: Bringing the body into 
futures work. Eur J Futures Res. 2(1):1–8. doi: 10.1007/ 
s40309-014-0053-6 .
Bussey M. 2017 . Time’s calling: time, timing, and transfor -
mation in futures work. World Futures Rev. 9 
(4):236–247. doi: 10.1177/1946756717697335 .
Bussey M. 2019 . Anticipatory aesthetics: the senses and the 
body in anticipatory theory and Practice. In: Poli R, 
editor. Handbook of Anticipation: theoretical and 
Applied Aspects of the Use of Future in Decision 
Making. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International 
Publishing; p. 861–874.
Campbell B, Beare D, Bennett E, Hall-Spencer J, Ingram J, 
Jaramillo F, Ortiz R, Ramankutty N, Sayer J, Shindell D. 
2017 . Agriculture production as a major driver of the 
Earth system exceeding planetary boundaries. Ecol Soc. 
22(4). doi: 10.5751/ES-09595-220408 .
Camrass K. 2020 . Regenerative futures. Foresight. 22 
(4):401–415. doi: 10.1108/FS-08-2019-0079 .
Clapp J. 2023 . Concentration and crises: exploring the deep 
roots of vulnerability in the global industrial food 
system. J Peasant Stud. 50(1):1–25. doi: 10.1080/ 
03066150.2022.2129013 .
Colvin RM, Witt GB, Lacey J. 2016 . Approaches to identi -
fying stakeholders in environmental management: 
Insights from practitioners to go beyond the ‘usual sus-
pects. Land Use Policy. 52:266–276. doi: 10.1016/j.land 
usepol.2015.12.032 .
Darnhofer I. 2020 . Farming from a process-relational per-
spective: making openings for change Visible. Sociologia 
Ruralis. 60(2):505–528. doi: 10.1111/soru.12294 .
Davies B. 2021 . Entanglement in the World’s Becoming 
and the Doing of New Materialist Inquiry. London: 
Routledge.
DeLanda M. 2006 . A New Philosophy of Society— 
Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity. 
Bloomsbury Publishing.
Dumbrell NP, Kragt ME, Gibson FL. 2016 . What carbon 
farming activities are farmers likely to adopt? A best– worst scaling survey. Land Use Policy. 54:29–37. doi: 10. 
1016/j.landusepol.2016.02.002 .
EU, (European Commission). date unknown . Carbon 
Removals and Carbon Farming—European 
Commission. [accessed 2024 Aug 26], from https:// 
climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-action/carbon-removals-and- 
carbon-farming_en .
European Commission, D.-G. for C. 2021 . European green 
deal: Delivering on our targets. Publications Office of the 
European Union. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2775/ 
595210 .
European Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture 
and Rural Development. 2021 . CORDIS results pack on 
soil health—Publications Office of the EU. European 
Research Executive Agency, Publications Office of the 
European Union. https://op.europa.eu/en/publication- 
detail/-/publication/5e8c13a6-9817-11eb-b85c 
-01aa75ed71a1 .
European Commission Directorate-General for 
Environment. 2022 . An Advocacy Toolkit for Nature: bio-
diversity Loss, Nature Protection, and the EU Strategy for 
Nature: october 2022. Publications Office of the European 
Union; https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2779/52585 .
Facer K. 2019 . Storytelling in troubled times: what is the 
role for educators in the deep crises of the 21st century? 
Literacy. 53(1):3–13. doi: 10.1111/lit.12176 .
Facer K. 2023 . Possibility and the temporal imagination. 
Possibility Stud & Soc. 1(1–2):60–66. doi: 10.1177/ 
27538699231171797 .
Flood S, Cradock-Henry NA, Blackett P, Edwards P. 2018 . 
Adaptive and interactive climate futures: systematic 
review of ‘serious games’ for engagement and decision- 
making. Environ Res Lett. 13(6):063005. doi: 10.1088/ 
1748-9326/aac1c6 .
European Commission Joint Research Centre, Fritsche U, 
Brunori G, Chiaramonti D, Galanakis C, Matthews R, 
Panoutsou C, Avraamides M, Borzacchiello MT, 
Stoermer E. 2021 . Future transitions for the bioeconomy 
towards sustainable development and a climate-neutral 
economy: foresight scenarios for the EU bioeconomy in 
2050. Publications Office of the European Union. 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2760/763277 .
Gibson-Graham J. 2008 . Diverse economies: performative 
practices for `other worlds’. Prog Hum Geogr. 32 
(5):613–632. doi: 10.1177/0309132508090821 .
Granjou C, Salazar JF. 2016 . Future. Environ Humanit. 8 
(2):240–244. doi: 10.1215/22011919-3664342 .
Granjou C, Walker J, Salazar JF. 2017 . The politics of 
anticipation: on knowing and governing environmental 
futures. Futures. 92:5–11. doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2017.05. 
007.
Groves C. 2017 . Emptying the future: on the environmental 
politics of anticipation. Futures. 92:29–38. doi: 10.1016/j. 
futures.2016.06.003 .
European Commission Directorate-General for Research 
and Innovation, Hedegaard C, Mysiak J, Lera S, 
Clair A, Scicluna Bartoli M, Cornieti M, Freitas H, 
Holy M, Jacob D, et al. 2020 . A climate resilient 
Europe: prepare Europe for climate disruptions and 
accelerate the transformation to a climate resilient and 
just Europe by 2030. Publications Office of the European 
Union. https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/69766 .
Inayatullah S. 1998 . Causal layered analysis: poststructural -
ism as method. Futures. 30(8):815–829. doi: 10.1016/ 
S0016-3287(98)00086-X .
Inayatullah S, Ed. 2004 . The Causal Layered Analysis 
(CLA) Reader: theory and Case Studies of an 14
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
Integrative and Transformative Methodology. Tamkang 
University Press.
Inayatullah S. 2008 . Six pillars: futures thinking for 
transforming. Foresight. 10(1):4–21. doi: 10.1108/ 
14636680810855991 .
Inayatullah S. 2022 . Causal layered analysis: theory, con-
ceptual framework and method. In: Inayatullah S, 
Mercer R, Milojević I Sweeney JA, editors. CLA 3.0: 
Thirty Years of Transformative Research. Tamkang 
University Press; p. 3–22.
Inayatullah S, Mercer R, Milojević I, Sweeney JA, Eds. 
2022 . CLA 3.0: Thirty Years of Transformative 
Research. Tamkang University Press. https://www.meta 
future.org/product/cla-3-0-thirty-years-of-transformative- 
research-2/ .
Inayatullah S, Milojević I, Eds. 2015 . CLA 2.0: 
Transformative Research in Theory and Practice. 
Tamkang University Press. https://www.metafuture.org/ 
product/cla-2-0/ .
Ingold T. 1993 . The temporality of the landscape. World 
Archaeology. 25(2):152–174. doi: 10.1080/00438243. 
1993.9980235 .
IPBES. 2019 . Summary for policymakers of the global 
assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services 
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. IPBES secretariat.
Jean S, Medema W, Adamowski J, Chew C, Delaney P, 
Wals A. 2018 . Serious games as a catalyst for boundary 
crossing, collaboration and knowledge co-creation in 
a watershed governance context. J Environ Manag. 
223:1010–1022. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.021 .
Johansson EL, Brogaard S, Brodin L. 2022 . Envisioning 
sustainable carbon sequestration in Swedish farmland. 
Environ Sci Policy. 135:16–25. doi: 10.1016/j.envsci. 
2022.04.005 .
Kon Kam King J, Granjou C. 2020 . Mapping soil, losing 
ground? Politics of soil mapping. In: Salazar JF, 
Granjou C, Kearnes M, Krzywoszynska A Tironi M, 
editors. Thinking with Soils: material Politics and 
Social Theory. Bloomsbury Publishing; p. 39–54.
Krzywoszynska A. 2019 . Caring for soil life in the 
Anthropocene: the role of attentiveness in more-than- 
human ethics. Trans Inst Br Geogr. 44(4):661–675. doi:  
10.1111/tran.12293 .
Krzywoszynska A, Banwart S, Blacker D. 2020 . To know, to 
dwell, to care: towards and actionable, place-based 
knowledge of soils. In: Salazar J, Granjou C, 
Kearnes M, Krzywoszynska A Tironi M, editors. 
Thinking with Soils: material Politics and Social 
Theory. Bloomsbury Publishing; p. 89–106.
Krzywoszynska A, Marchesi G. 2020 . Toward a relational 
materiality of Soils: Introduction. Environ Humanit. 12 
(1):190–204. doi: 10.1215/22011919-8142297 .
Latour B. 2018 . Down to Earth: politics in the New 
Climatic Regime. Polity Press.
Loewen Walker R. 2014 . The living present as a materialist 
feminist temporality. Women Cult Rev. 25(1):46–61. 
doi: 10.1080/09574042.2014.901107 .
Mattila TJ, Hagelberg E, Söderlund S, Joona J. 2022 . 
How farmers approach soil carbon sequestration? 
Lessons learned from 105 carbon-farming plans. Soil 
Tillage Res. 215:105204. doi: 10.1016/j.still.2021. 
105204 .
McDonald H, Frelih-Larsen A, Lorant A, Duin L, 
Andersen SP, Costa G, Bradley H. 2021 . Carbon farming 
| Making agriculture fit for 2030 [Study for the commit -
tee on Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI)]. Policy Department for Economic, Scientific 
and Quality of Life Policies, European Parliament.
McGreevy SR, Rupprecht CDD, Niles D, Wiek A, 
Carolan M, Kallis G, Kantamaturapoj K, Mangnus A, 
Jehlička P, Taherzadeh O, et al. 2022 . Sustainable agri-
food systems for a post-growth world. Nat 
Sustainability. 5(12):1011–1017. doi: 10.1038/s41893- 
022-00933-5 .
Milojević I. 2008 . Timing feminism, feminising time. 
Futures. 40(4):329–345. doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2007.08. 
008.
Milojević I, Inayatullah S. 2015 . Narrative foresight. 
Futures. 73:151–162. doi: 10.1016/j.futures.2015.08.007 .
Montanarella L, Panagos P. 2021 . The relevance of sustain -
able soil management within the European Green Deal. 
Land Use Policy. 100:104950. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol. 
2020.104950 .
O’Brien K. 2018 . Is the 1.5°C target possible? Exploring the 
three spheres of transformation. Curr Opin Environ 
Sustainability. 31:153–160. doi: 10.1016/j.cosust.2018.04. 
010.
Omar A, Thorsøe MH. 2023 . Rebalance power and 
strengthen farmers’ position in the EU food system? 
A CDA of the Farm to Fork Strategy. AgricultureHum 
Values. 41(2):631–646. doi: 10.1007/s10460-023-10508-5 .
Paustian K, Andrén O, Janzen HH, Lal R, Smith P, Tian G, 
Tiessen H, Van Noordwijk M, Woomer PL. 1997 . 
Agricultural soils as a sink to mitigate CO2 emissions. 
Soil Use Manag. 13(s4):230–244. doi: 10.1111/j.1475- 
2743.1997.tb00594.x .
Paustian K, Larson E, Kent J, Marx E, Swan A. 2019 . Soil 
C Sequestration as a biological negative emission 
strategY. Front Clim. 1:1. doi: 10.3389/fclim.2019.00008 .
Poli R. 2011 . Steps Toward an explicit ontology of the 
future. J Futures Stud. 16(1):67–78.
Powell C. 2013 . Radical relationism: a proposal. In: 
Powell N Dépelteau F, editors. Conceptualizing rela-
tional sociology—Ontological and theoretical issues. 
Palgrave MacMillan; p. 187–207.
Powell N, Do T, Bachelder S, Tattari S, Koskiaho J, 
Hjerppe T, Väisänen S, Giełczewski M, Piniewski M, 
Księżniak M. 2021 . Rethinking decision support under 
conditions of irreducible uncertainty: co-designing 
a serious game to navigate baltic sea nutrient 
enrichment. Soc & Nat Resour. 34(8):1075–1092. doi:  
10.1080/08941920.2021.1934930 .
Puig de la Bellacasa M. 2015 . Making time for soil: 
Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Soc Stud 
Sci. 45(5):691–716. doi: 10.1177/0306312715599851 .
Puig de la Bellacasa M. 2017 . Matters of Care: speculative 
Ethics in More than Human Worlds. University of 
Minnesota Press.
Ramos J. 2003 . From Critique to Cultural Recovery: critical 
futures studies and Causal Layered Analysis. Australian 
Foresight Institute.
Rose DB. 2012 . Multispecies knots of ethical time. Environ 
Philos. 9(1):127–140. doi: 10.5840/envirophil2012918 .
Salazar JF, Granjou C, Kearnes M, Krzywoszynska A, & 
Tironi M, Eds. 2020 . Thinking with Soils: material 
Politics and Social Theory. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Staffa RK, Riechers M, Martín-López B. 2022 . A feminist 
ethos for caring knowledge production in transdisciplin -
ary sustainability science. Sustainability Sci. 17(1):45–63. 
doi: 10.1007/s11625-021-01064-0 .
Terry N, Castro A, Chibwe B, Karuri-Sebina G, Savu C, 
Pereira L. 2024 . Inviting a decolonial praxis for future 
imaginaries of nature: Introducing the entangled time ECOSYSTEMS AND PEOPLE
 15
tree. Environ Sci Policy. 151:103615. doi: 10.1016/j. 
envsci.2023.103615 .
van der Ploeg JD. 2020 . From biomedical to 
politico-economic crisis: The food system in times of 
Covid-19. J Peasant Stud. 47(5):944–972. doi: 10.1080/ 
03066150.2020.1794843 .
Veerman C, Pinto Correia T, Bastioli C, Biro B, Bouma J, 
Cienciala E, Emmett B, Frison EA, Grand A, Hristov L, 
et al. 2020 . Caring for soil is caring for life: ensure 75% 
of soils are healthy by 2030 for food, people, nature and 
climate: report of the mission board for soil health and 
food. Publications Office of the European Union. https:// 
data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/821504 .
Verschuuren J. 2018 . Towards an EU regulatory framework 
for climate-smart agriculture: The example of soil car-
bon sequestration. Transnatl Environ Law. 7(2):301–322. 
Scopus. 10.1017/S2047102517000395 .Vogel C, O’Brien K. 2022 . Getting to the heart of 
transformation. Sustainability Sci. 17(2):653–659. doi:  
10.1007/s11625-021-01016-8 .
Wamsler C, Osberg G, Osika W, Herndersson H, 
Mundaca L. 2021 . Linking internal and external trans -
formation for sustainability and climate action: Towards 
a new research and policy agenda. Global Environ 
Change. 71:102373. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021. 
102373 .
West S, Haider LJ, Stålhammar S, Woroniecki S. 2020 . 
A relational turn for sustainability science? Relational 
thinking, leverage points and transformations. 
Ecosystems People. 16(1):304–325. doi: 10.1080/ 
26395916.2020.1814417 .
Whyte K. 2021 . Time as kinship. In: Cohen J Foote S, 
editors. The Cambridge Companion to Environmental 
Humanities. Cambridge University Press.16
 S. BARRINEAU ET AL.
