Vol.:(0123456789)Agriculture and Human Values (2025) 42:271–288 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-024-10605-z
Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women 
in regenerative farming
Ane Kirstine Aare1  · Anna Umantseva1  · Laura Brandt Sørensen1 
Accepted: 24 June 2024 / Published online: 24 July 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Around the world, practitioners and academics are engaging in the rise of regenerative farming. On the margins of the pre-
dominant farming system, and often with little support and acknowledgement, regenerative farming is surprisingly persistent 
and represents a radical response to industrialization, ecological crises and alienation. This study uses feminist theories to 
grasp farmers’ regenerative experiences and explores how dialogical methodologies can create collective thinking among 
farmers and between academia and practice. The study is based on dialogues and iterative writing between three female 
researchers and two female regenerative farmers in Denmark in which we explore regenerative farming practices, female per -
spectives, feminist (more-than-human) care, and the sustainability crises we are facing today and in the future. The exchange 
of thoughts provides insights into what it is to be human in farming, including more-than-human relationships, as well as 
reflections on composting as a reproductive practice, and the (quiet) revolutionary potential of regenerative farming. Thus, 
we experience how creating collective thinking about common concerns across academia and practice can entail feelings of 
being part of a community as well as involve actual consequences and risks. Finally, it reminds us that sharing fragility by 
laying bare our work (and thoughts) as both researchers and practitioners allows for careful dialogues and valuable insights.
Keywords Participatory research · Dialogical methods · Feminist theories · Regenerative farming · Care · More-than-
human
Introduction: regenerative farming 
as a practical and epistemological concern
Despite advances in productivity in farming systems, Green 
Revolution logics and technologies have caused the huge 
depletion of soils around the world (UNCCD 2017; Veerman 
et al. 2020; IPCC 2022). To counteract this, regenerative 
farming seeks not merely to sustain, but to rebuild the foun -
dations of farming by improving soil health (Moyer et al. 
2020; Schreefel et al. 2020). Regenerative logics and prac-
tices echo the farming pioneers of bygone times, and their 
origin can be traced to indigenous knowledge and practices 
that have been marginalized through colonial territorial and 
cultural dispossession (Altieri 2004; Tittonell et al. 2022). 
However, in the last few decades regenerative farming has 
flourished in response to environmental and economic crises and to the production-orientated farming and agro-industry 
(Newton et al. 2020; Siegfried 2020; Seymour and Connelly 
2022). In a northern European country like Denmark, where 
62% of the territorial land is used for agricultural produc-
tion (Statistics Denmark 2020) which accounts for 24% of 
the total national greenhouse gas emissions (Dalgaard et al. 
2011) regenerative farming is receiving increased attenton. 
Radical change in the agrifood system is needed to counter -
act the negative effects of post WWII intensifiation and spe-
cialization of production, that have led to drastic biodiversity 
loss (Danish Biodiversity Council 2022), nitrogen leaching 
to surface waters (Kronvang et al. 2008), a decrease in soil 
carbon stocks (Adhikari et al. 2014), and very high debt and 
thus path dependency among farmers (Hansen 2019).
Many interpretations of regenerative farming exist side 
by side, since numerous different actors are increasingly 
interested in the concept, often with very different visions 
(Newton et al. 2020; Giller et al. 2021; Kallio and LaFleur 
2023). The Rodale Institute, which originally used the term, 
summarizes regenerative farming as “working to achieve 
closed nutrient loops, reduction or elimination of biocidal 
 * Ane Kirstine Aare 
 akaare@ruc.dk
1 Department of People and Technology, Roskilde University, 
Roskilde, Denmark
272 A. K. Aare et al.
chemicals, greater crop and biological diversity, fewer annu -
als and more perennials, and practices that mimic natural 
ecological processes” (Moyer et al. 2020). Furthermore, in 
some interpretations, regenerative farming combines soil 
(or, more broadly, nature) restoration with a critical per -
spective on food production and the broader farming sys-
tem (LaCanne and Lundgren 2018; Al-Kaisi and Lal 2020; 
Schreefel et al. 2020; Tittonell et al. 2022). This is done 
by also questioning the role and welfare of all actors in the 
farming system, the role of capitalism, and what knowledge 
is appreciated (Duncan et al. 2020). Thus, in its extensive 
interpretation, regenerative thinking and farming imply a 
radical systemic shift from current predominant farming 
practices, which focus on input-output cost calculations, to 
a broader understanding of a farming system that restores 
the wellbeing of all beings.
Regenerative agriculture (RA) has become an ambigu-
ous discourse and practice used by actors who seemingly 
belong to opposite sides of the farming debates (Tittonell 
et al. 2022 ; Gordon et al. 2023 ). Food corporations are 
increasingly incorporating RA into their discourses as an 
add-on farming technique, without otherwise changing the 
productivist and industrialized basis of farming (Gordon 
et al. 2023). Gordon et al. (2023) detail a variety of regen-
erative agriculture discourses and their levels of departure 
from the status quo, ranging from merely a new technique 
of on-farm management to “regenerative cultures” includ-
ing more equitable value chains and farm labor, and more 
radical socio-political transformations (food sovereignty and 
agroecology). With this variety of conflicting discourses and 
a rapidly changing landscape of what regenerative agricul-
ture is and will become, this paper intends to contribute 
to exploring how RA can be more than merely a technical 
change; it can be a transformative movement by the appli-
cation of collective and relational thinking. Regenerative 
farming is thus both a practical and ethical ontological and 
epistemological exercise (Gibbons 2020; Newton et al. 2020; 
Egmose et al. 2021). Hence by paving the way for new para-
digms, regenerative farming cannot be reduced to a set of 
farming practices, but involves new ways of relating – in 
nature, in the economic system and in human collectives 
(Leitheiser et al. 2022).
Relational thinking in agricultural studies has developed 
in the conjunction of feminist theory and posthuman studies 
as a theoretical and critical reflection on the sustainability 
crisis by introducing concepts such as more-than-human 
relations and ethics of care (Tsing 2015; Haraway 2016; Puig 
de la Bellacasa 2017; Beacham 2018; Hassink et al. 2020; 
Seymour and Connelly 2022). More-than-human ethics of 
care rejects an anthropocentric and human-centered perspec -
tive by exploring relations between humans and more-than-
humans (such as plants, soils, animals and ecosystems). The 
recognition of such interconnectedness allows an exploration of a multiplicity of embodied, affective and situated rela-
tions. This perspective provides a radical counterposition to 
the perspective embedded in the industrialization of farming 
where humans are perceived as superiors controlling and 
manipulating eco-systems (Gilson 2015). Perceiving posi-
tions and agency differently allows for new ways of under -
standing and engaging in farming systems, for researchers 
and practitioners alike.
Apart from looking towards relational ontologies, we 
situate this article within a broader tradition of feminist the-
ory addressing questions of care and social reproduction as 
undervalued labor (Bauhardt 2018). According to the femi-
nist thinker Vandana Shiva, farming has been historically 
constructed as a male-dominated, patriarchal activity, often 
devaluing and invisibilizing the crucial role of women’s 
knowledges and labor (Shiva 2009, 2013). Studies in certain 
parts of the world, especially in developing countries, show 
a trend of “feminization of agriculture” – women engaging 
more in agricultural labor or becoming farm managers for a 
variety of reasons, such as male labor outmigration to urban 
areas with women taking up the roles in farming previously 
performed by men (Kawarazuka et al.  2022). Despite this 
acknowledgement, women’s agricultural labor, as well as 
farming practices and mindsets traditionally considered 
“female”, such as care and reproductive activities, often 
remain marginalized in theory and practice (Shiva 2013).
In European countries, the number of women in farm-
ing has slowly been increasing in recent years, however the 
differences between countries are significant. The number 
of farms managed by women range from 45% in Latvia and 
Lithuania to 5–8% in Denmark, Malta and the Netherlands 
(European Commission 2021). In Denmark in 2020, only 5% 
of the land belonged to farms owned by female farmers, and 
women-owned farms are significantly smaller in size than 
male-owned ones (Statistics Denmark 2021).
As regenerative farming contests the societal structure of 
current farming systems, we suggest that understanding and 
co-creating transitions towards more caring and reciprocal 
relations between humans and more-than-humans needs to 
go hand in hand with addressing issues of patriarchy, capital-
ist orientation, individualism and colonial epistemic injus-
tices as these issues create conditions for the hierarchization 
and exploitation of care and reproduction (of humans and 
more-than-humans) (Trevilla Espinal et al. 2021). By com-
bining diverse strands of feminist theory, including more-
than human care, feminist economy and ecofeminism, we 
explore the conditions for careful farming practices, and thus 
contribute to the growing field of exploring how people live 
with, negotiate with and relate to the practices of regenera-
tive farming.
In the following sections, this paper will (1) Present 
the conceptual framework that builds on intersections of 
feminist theories, more-than-human thinking and collective 
273 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
organizing as a way towards transformative change. (2) 
Detail the methodological steps of building a dialogue 
between researchers and regenerative farmers. (3) Introduce 
the analysis structured around three interrelated themes. (4) 
And, finally, in a discussion and conclusion section, reflect 
on the vulnerabilities of the process of creating collective 
thinking as well as the potential of this conceptual and meth-
odological approach to build pathways towards transforma-
tive regenerative thinking.
Building dialogue as a conceptual 
framework
Applying relational thinking as well as feminist perspectives 
to the farming system implies a critical view of the role 
of researchers and preconditions for knowledge creation. 
Regenerative farming thus also requires renewed relations 
between research and practice. Action research, partici-
patory research, feminist research, etc. represent research 
approaches that incorporate different ways of knowing into 
the research. The arguments range from grasping complexi-
ties, including diversity of knowledge (embodied, expe-
rienced, informal, etc.), supporting transitions, as well as 
democratization and empowerment (Naples 2007; Egmose 
et al. 2022). However, in reality, the knowledge produced 
within research processes is often formulated and passed 
on through texts written by academics (Phillips et al. 2021, 
2022a). As the interpretation and presentation involve 
mechanisms of exclusion and inclusion of knowledge, such 
research processes involve power imbalances. Research-
ers have tried to compensate for such unequal power rela-
tions by, for example, involving practitioners in defining or criticizing the research process (Naples 2007; Phillips 
et al. 2021) or by using non-traditional academic formats for 
presenting research outputs such as autoethnography (Phil-
lips et al. 2022a, b), co-writing (Raider-Roth et al. 2019), 
or dialogues between researchers to demystify partial and 
situated knowledge construction pathways (Van de Pavert 
and Ressiore 2023). Building on these traditions and con-
cerns, we wanted to create dialogues with farmers in which 
they could participate in analyzing their own situation and 
thoughts. This means that the term dialogue has a double 
connotation in the study as presented in Fig.  1. It refers both 
to the epistemological exercise of collective knowledge crea-
tion (the methodological approach) and to the ontological 
perception of dialogical relations between human and more-
than-humans in farming (the theoretical lenses).
In the following we will introduce the two strands of the 
conceptual framework as both a theoretical and methodo -
logical approach.
Framing care and social reproduction 
within feminist political economy, ecofeminism, 
and ethics of care
Care and social reproduction are central concepts in several 
strands of feminist scholarship. This section delves into the 
convergence and divergence of these notions within femi-
nist political economy, ecofeminism, ethics of care and the 
evolving discourse of more-than-human care. While care, 
reproduction and more-than-human care arise from distinct 
theoretical frameworks, they intersect in ways that invite 
critical exploration.
Emerging out of broader feminist and post-human stud-
ies, the concept of more-than-human care acknowledges Fig. 1  Conceptual framework 
for the use of dialogue in the 
study. Dialogue includes both 
the methodological (collec-
tive thinking) and theoretical 
(relational thinking) approach 
applied. The dialogical 
approaches draw on inspiration 
from different theoretical and 
methodological traditions

274 A. K. Aare et al.
that care extends beyond the human realm. This perspec -
tive recognizes the agency and value of more-than-human 
entities. More-than-human care thus challenges the binary 
separation between humans and nature, advocating for an 
ethic of coexistence and mutual care. It converges with the 
feminist understanding of care by reinforcing the importance 
of empathy, relationality and interconnectedness. Maria Puig 
de la Bellacasa has played a significant role in introducing 
the “ecological turn” into care conceptualization (Puig de 
la Bellacasa 2012, 2015, 2017). Taking up Joan Tronto’s 
(1993) conceptualization of care as “species activity that 
includes everything we do to maintain, continue and repair 
our world”, and combining it with readings of the post-
human thinkers Latour 2007) and Haraway (2013), Puig de 
la Bellacasa (2017) explores questions of what it means to 
care in the context of the more-than-human world. She notes 
that “care is human trouble, but this does not make of care 
a human-only matter” (ibid., p. 2). In her reading, she goes 
beyond perceiving care as a normative stand encouraging 
humans to care for the more-than-human nature. Rather, she 
understands care as an ontological condition of being in a 
relational world, and hence care is unavoidable. The ques-
tion is then: How can we care? From the more-than-human 
perspective, care turns into a search for ability and autonomy 
in the other (Schrader 2015) and a way to learn to recognize 
“multiple needs and agencies without submitting to desire 
for control” (Bresnihan 2020).
The feminist approach of more-than-human care seeks to 
zoom in on, re-discover and re-imagine how people relate to 
nature, and how cultivating and exploring these relations is 
key to renewing mindsets and paradigms for a sustainable 
world. For example, Krzywoszynska (Krzywoszynska 2019) 
shows how farmers’ “attentiveness” to soil through embod-
ied and cognitive practice restores soil biota, but also makes 
farmers vulnerable within farming systems where soil care 
is not rewarded or considered a valuable part of food pro-
duction. Other researchers (Kimmerer 2013; Barnett 2023) 
link care in human-nature relations to traditional indigenous 
knowledges, where relations between people and their envi-
ronment are perceived as a matter of “reciprocity”, as the 
Earth is perceived as a gift that allows us to live with it and 
requires us to give back.
In feminist political economy, care and reproduction are 
also focal points as they shape the dynamics of labor, econ-
omy and power. Care work, predominantly performed by 
women, forms the foundation of social reproduction, main-
taining economic systems and societal structures (Bauhardt 
2018). This perspective highlights the invisible labor that 
sustains societies and economies, and emphasizes the gen-
dered inequalities that persist through the division of labor.
The feminist political economy’s emphasis on the under -
valuation of care labor resonates with the ecofeminist cri-
tique of the exploitation of both women and the environment. The fusion of these concepts highlights the systemic under -
pinnings of socio-ecological injustices and offers an analysis 
of the intertwined struggles for gender equity and ecological 
justice. At the same time, ecofeminism is often criticized 
for essentializing women by saying that women are more 
closely connected to nature, thereby feeding into patriarchal 
assumptions about women as less rational, more emotional 
and closer to nature than men (Bauhardt 2018). However, 
the contributions of ecofeminism cannot be limited to com-
paring women and nature. As Bauhardt (Bauhardt 2018) 
suggests, ecofeminism points to how social and ecological 
reproduction (caring for humans and more-than-humans to 
sustain life) are “at the same time a relationship of labour 
and exploitation and a source for creating bonds with the 
material foundations of life” (p. 32). This resonates with 
feminist calls (feminist ecology and feminist economies) for 
the need to re-think economics in terms of “caring econo-
mies”, where reproduction (activities of sustaining, restor -
ing and regenerating human and more-than-human lives) 
becomes the primary principle (Biesecker and Hofmeister 
2010; Biesecker and von Winterfeld 2018).
Collective thinking as a way of organizing?
Various strands of feminist theories perceive processes of 
social change as a collective endeavor opposed to individu-
alized paths based on “rational choice theory and a Homo 
economicus conception of what it means to be human” 
(García-López et al. 2021). This is reflected, for instance, in 
the interpretation of commoning as “maintaining relation-
ships between human and non-human communities” (ibid, 
p. 1201) to sustain social and environmental reproduction. 
New ways of relating between humans can occur in gifting 
or communal management of resources, including taking 
care of surpluses, waste, etc. (Beacham 2018; Jones 2019). 
Collectivity thus becomes a feminist way of organizing, as 
opposed to approaches that begin with the unified, indi-
vidualized, rational and Anthropocentric perspective. This 
is what Anna Tsing calls contras to the unified continuity 
of Man (Tsing 2016). Through her work, Anna Tsing dis -
covers that the critical perspective of the Anthropocene has 
drawn scientists, artists, philosophers and anthropologists 
into conversations on the heterogenic relationships between 
beings (human and more-than-human). Thus, if we perceive 
regenerative thinking as radically different to industrial-pro-
ductivist ideas, new discourses need to be made by shar -
ing personal perspectives and stories, and by engaging in 
collective learning between different experiences and per -
spectives (Gordon et al. 2021 ). According to Bastian et al. 
(2016), there is a need to bring together and explore link -
ages between the emerging more-than-human approaches 
and more established fields of participatory research because 
both approaches are interested in developing methods that 
275 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
can give voice to those excluded from dominant knowl-
edge production. In the ethnographic tradition of Science 
and Technology Studies (STS), the inclusion of non-human 
actors as informants would have been one way to approach 
this ambition. However, in the present case we use post-
human thinking to unfold the farmers’ own interpretation 
of the relations and care at stake in regenerative farming. 
The methodology applied in this study thus seeks to explore 
ways to create shared subjectivities between female farmers 
and female researchers who share an interest in regenerative 
thinking and farming. Following ideas of relationality and 
feminist care ethics, we wanted to integrate these ambitions 
into the methodology of the study, and in this way enact a 
thinking-with-care approach through the analysis and writ-
ing process.
Methods: finding careful ways to explore 
regenerative farming and collective thinking
This study arose, firstly, out of our (researchers) own curi-
osity about the potential of feminist theories to grasp farm-
ers’ regenerative farming experiences and, secondly, out of 
an interest in exploring methodologies to create collective 
thinking.
The use of participatory approaches in studies on agri-
cultural transitions has drastically increased in recent years. 
Considerable focus is placed on co-learning about sustain-
able practices and on solutions to existing unsustainable 
practices and systems through experimentation and innova-
tion (see e.g. Frank et al. 2022). However, the participation 
of actors is used to a lesser extent as a tool to understand 
the perspectives and experiences of working in new ways. We argue that more ambitious participatory methodologies 
are needed to contribute to the radical transformation that is 
suggested in regenerative farming and thinking.
The ambition behind this study was to use academic theo-
ries and interpretations as a platform to improve the under -
standing of being in regenerative farming – for researchers 
as well as farmers. Collective thinking thus refers to the 
process of dialogue as much as to the final product (the 
analysis).
We have drawn inspiration from other attempts to go 
beyond mere interviews by e.g. illustrate the reflexive dia-
logue among researchers (see e.g. Van de Pavert and Res-
siore 2023) and represent practitioners’ response to aca-
demic analyses (see e.g. Aare et al. 2020). However, we did 
not find an approach that was consistent enough with the 
dialogical ambition in this study, so we exploratively devel-
oped the following methodological approach (Fig.  2).
The study builds on dialogues involving two female 
farmers, Sidsel and Marianne1, and three female research-
ers, Ane, Anna and Laura. The two farmers were acquaint-
ances from previous participatory research and network -
ing in the regenerative farming community. Initiating this 
study stemmed from conversations with the two farmers and 
among the three researchers prior to the actual empirical 
collection (a).
We had our first dialogue with Sidsel and Marianne in 
spring/summer 2022 at the respective farms where they were 
then working (b). The dialogues were held with Ane, lasted 
Fig. 2  A Illustration of the methodological process of dialogue 
applied in this study: (a) prior talks between research and farmers, 
(b) individual farmer interviews, (c) researcher analysis, (d) farmers 
reading (e) collective discussion, (f) revision, (g) farmers reading, (h) reviews, (i) revision and (j) publication. B  Illustration of actors (farm-
ers, researchers, and reviewers) involved in the events of the dialogue 
(a-j)
1  One of the farmers expressed a desire to remain anonymous in the 
study. She chose the name Marianne as her alias, while Sidsel used 
her own name.
276 A. K. Aare et al.
between one hour and 90 min, and were loosely structured 
around two main questions: What does it mean for you to 
work with regenerative farming? and What is it like being 
a female in it? The ambition of presenting quite open ques-
tions was to allow the farmers’ lived experience and engage-
ment to guide the study (Naples 2007).
After the initial dialogues with the farmers, the research-
ers combined the experiences and thoughts articulated by the 
farmers with feminist theories into a first draft of an analy -
sis (c). We followed an abductive approach as our primary 
analytical strategy, going back and forth between the data 
and the theory, between shaping conceptual and empirical 
themes (Timmermans and Tavory 2022). In Western schol-
arship, the theories or philosophical approaches presented 
above are relatively new, and can often be interpreted as 
unconventional from the perspective of what are considered 
to be more established scientific approaches (Kimmerer 
2013). Hence, for us, applying these theories to analyze the 
real-life practice of farmers without engaging them in the 
analysis seemed like a one-sided practice where participants 
most probably have not heard of these theories. Hence, we 
intended to familiarize the farmers with the theories, as well 
as present the narrative we produced using these theories to 
interpret their practices in order to make the knowledge pro -
duction more equitable and dialogical. Therefore, theoretical 
concepts were (and still are in this final version) explained in 
the analysis (rather than solely in the theoretical chapter), to 
make the thoughts explicit for farmers in the iterative work 
with the analysis.
The draft of the analysis was sent to the farmers (d) with 
the aim of initiating a co-writing process. However, we 
(researchers) realized that finding the time, inclination and 
courage to engage in writing or editing an academic text was 
not an option immediately open to the farmers. Instead, we 
arranged an online meeting to discuss the text (e). The col-
lective meeting allowed us to discuss the concrete analysis 
(enabling us to rewrite the final analysis (f), as presented 
below), as well as hear about the farmers’ experiences 
of being portrayed through the analysis (presented in the 
discussion).
The final version was sent to the farmers for their last 
comments (g) and they were asked whether they would like 
to co-author the publication. After this feedback, the paper 
was sent to the journal and the responses from the reviewers 
were received as a further dialogue among researchers (h), 
leading to the final revisions by researchers (i) and publica-
tion (j).
Presentation of the farmers and researchers
In feminist political economy, care is traditionally seen as a 
gendered activity. Although feminist more-than-human care 
builds on decades of feminist scholarship, it tends to distance care from its gendered version, viewing practices of care 
as anything that has to do with reproducing and support -
ing life. Nevertheless, for the dialogues we chose to invite 
two female farmers who practice (in different ways and to 
differing degrees) regenerative farming. On the one hand, 
the values and practices of regenerative farming resonate 
with feminist thinking, such as the idea of interdependent 
relationships, collective living and care practices, which do 
not necessarily have a pronounced gender dimension. On 
the other, regenerative farming, at least in Denmark, seems 
to have a significant representation of female participants, 
something that cannot be observed in the general landscape 
of farming. Hence, the discussion about how feminist theo-
ries relate to the gender dimension, and if they are neces-
sarily interconnected, is an open question in this research. 
Finally, the study questions whether the collective experi-
ences of being females engaging in patriarchal world struc-
tures might increase our ability to address the lack of caring 
and reciprocity in both farming and academia. The study 
thus also explores how gendered collective experiences cre-
ate the basis for an interesting discussion about regeneration 
and (more-than-human) care.
The two farmers engage in regenerative practices on two 
very different farms. Marianne runs a 400 hectare farm in 
Jutland using principles from conservation agriculture and 
regenerative agriculture. She sells her produce to whole-
salers, but is also experimenting with niche products sold 
through minor sale channels. She owns the farm and has 
one employee and one trainee. Sidsel was on a small organic 
farm in the middle of Zealand. Recently one hectare was 
converted to a market garden, which is run by a company 
partly owned by restaurants in Copenhagen to produce fresh 
and local vegetables for them and other restaurants. Two or 
three people are hired to manage the farm with help from 
voluntary workers.
The first time the researchers and farmers met (d), the 
two farmers introduced themselves to each other and to 
us as researchers. This is how the two farmers presented 
themselves:
Marianne: “Well,  I run my father’s farm and actually 
also my mother’s. I started in 2016. Actually,  it wasn’t 
always on the cards , but I’m an only child and if I 
wanted to stay here on the farm then I had to figure 
out how myself. It’s a conventional pig farm. Or it was 
until 10 years ago. And well,  it’s probably 4–5 years 
ago that I really started to take an interest in regenera-
tive farming because I met Jill Clapperton,  an Ameri-
can researcher who has a global network,  and she has 
really tried a lot of things. […] And I have to admit 
that it was all-encompassing when we first started to 
take an interest in this. After all,  it’s not small things 
that you need to be able to do in order to move in a 
277 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
more sustainable and regenerative direction. But it’s 
just so interesting that I can’t really help it either. I can 
also feel a little frustrated sometimes because I think 
my progress is a little slow,  but that’s just the way it 
is. Because I still use pesticides. So I’m not organic. 
There’s still a long way to go. So I run an arable farm,  
a semi-large one,  or even quite large if it has to be 
done regeneratively. I have 400 hectares. And there 
are advantages and disadvantages to that. But you are 
always allowed to take a piece of land where you do 
something on a small scale. So I try to find time for 
that, but sometimes the time is a bit snatched,  I must 
admit.”
Sidsel  “I wasn’t supposed to be a farmer either. I grew 
up in Copenhagen and have been around for a while. 
I’ve been very interested in education,  democratic edu-
cation and green education,  and by that detour I was 
involved in a project in Lolland,  which is about start-
ing a folk high school that also deals with farming. 
And I came across the all-time eco-feminist Vandana 
Shiva and saw some films about seeds and so began 
to get drawn into that world,  i.e. more from a political 
perspective. That was my starting point , I think. And 
then because of the things I found exciting about edu-
cation and pedagogy and ‘dannelse’,  it only becomes 
really exciting when it is about moving something in 
the world,  when it is connected to something in prac-
tice. So it makes a lot of sense for me to link farming 
and education together. And then I went to a farming 
school in Norway for two years and have been part of 
running a small vegetable production operation last 
year by the skin of our teeth. And now I’ve just moved 
from Fejø to Lolland,  and I’m sitting right now look -
ing at the hectare of land that comes with the folk high 
school in Søllested. But right now I am mostly head 
of the secretariat and therefore have a lot of admin -
istrative work. So I mostly look at that field while I’m 
sending emails and stuff , but hopefully in a year I’ll be 
out there rooting around in the soil.”
As researchers, we initiated this study out of a common 
interest in regenerative farming and feminist theories. How -
ever, like the farmers, we also bring different personal and 
professional perspectives to the dialogue.
Anna is a cultural anthropologist whose research and 
teaching focuses on civil society-driven eco-social transi-
tions. Her interdisciplinary research interests are regen-
erative trends in farming, community economies, feminist 
epistemologies, and epistemologies of the South. She is 
interested in the dynamics of knowledge co-production, and 
understanding how engaging with a plurality of knowledges 
can contribute to eco-social transitions.Laura is a social scientist within the research field of 
sustainable food and farming systems. She is working with 
research questions concerning food anthropology, agrifood 
education, and relational approaches to sustainable and sys-
temic transformations. She is especially interested in how 
knowledge is constructed and focuses on posthuman onto-
epistemologies, more-than-human relationality, and the role 
of care, values and embodied experiences.
Ane is a trained environmental planner who is engaged 
in research questions regarding the transition towards regen-
erative farming practices. She is concerned about the diver -
gent perspectives, needs, and dreams among different actors 
within transition processes, especially those of farmers. Her 
concern about the experiences and roles of farmers in such 
processes has led to an increased focus on different kinds 
of knowledge (embodied, tacit, etc.) as well as the plurality 
of drivers for change, including non-economic ones (care, 
justice, etc.).
Below we present the analysis that was adapted following 
the second dialogue with the two farmers.
Analysis: combining regenerative 
and feminist experiences and thoughts
The analysis is structured into four overall themes that aim 
to create collective thoughts on dimensions of regenerative 
farming practices and care theory. The themes are “Being 
human in farming: making affective engagements in farming 
visible”, “More-than-human relationships in farming”, and 
“Composting as a reproductive practice”.
Being human in farming: making affective 
engagements in farming visible
One thing that was emphasized in the dialogue with the 
farmers was the importance of “being human” in farming. 
The urgency of this need seems to be a consequence of a col-
lective experience of not  being able to be human in today’s 
farming system, which is shaped by an industry that builds 
on control, productivity, efficiency and profit. Both Sidsel 
and Marianne express a longing for change, which includes 
more room for the unmeasurable aspects of farming practice, 
such as caring and nurturing.
“I have thought a lot about how our economy is organ-
ized. Structurally,  we value systems that provide profit 
and systems where we can extract value. Some of the 
things we are about to do differently in farming are 
some of the things that are difficult to measure: which 
is to make agriculture a more comfortable place to be 
human,  the landscape more pleasant to be in,  the coun-
try more inviting,  and to invest in some of the changes 
278 A. K. Aare et al.
in practice whose effects you cannot measure the next 
year,  soil fertility. And I definitely associate that with 
something more feminine.” Sidsel.
“I don’t know where that wanting to change comes 
from,  but I think it’s the female aspect of caring. That 
wanting to nurture. In any case,  it’s deep within me. 
But it is of course individual.” Marianne.
In these quotes, ”being human” is related to societal val-
ues, but also to a “female” way of being. At the same time, 
Marianne indicates that “wanting to nurture” might also be 
an individual characteristic rather than something she has 
because of her gender. In our follow-up dialogue, Marianne 
adds to this perspective by referring to a group of male farm -
ers who meet regularly to share knowledge about healthier 
soils and plants. In the end she says: “Of course,  I haven’t 
asked them what their motives are,  whether they are the 
same as mine” (Marianne). Sidsel agrees that regenerative 
farming does not necessarily only appeal to a specific gen-
der. However, she points towards a particular demographic 
group that has been attracted to regenerative farming in 
recent years: “ They come from one of the bigger cities , have 
studied something at university,  and have become frustrated. 
And I think maybe there is a preponderance of women in 
these environments” (Sidsel).
Being a human in farming for Marianne and Sidsel also 
involves emotions and affection. Both emphasize experienc-
ing exhaustion (physical and emotional) and vulnerability. 
Marianne, for example, talks about how practicing regenera-
tive techniques makes her vulnerable because she deviates 
from what is considered the norm. Here Marianne refers to 
judgment from other farmers because her fields look dif -
ferent from conventional fields, as well as a lack of under -
standing from her employees. Sidsel in turn talks about how 
farming in general is hard and exhausting because of the 
small financial margins. Hence, engaging in caring prac-
tices, including the emotional engagement that comes with 
it, while at the same time thinking about financial survival, 
is draining.
“Actually,  I just want to enjoy myself. I really like 
growing vegetables,  I love it , I really like taking care 
of animals,  I love it,  but I think it’s hard that the con-
ditions are so strained. You think about efficiency all 
the time and whether you make enough money. It takes 
up so much mental space. And that’s no fun.” Sidsel.
These accounts provoke several reflections. Affection 
and emotions, such as “joy”, “love” or “distress”, are rarely 
addressed in farming and sustainability research. In the lit-
erature, the affective dimension and emotional engagement 
are often linked to individual motivation or values (Alrøe 
et al. 2017). Thus, in an educational course on eco-justice, 
Walsh et al. (2020) identify “love” as a competence. They argue that love, and relating through love, is the basis for 
establishing meaningful relationships with others (both 
human beings and other beings, such as animals, plants, 
soil, etc.). Here, love and relating through love give access 
to alternative perspectives that cultivate a renewed sense 
of intimacy with nature. They suggest that “love” can be a 
skill of extending and receiving care for more-than-human 
beings that fosters reciprocity and co-creation of meaning, 
which is important in developing sustainable and alternative 
farming systems. When Sidsel uses the term “love”, it is not 
necessarily in its literal sense; it might refer to extending and 
receiving care from growing vegetables and interacting with 
animals (Kimmerer 2013; Van de Pavert and Ressiore 2023). 
To Sidsel, loving and caring are not an added value, but a 
prerequisite for her doings, thus challenging the idea of work 
as a primarily rational activity for subsistence:
“[…] when I have to find something I want to do , I 
have to actually like it. And also on a somewhat philo-
sophical , poetic level. It’s just such a big part of me 
that I can’t do anything every day if I don’t feel like it. 
That is,  if I don’t have feelings for it.” Sidsel.
“Being human” in farming thus involves feeling a con-
nection between one’s practice and belief. Recognizing this 
perspective in the context of farming might reveal or even 
invite new conversations about how we would like to pro-
duce food in future. However, Sidsel explains that she avoids 
talking a lot about the affective dimensions of farming out of 
fear that her colleagues do not think she is suited to a leading 
position on a farm or in a school. However, when she does 
articulate affection, she often finds that she delegitimizes 
herself to avoid others doing it. This is something that she 
finds quite problematic:
“It’s a problem because we measure the success of a 
farm by very few parameters,  and none of the param-
eters are the welfare of those who are on the farm,  
either animals or people,  right? There are plenty of 
successful farms where people do not have a great 
time, and there are plenty of unsuccessful farms where 
people have a great time.” Sidsel.
“While we can’t talk about feelings,  while we can’t talk 
about what kind of everyday life people have,  what 
kind of stress you live with […]  then it will never ever 
be an important bottom line to assess how successful 
a farm is. And then I don’t believe that it will get any 
better.” Sidsel.
Following feminist economy scholars, exhaustion reso-
nates with devalued care work (Federici 2020). This means 
that care becomes exhaustive, and even oppressive, if not 
recognized and accounted for at the structural level and 
through societal awareness. Puig de la Bellacasa (2012) 
argues that care practices in relation to sustainability are an 
279 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
ethical (and political) concern that emphasizes the issues of 
devaluated labor, other living beings, and an urgent need to 
recognize the “inevitable interdependency essential to the 
reliant and vulnerable beings that we are” (p. 198).
Marianne and Sidsel both recognize the need and experi -
ences of interdependency between human beings and more-
than-human beings (soil, plants, animals, etc.). Marianne 
explains how she experienced interdependency and vulner -
ability in her own life:
“One of our children has had an intestinal disease,  
which they [doctors] say is chronic. Now she’s healthy 
because she made some changes [in her diet]. In this 
process,  I read a lot about nutrition and recognized the 
responsibility we have. I took it seriously,  regarding 
my responsibility as a farmer in terms of what kind of 
products are passed on to animals and people. If we 
are to make good fodder and food,  we must learn to 
work with the soil.” Marianne.
This reflection pinpoints the interdependency between 
healthy soil and human health, but also reveals the lived 
experiences of being a mother with a sick child. In this way, 
the example illustrates how farming also involves being a 
human beyond a profession, extending it to family life and 
society in general.
Thus “being human” in farming questions our understand-
ing of what is included and excluded in farming practice. 
Sidsel and Marianne exemplify in different ways how being 
a farmer is not solely a professional act of running a busi-
ness or producing food, but involves situated experiences 
and interrelatedness that embed emotional experiences.
Relationships in regenerative farming
What makes regenerative farming or rather regenerative 
thinking resonate with the care approach is the focus on 
relationships as a fundamental element of wellbeing and 
sustainability. Adeline Johns-Putra, among other thinkers, 
suggests relating care and the environmental crisis by re-
acknowledging the collectiveness, dependency and respon-
sibility in a world where human beings live together with 
other living beings (Johns-Putra 2013). Yet how do we relate 
to what we do (e.g. the farm, farming, being a farmer)? How 
do we relate to other living beings in the food-production 
process (close by or at a distance)? And how do we create a 
relationship with a plant?
As became evident when talking to both farmers, regen-
erative thinking entails a move away from focusing on crops 
to being concerned about the soil as a complex web of liv -
ing and non-living elements. This increases the number of 
more-than-human actors involved in farming, and thereby 
the complexity and collectivity (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017).Both farmers reflect on how they can support the different 
actors in the soil food web, for example by creating condi-
tions for the plant to be an active agent. Marianne explains 
that changing her way of fertilizing the plant allows it to be 
more selective in how it absorbs its nutrients.
“Like spoon-feeding. The thing about feeding a lit-
tle bit at a time. It is much more adapted,  whereas if 
we come with everything  [all at once] […] these are 
some huge meals. And the plant can’t choose whether 
to absorb it or not.” Marianne.
Sidsel, in turn, talks about farming as a dialogical rela-
tionship, and the importance of accepting the lack of human 
control over all the factors involved in farming:
“(F)arming is fun because it’s a dialogue. You do 
something and then it comes back somehow. It’s not 
like typing on a computer. There is something that is 
out of control: the weather and all sorts of things. It’s 
pretty crazy to farm. I like that. And I think that’s also 
healthy to practice –losing control a little.” Sidsel.
Both farmers thus portray the farmer as part of an inter -
connected system responding, providing and supporting, 
rather than mastering nature or food production (Plumwood 
1994). As Marianne explains:
“So this whole way of thinking that if we can […] shift 
the plant’s ability to defend itself […] If you really 
have a good microbial turnover,  diversity and all that,  
then I actually think the system can do it by itself,  but 
until you get there I think it will be wise to introduce 
some tricks to just to help it over , so that you help 
the plant strengthen itself until it has established that 
good collaboration with the entire microbial life.”  
Marianne.
The idea of “helping the plant to strengthen itself” is a 
good example of a reciprocal relationship and integration of 
the farmer as an actor in the soil food web. Marianne assists 
the plants that help themselves establish a good collabora-
tion with the entire microbial life, which provides “good” 
soil to grow healthy crops for her, her children and others. 
However, such a collaboration can be challenging:
”It requires huge work with myself,  which is partly 
about becoming good at listening and using my atten-
tion, and when something goes wrong – or how should 
I put it? Yes,  then,  it’s about the fact that we haven’t 
found the right rhythm together.” Sidsel.
Regenerative farming thus requires new ways of know -
ing and learning, as well as unlearning with farming, in 
more-than-human relationships. To Sidsel, this involves 
going beyond theoretical quantifiable knowledge and using 
one’s senses, what she calls a “peasant sense”.
280 A. K. Aare et al.
”It is some of the things we also need to do as farm-
ers; insist that there are other ways of perceiving the 
soil which are legitimate. Other than just getting soil 
tests done and getting some numbers back or look -
ing at some research and doing it like the research 
says. […] Other methods that are less tangible,  
quantifiable,  and much more complex. That makes 
it really fun because you can get much better at it , 
and suddenly you’re able to understand some things 
and sense some things that were inaccessible to you 
before,  because you’ve learned to know the soil and 
learned to know your field.” Sidsel.
However, learning through new methods and unlearning 
can be difficult and lonely. Sidsel explains how she longs 
to expand her “collective” beyond her existing network of 
small-scale farmers. From her perspective, all the learn-
ing needed to succeed in regenerative farming requires 
one to be part of a (larger) collective, both to have an 
extended collective pool of experience and knowledge, 
but also because unlearning is uncomfortable. Thus you 
need somewhere to find support, motivation and stamina 
to continue.
After engaging in regenerative farming, Marianne has 
joined new farmer networks. To her the essential criterion is 
that the networks provide safe spaces for sharing experiences 
and new ideas about how to cultivate soil. Thus, engaging in 
relations with other farmers and being part of processes of 
collective learning and thinking might be vital for farmers’ 
caring abilities and more-than-human relationships. Or the 
caring ability might already exist, but the collective learn-
ing can increase the awareness, recognition and feeling of 
acceptance of regenerative caring practices. This highlights 
how caring can be exhausting and oppressive if it is not 
recognized and taken into account.
Caring relationships in farming systems also involve 
dilemmas and compromises. During the small talk before the 
second dialogue, Marianne confessed that she had applied 
insecticides on some of her fields this year. It could be said 
that she chose to care more about yield than about aphids. 
Caring for her employee is another reason why Marianne 
compromises on her own ambitions and beliefs:
“An example of something that we’ve done so that 
he (employee) also thinks it’s a nice place to be: 
he doesn’t like weeding wild oats , so I’ve actually 
bought some wild oat remedy that we’ve sprayed on 
so he doesn’t have to go and weed wild oats. Well,  
just thinking that it should be an employee concern 
makes me a little sad.” Marianne.
Relational work and interdependency thus expand beyond 
more-than-humans in the soil food web to humans and to 
society in general. This is reflected in the two farmers’ holistic approach to what farming encompasses. Firstly, 
they recognize that they are part of a food system , including 
value chains, policies, consumption patterns, etc. where their 
practice is affected and affects the rest of the system.
“(R)egenerative farming is not only about how we treat 
the soil,  but also how we treat each other and what 
kind of food system we are part of on a larger scale.” 
Sidsel.
However, the two farmers are also thinking holistically in 
the sense that they perceive farming as part of a whole life, 
including farmers’ private stories and affective engagement. 
For example, Sidsel is concerned about her future life (par -
enthood, joy, physical wealth, etc.) if she stays in farming, 
which has made her doubt her professional engagement in 
farming in future. Thus, relationships enact different reali-
ties of regenerative farming, and these are co-existing and 
sometimes contradictory (caring for the soil, the employee, 
the child, the economy, etc.).
Time for composting as a reproductive practice
Feminist theory, and especially the feminist economy, criti-
cizes the unbalanced appreciation between production and 
reproduction. Today’s global soil depletion demonstrates 
that reproduction in farming in the form of revitalizing 
soil is not an acknowledged or valued practice in market 
terms. To both farmers, the ambition of regenerative farm-
ing is precisely to achieve a balance between production and 
reproduction.
Thinking with care theories, the activities of reproduc-
tion are crucial to creating and sustaining relations with 
the more-than-human world. Reproductive activities thus 
become “doings which support livable relationalities” (Puig 
de la Bellacasa 2011) rather than mere peripheral activities 
that support productive tasks. This does not mean, however, 
that relating to soil with care cannot include decisions and 
actions that can be viewed as controlling or even violent 
– e.g. using chemicals in the field or eliminating actors in the 
soil food web for the sake of helping the whole ecosystem 
survive (Beacham 2018; Krzywoszynska 2019; Kallio and 
LaFleur 2023).
Making, processing and distributing compost are concrete 
examples of reproductive activities where one becomes more 
closely connected to the soil as a living organism (Puig de 
la Bellacasa 2019; Kallio and LaFleur 2023). To Marianne, 
compost is her way of “curing” soil microbial life, some-
thing she is experimenting with in her own DIY laboratory. 
Sidsel, however, experiences composting through affectivity 
and sensory engagement:
“I get a huge kick out of the wonder of life. The connec-
tion between the very down-to-earth – the practical,  
281 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
physical turning of the compost – and how philosophi-
cal a compost is. How funny it is to see life and death 
unfold right there. It gives rise to many thoughts and 
feelings. At the same time as it being so ridiculously 
concrete and sensuous. I also think there is something 
with sensuousness.” Sidsel.
To Sidsel, compost reflects one part of a cycle where 
‘waste’ goes back to life. Wanting to “take care of what is 
left from production” (Sidsel) reveals a cyclic understanding 
of the farming system and acknowledgment of the existence 
and value of what is outside the productive system.
However, when caring practices are not part of the pro-
ductive system, they are also less respected. This puts farm-
ers in a dilemma not just financially, but also with regards 
to acknowledgement. Sidsel explains:
“I think because I don’t have a farming background 
at all […] I needed to prove myself. I became very 
interested in becoming a professional. I was only a 
real farmer if that was my profession. And since then,  
I’ve thought it was bullshit. That something becomes 
legitimate if it becomes part of the economy.” Sidsel.
With this quote, Sidsel argues that farmers are only 
acknowledged if their farming is production-oriented. This 
might not exclude engagement in reproductive activities 
such as composting, using cover crops, etc., provided it is 
not at the expense of producing commodities. However, 
in practice this can be challenging, as reproductive caring 
practices such as composting are time-consuming without 
generating short-term financial profits.
“Time” is raised as an issue by the farmers in two dif-
ferent ways: firstly, the lack of time to do what needs to be 
done if farmers want to farm regeneratively, and secondly, 
regenerative farming requires a sense for temporal rhythms 
that call for another pace and perspective of time:
“It makes good sense to look at which weed it is,  where 
it is; what the wind,  rain,  sun,  soil are like. It’s insane 
to think that you can just decide what happens to it  (the 
land), that you just move in and fix it. It requires time 
that most people don’t have because it costs money.” 
Sidsel.
“A big [theme] in regenerative farming is working 
with a different time horizon. There is,  after all,  much 
of what I am talking about with the term regenera-
tive, that also gives something to the bottom line,  but it 
is just a completely different time perspective.” Sidsel.
In the same way, many scholars working with the concept 
of care argue that in order to integrate care one needs to 
reflect on the perception of time, and how this perspective 
affects others (Bastian 2009; Johnson 2015; Schrader 2015; 
Puig de la Bellacasa 2017). Michelle Bastian ( 2009 ) and Boaventura de Sousa Santos ( 2014 ) suggest that the concept 
of linear time that informs the Western worldview is not 
universal, and other timescales, such as cyclical time, can 
be fruitful for analyzing how time affects people’s relation-
ship with the environment. With her notion of “soil times”, 
Puig de la Bellacasa (2017) adds to the multiplicity of eco-
temporalities, as opposed to the one-way anthropocentric 
temporality that goes with productivism. She argues that if 
caring is to be increased, it is necessary to “make time for 
soil care”.
However, to convince oneself and others about the effects 
of the time spent on regeneration, both farmers express that 
they need proof. This is due to the lack of direct response 
to their practice because “soil cannot provide feedback on 
the care received in the same way as humans can” (Van de 
Pavert and Ressiore 2023). Marianne explains that if she 
could prove the effects of her practices, she would be more 
confident talking about her methods and ideas with other 
farmers. Similarly, Sidsel is longing for good practical exam-
ples or research that she can refer to when communicating 
her ambition. The search for evidence that caring practices 
lead to greater regeneration thus illustrates how caring can 
also be associated with feelings of insecurity and doubt.
Discussions and conclusions: collectively 
thinking with care about activism, dialogue 
and feminist theories
The dialogues led to understandings of regenerative prac-
tices and relations with human and more-than-humans in 
farming systems. The dialogues also brought up themes 
about how thinking regeneratively can be activistic, and how 
the encounter between research and practice provides spaces 
for thinking with care. Finally, in this section we reflect on 
the input that the dialogue has provided for future dialogue 
and research on regenerative farming by combining different 
feminist strands and experiences from practice.
“I feel like a little rebel, but quiet”
Regenerative farming is a response to several ecological 
crises, including climate change, biodiversity, pollution 
etc., but is also related to several social crises of inequality, 
alienation, and mistrust:
“In addition to the many crises we have, the climate 
crisis, biodiversity crisis and environmental crisis, I 
think we also have a crisis of confidence. Control has 
almost become a mantra, because we cannot trust that 
farmers of their own free will do something that leads 
in the right direction, and it is probably a mistrust that 
282 A. K. Aare et al.
has come about for a reason. There is no doubt about 
that.” Marianne.
Marianne uses her considerations about becoming cer -
tified organic as an example of this crisis. Her perception 
is that innovative farmers are challenged by strict regula-
tion, as it reduces the flexibility for trying out new prac-
tices. Through her engagement with regenerative farming, 
Marianne has also become very skeptical about (commer -
cial) actors and structures in the farming system, including 
agricultural advisers, the agroindustry, etc.
“I’ve never really been interested in politics. And I 
always just fitted in and did what was expected of me,  
so I kind of feel like something has happened. I simply 
have to be an activist,  at least in my own place. So I’m 
increasingly critical of authorities,  and I’ve become 
increasingly critical of the marketing in agriculture 
and the agricultural press. I don’t read it at all in the 
same way as I used to.” Marianne.
“I grew up very loyal to authorities,  but all this [regen-
erative farming]  breaks with the conventions and I feel 
like a little rebel,  but quiet.” Marianne.
Edgar Burns (2020), who studies the emergence of regen-
erative farming networks in New Zealand, calls the practice 
a “quiet revolution” in farming because of the fundamentally 
different way of doing and perceiving farming. Discussing 
the analysis with Marianne and Sidsel in the follow-up dia-
logue generated an interesting conversation about a quieter 
or even careful kind of activism. Both Sidsel and Mari-
anne explain that their strategy today, especially towards 
other farmers, is to seek dialogue rather than confrontation, 
because as Sidsel explains: “We’re all in the same boat”.
“You can be an activist in many different ways. So 
maybe it’s really more about formulating a new con-
cept of what it is to be an activist,  which is a little more 
dialogue-seeking and a little more caring , and not 
about storming into the National Federation of Large 
Farmers’ Unions and telling them what big dumbasses 
they are. But a slightly soft sensitive activism,  which 
is also about being a little more caring towards those 
who are doing their best right now.” Sidsel.
The quiet and sensitive activism presented by Sidsel and 
Marianne has clear commonalities with the careful and rela-
tional approach to farming they both describe. Exploring 
careful ways of conducting research was also the aim of this 
paper and the arguments behind the conceptual framework. 
Being careful in research corresponds with the posthuman 
and feminist understanding of academic engagement. Stud-
ies within sustainability research highlight in particular the 
urgent need for radical change and the related epistemo-
logical and methodological implications. Bertella (2023) advocates for a ‘care-full academic activism’ that offers a 
holistic, innovative and practical perspective on care-based 
research aiming to connect sustainable transformation with 
care. Pottinger (2020) “explores moments of taking care” by 
drawing on ethnographic fieldwork on gardeners’ everyday 
activisms with seeds and plants. She points out that a gentle 
methodological approach can hold utility for exposing and 
theorising under-acknowledged forms of care-full political 
and environmental action, which might be significant. Both 
thinkers provide examples of how to use sensitivity towards 
relationality, attentiveness, and ethics of care when doing 
academic research.
By applying a careful research approach, we hope to con-
tribute to the discussion on what consequences it may have 
to include ethics of care and relational methodologies, and 
bring forward a discussion on dialogical and participatory 
research within regenerative farming.
Collective thinking as a means of transformation
“Transformation,  I think we are all in it. You as 
researchers and us […] So we must try to contribute 
from where we are.” Marianne.
The ambition of this study was to create collective think -
ing among regenerative farmers and researchers, both to 
reduce the distance between theory and practice, and to 
unravel common experiences between the two farmers. 
Furthermore, we wanted to create a possibility for sharing 
engagement on social change between practitioners and aca-
demics. From an action research and eco-feminist perspec-
tive Egmose et al. (2022) argue that researching together 
can foster eco-social transformation by i) enabling social 
learning spaces to make visible the ways we are socially 
and ecologically related; ii) re-imagining how we want to 
live and relate in wider ecologies; iii) seeking alternatives 
to mastery through tangible practices; and iv) enabling new 
organizational forms for societal reorganization”. When 
discussing this ambition with Sidsel and Marianne in the 
second dialogue, they shared with us how the consolidation 
of experiences and thoughts (through the analysis) affected 
them:
“You have formulated some of the things that mean 
something to me in relation to being a farmer and 
some of the things that have meant that I did not take 
the well-trodden path and that I have no intention of 
continuing along that path either.” Sidsel.
Between the first and the second dialogues, Sidsel 
changed her job from being a small-scale farmer to being 
the coordinator of a new school focusing on regenerative 
farming and food. The analysis reminded Sidsel of how 
experiences (individual or collective) affect personal life 
283 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
choices, thus retrospectively creating meaningful and coher -
ent stories.
To Marianne, the collective story presented in the analy -
sis made her feel “hopeful”:
“If you as researchers can find a common thread in the 
talks with us,  that somehow makes me a little hope-
ful. So maybe there is a more general picture. Then I 
can feel like part of something bigger,  even if I’m just 
walking around a bit alone in a field. That I am part 
of a community even without being in a direct working 
community or established networks. So that makes me 
hopeful in one way or another.” Marianne.
The collectivity created around practical, academic and 
personal engagement in regenerative thinking and doing can 
thus provide a feeling of support in the engaged individu-
als’ lives.
However, the concern about objectification of the farm-
ers rather than actual democratic involvement made us ask 
the farmers about how it made them feel to be the object of 
analysis by researchers. Sidsel reported: ”It’s actually quite 
flattering in a way to read it , right? And I thought , well , 
but if that’s what you get out of what I do,  what matters to 
me, then it’s really nice to actually hear” (Sidsel). Mari-
anne does not feel flattered. Instead she says: “[…] such a 
quite shy farmer who just tends to run in her own field. I 
think: Did I say that? But I don’t feel misunderstood. I don’t ” 
(Marianne). Instead, she explains how reading the analysis 
made her reflect on her own practice: “It has contributed 
with some thoughts about why I would like the change” 
(Marianne). “So it’s really comprehensive. Also more than 
we might experience on a daily basis” (Marianne). Again, 
bringing together experiences and theoretical lenses can help 
create meaningful stories about one’s own situation and the 
situation of others. To Marianne, this means both finding 
meaning but also expanding her individual experiences to a 
collective pool of experiences, and thereby situating them in 
broader structural issues. Whether this leaves one in a better 
place is an open question.
Toledo et al. (2023) explain how feminist methodol-
ogy of sharing experiences can be used to “inspire joy, 
generate connection, find community, and build new 
dwellings”(Toledo et al. 2023). Building dwellings refers 
to Sara Ahmed’s notion that “(to) build feminist dwellings, 
we need to dismantle what has already been assembled; we 
need to ask what it is we are against, what it is we are for, 
knowing full well that this we  is not a foundation but what 
we are working toward” (Ahmed 2017). Despite the fact that 
the contexts in which the two farmers engage in regenera-
tive practices are rather different, their differences were not 
an obstacle for bringing their personal thoughts and expe-
riences together for collective thinking. Furthermore, the 
situation of being practitioners and researchers with very different contextual approaches and knowledge did not hin-
der a dialogue; instead it added another conceptual reflec-
tion about regenerative thinking to the dialogue and analysis. 
Using time to present and weave together their experiences 
of regenerative farming instead allowed the farmers and the 
researchers to look at things from a meta-perspective and see 
the comprehensive extent and consequences of regenerative 
thinking. It also allowed the creation of a we  attached to this 
story to strive for and be supported by, a we  that appreci-
ates and makes space for regenerative farming and thinking. 
Despite the potential of collective thinking, both Sidsel and 
Marianne expressed their reluctance to share the analysis 
with everyone2. When we asked the farmers why they would 
not like to be associated with the analysis in which they said 
they felt represented and even flattered, Marianne and Sidsel 
explained:
“So, for example,  in the farmers’ group there is some-
one who’s employed in my bank. And I have a big loan. 
In other words,  it’s of no use if your creditors think 
you are completely on the fence about what you do 
with the money you’ve borrowed. So it is,  for exam-
ple, one thing,  but it is also about reputation. I think 
everyone knows that when you sit down and formulate 
something as researchers,  you also want,  if you submit 
an article,  that it passes a review. Yes,  I will be sorry 
if I behaved in such a way that when I come to some 
gathering,  people just avoid me like this or if I have 
opened my mouth and they just shrug their shoulders 
like this or laugh a little or so. It can do something to 
you, I think.” Marianne.
“There are some of the farmers I talk to who I actually 
don’t want reading this. Just because it’s quite con-
troversial actually. At least,  someone will take me less 
seriously if they read this first.” Sidsel.
These thoughts recall experiences of how thinking with 
feminist theories and methodologies can also be controver -
sial in academia. Laura adds:
“So, I think that we can recognize many of those things 
from academia. It also depends on the context,  whether 
we would present these thoughts,  for example. Because 
it will not be recognized in all places either. […] And 
some might think that it’s very sweet what we’re doing , 
but what are we going to use it for? So yes,  we may 
say that we’re doing research,  but there are some who 
might not think that this was particularly research-
based or that these are perspectives that are worth 
pursuing. So,  it is really the feeling of ‘ouf’ who will 
2  Both farmers agreed on the conditions of the study through written 
consent. One of the farmers expressed a wish to remain anonymous 
and chose an alias for the study.
284 A. K. Aare et al.
hire me and where will the money come from tomor -
row.”  Laura.
Despite the fact that we often “think-with” the subjects 
of our academic studies, Puig de la Bellacasa notices that 
“affective attachments to collectives are misplaced in aca-
demic texts, deemed empathetically uncritical, or even self-
indulgent”(Puig de la Bellacasa 2012) and that “academic 
settings do not really value eclectic writing-with, especially 
when it explodes the category of disciplined peers” (p. 202).
In this way, producing written text about the engagement 
in regenerative thinking can have concrete consequences in 
practice as well as in academia; something that reminds us 
that writing, researching, and relating in knowledge produc-
tion are not isolated activities, but influence the world in 
which we live (ibid.).
In this study, we felt obliged to present the interpreta-
tions to the subjects we had been thinking-with. In doing 
so, we were reminded of the reflexivity and care needed 
when we interpret the experiences of others (Puig de la Bel-
lacasa 2012; Staffa et al. 2022). Presenting abstract theories 
compared with the tough everyday life of farmers implies 
recognizing the privilege of researchers to hover over eve -
ryday life with philosophical perceptions and critiques. In 
this study, the act of laying out the interpretation and inviting 
practitioners to theoretical thinking allowed us to reverse 
the roles between researchers and practitioners by exposing 
ourselves to critique and the vulnerability that comes with it. 
Our experience was that sharing something vulnerable both 
as researchers and practitioners fostered care. Furthermore, 
sharing the experience of breaking norms (Ahmed 2017) 
weaved our life-worlds together, despite our differences. The 
atmosphere of both the first and the second dialogues was 
therefore gentle, caring and joyful. The personal relation-
ships as well as the themes of analysis (being more personal 
and not very factual) made it both awkward and warm. As 
insinuated above by Puig de la Bellacasa (2012), relation 
building and feelings around doing interviews are in many 
methodological schools intended to be prevented by “pro-
fessional” distancing. With the intention of meeting on a 
more equal footing, bringing ourselves as researchers into 
the room, creating transparency about the aim, process, and 
ambitions was necessary and unavoidable.
In this study, we did not manage to write  together with 
the farmers. During the study we realized that to undertake 
co-writing as a way of thinking collectively requires a lot of 
engagement and equal appreciation of the writing process as 
a common third. Through our contact with the farmers, we 
learned about the contrasting pace of academia and the busy 
and changeable rhythms of our lives. One of the farmers 
articulated a wish to engage in further discussions about the 
text, while at the same time acknowledging the limitations 
related to a lack of time in her current situation. However, the indication that the dialogue might continue beyond this 
paper offers hope for future collective regenerative think -
ing. Finally, the farmers’ articulation of the potential conse -
quences of sharing their thoughts also made us reconsider 
the idea of co-writing in this situation.
Taking the dialogue forward
With this study we aimed at exploring the potential of regen-
erative farming as a transformative movement by applying 
collective and relational thinking. The need for collective 
thinking is already emphasized in regenerative agriculture 
papers (Gordon et al. 2021; Seymour and Connelly 2022), 
and in feminist theory and posthuman studies (Tsing 2015; 
Haraway 2016; Puig de la Bellacasa 2017; Beacham 2018; 
Hassink et al. 2020; Seymour and Connelly 2022). The farm-
ers introduced in this paper indicate that regenerative think -
ing is different from defining “what is in and what is out” in 
farming. Instead, it is about inclusion, relationality and care 
when approaching and thinking about farming. However, 
little is written about how to make collective thinking and 
care transformative.
The practices of the farmers we spoke to can be described 
as attempts to engage in more-than-human care to create a 
relationship with the more-than-human on the farm. This can 
be seen, for example, in caring for things that do not pro-
duce human-centered value in themselves (such as extending 
care to the soil and soil microorganisms). This, as Sidsel 
suggests, implies partially ceding control, recognizing that 
not everything can or should be controlled by the farmer, 
and thereby giving more agency to the more-than-human 
entities. For Sidsel and Marianne, this means learning and 
unlearning how to be present differently with plants and ani-
mals; how to establish one’s role as a farmer who is attend-
ing to the plants rather than exercising control; and being 
confronted with dilemmas and uncertainties of more-than-
human care when there needs to be a balance between the 
wellbeing of soil and plants and the necessity to produce 
food for sale and support the farm financially.
These relational dynamics between farmers and plants 
are mirrored in the farmers’ care and reproductive labor 
beyond the farm. Stories of their interactions with plants, 
soil, and soil organisms are intertwined with how they see 
and experience their role in social reproduction, including 
their personal and family life and care for other workers on 
the farm. The reproductive work they do in regenerative 
farming is thus interlaced with broader social reproduction 
towards their families and broader society.
This focus on reproductive work, e.g. composting or treat-
ing the plants differently, has very real and tangible implica-
tions for farmers. It requires being vulnerable, sometimes not 
285 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
being recognized as legitimate farmers, because the legiti-
macy is often linked to production-oriented metrics.
Hence, by thinking of more-than-human care from a 
feminist perspective, we situate these practices as part of 
a broader context of social reproduction that reveals the 
undervalued labor (physical and emotional) and the risk of 
isolation and delegitimization associated with it. That is why 
we argue that, for these farmers, more-than-human care is 
also largely about being human in farming, attending to the 
reproduction of life, a longing to nurture, and experiencing 
love and affection.
Feminist ideas of social reproduction in society hence 
direct an analysis of regenerative practices towards a critique 
of the undervalued role of reproduction and care in farming 
systems and research, calling for a greater focus on how 
reproducing human and more-than-human life are integral 
components of farming systems.
We suggest that an analysis of farming that attempts to 
transition from an industrialized production-oriented para-
digm to regenerative thinking can be enriched by combining 
a more-than-human care perspective with broader critical 
feminist thinking. While more-than-human care invites us 
to think about how uncovering the interconnectedness of 
human and more-than-human wellbeing through relations 
of care and reciprocity can inform new ways of relating to 
nature, conceptualizations of care in other feminist strands 
remind us of the undervalued place of care and reproduction 
(human and more-than-human) within existing economic 
paradigms and societies as a whole.
Finally, through the dialogues, it is clear that insisting 
on being human in farming, creating relationships with 
more-than-human elements, spending time on reproductive 
activities, and perceiving through various temporalities are 
all examples of rebellion against the established farming 
system. However, rather than being performed in political 
arenas, these are carried out as concrete local acts of care 
in farming. Hence, creating places for dialogue across these 
quiet revolutions are crucial in order to move beyond indi-
vidual experiences to collective thoughts and visions for a 
future regenerative farming system in theory and practice. 
Hence, we suggest that there is a need for more engagement 
in dialogues between researchers and practitioners, and for 
the inclusion of diverse forms of knowledge (e.g. feminist, 
bodily, affective) in studies of transitions to regenerative 
farming and thinking. It is our ambition and our hope that 
bringing different forms of knowledge into a care-full dia-
logue can be a part of the theory of change for transforma-
tive regenerative thinking.
Acknowledgements We are very grateful to Sidsel and Marianne for 
their time, commitment and curiosity, which made this research pos-
sible. We also want to thank the reviewers for their constructive com-
ments and participating in the dialogue, which helped us to improve 
the paper.Author contributions All authors contributed to the study conception 
and design. Material preparation, data collection and analysis were 
performed by all authors. All authors contributed and commented on 
all versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript. No funding was received for conducting this study.
Funding Open access funding provided by Roskilde University.
Declarations 
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration 
of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Ethics Committee of Roskilde 
University (Date 02.01.24). Written informed consent was obtained 
from all individual participants included in the study.
Competing interests The authors have no competing interests to 
declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.
References
Aare, Ane, Jonas Kirstine, Søren Egmose, Lund, and Henrik Haug-
gaard-Nielsen. 2020. Opportunities and barriers in diversified 
farming and the use of agroecological principles in the Global 
North–The experiences of Danish biodynamic farmers. Agroecol-
ogy and Sustainable Food Systems 00. Taylor & Francis: 1–27. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 21683 565. 2020. 18229 80.
Adhikari, Kabindra, Alfred E. Hartemink, Budiman Minasny, Rania 
Bou Kheir, Mette B. Greve, and Mogens H. Greve. 2014. Digital 
mapping of soil organic carbon contents and stocks in Denmark. 
PLos One, 9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1371/ journ al. pone. 01055 19.
Ahmed, Sara. 2017. Living a Feminist Life. Durham and London: Duke 
University Press.
Al-Kaisi, Mahdi M., Rattan Lal. 2020. Aligning science and policy of 
regenerative agriculture. Soil Science Society of America Journal  
84: 1808–1820. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ saj2. 20162.
Alrøe, Hugo F., Marion Sautier, Katharine Legun, Jay Whitehead, 
Egon Noe, Henrik Moller, and Jon Manhire. 2017. Performance 
versus values in sustainability transformation of food systems. 
Sustainability (Switzerland) 9: 1–31. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/  
su903 0332.
Altieri, Miguel A. 2004. Linking ecologists and traditional farmers in 
the search for sustainable agriculture. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment 2: 35–42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1890/ 1540- 9295(2004)  
002[0035: LEATFI] 2.0. CO;2.
Barnett, Joshua. 2023. Imagining more-Than-Human Care: from multi-
species Mothering to Caring relations in finding the Mother Tree. 
Journal of Ecohumanism 2: 9–20. https:// doi. org/ 10. 33182/ joe.  
v2i1. 2861.
Bastian, Michelle. 2009. Inventing Nature: re-writing Time and Agency 
in a more-than-Human World. Australian Humanities Review  
99–116. https:// doi. org/ 10. 22459/ ahr. 47. 2009. 10.
286 A. K. Aare et al.
Bastian, Michelle, Owain Jones, Niamh Moore, and Emma Roe. 2016. 
Introduction: More-than-human participatory research: Contexts, 
challenges, possibilities. In Participatory Research in More-
than-Human Worlds, ed. Michelle Bastian, Owain Jones, Niamh 
Moore, and Emma Roe, 1–15. Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/  
97813 15661 698.
Bauhardt, Christine. 2018. Nature, care and gender. Feminist dilem-
mas. In Feminist Political Ecology and the Economics of Care, 
ed. Christine Bauhardt and Wendy Harcourt, London: Routledge.
Beacham, Jonathan. 2018. Organising food differently: towards a more-
than-human ethics of care for the Anthropocene. Organization 25: 
533–549. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13505 08418 777893.
Bertella, Giovanna. 2023. Care-full academic activism for sustainable 
transformations in tourism. Current Issues in Tourism 26. Rout-
ledge: 212–223. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13683 500. 2022. 20303 05.
Biesecker, Adelheid, Sabine Hofmeister. 2010. Focus: (re)productivity. 
Sustainable relations both between society and nature and between 
the genders. Ecological Economics 69 Elsevier B V 1703–1711. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ecole con. 2010. 03. 025.
Biesecker, Adelheid, and Winterfeld Uta von. 2018. Notion of multiple 
crisis and feminist perspectives on social contract. Gender Work 
and Organization 25: 279–293. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ gwao.  
12206.
Bresnihan, Patrick. 2020. The more-than-human commons: from com-
mons to commoning. Space Power and the Commons 105–124. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97813 15731 995- 13.
Burns, Edgar A. 2020. Thinking sociologically about regenerative agri-
culture. New Zealand Sociology 35: 189–213.
Dalgaard, T., J. E. Olesen, S. O. Petersen, B. M. Petersen, U. Jørgensen, 
T. Kristensen, N. J. Hutchings, S. Gyldenkærne, and J. E. Her -
mansen. 2011. Developments in greenhouse gas emissions and net 
energy use in Danish agriculture - how to achieve substantial CO 
2 reductions? Environmental Pollution 159: 3193–3203. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envpol. 2011. 02. 024.
Danish Biodiversity Council. 2022. From loss to progress: protected 
nature in Denmark in an international perspective (in Danish). 
Biodiversitetsrådet.
Duncan, Jessica, Michael Carolan, and Johannes S.C. Wiskerke. 2020. 
Regenerating food systems: a social-ecological approach. Rout-
ledge Handbook of Sustainable and Regenerative Food Systems. 
Book. Eds. Jessica Duncan, Michael Carolan, and Johannes S.C. 
Wiskerke, 1–11. Routledge.
Egmose, Jonas, Henrik Hauggaard-Nielsen, and Stefan Gaarsmand 
Jacobsen. 2022. Action research in the plural crisis of the liv -
ing: understanding, envisioning, practicing, organising eco-social 
transformation. Educational Action Research 30. Routledge: 671–
683. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 09650 792. 2022. 20844 33.
Egmose, Jonas, Stefan Gaarsmand Jacobsen, Henrik Hauggaard-
Nielsen, Lars, and Hulgård. 2021. The regenerative turn: on the 
re-emergence of reciprocity embedded in living ecologies. Glo-
balizations 18: 1271–1276. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14747 731.  
2021. 19115 08.
European Commission. 2021. She Fig. 2021. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2777/  
06090.
Federici, Sylvia. 2020. Re-enchanting the World: Feminism and the 
Politics of the Commons. Article. Journal of International Wom-
en’s Studies  21. Bridgewater: Bridgewater State College: 409–411.
Frank, Markus, Mariano M. Amoroso, Martina Propedo, and Brigitte 
Kaufmann. 2022. Co-inquiry in agroecology research with farm-
ers: transdisciplinary co-creation of contextualized and action-
able knowledge. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems 46 
Taylor and Francis Ltd 510–539. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 21683  
565. 2021. 20209 48.
García-López, Gustavo A., Ursula Lang, and Neera Singh. 2021. Com-
mons, Commoning and Co-becoming: Nurturing Life-in-common 
and Post-capitalist futures (an introduction to the theme issue). Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 4: 1199–1216. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 25148 48621 10510 81.
Gibbons, Leah V. 2020. Regenerative—The New Sustainable? Sustain-
ability 12: 5483. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ su121 35483.
Giller, Ken E., Renske Hijbeek, and Jens A. Andersson, James Sum-
berg. 2021. Regenerative agriculture: an agronomic perspective. 
Outlook on Agriculture 50: 13–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00307  
27021 998063.
Gilson, Erinn Cunniff. 2015. Vulnerability, relationality, and depend-
ency: Feminist conceptual resources for Food Justice. IJFAB: 
International Journal of Feminist Approaches to Bioethics 8: 
10–46. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3138/ ijfab.8. 2. 10.
Gordon, Ethan, Federico Davila, and Chris Riedy. 2021. Transform-
ing landscapes and mindscapes through regenerative agriculture. 
Agriculture and Human values. Springer Science and Business 
Media B V. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10460- 021- 10276-0.
Gordon, Ethan, Federico Davila, and Chris Riedy. 2023. Regenerative 
agriculture: a potentially transformative storyline shared by nine 
discourses. Sustainability Science  18. Springer Japan: 1833–1849. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11625- 022- 01281-1.
Hansen, Henning Otte. 2019. The agricultural treadmill - a way out 
through differentiation ? An empirical analysis of organic farm-
ing and the agricultural treadmill. Journal of Tourism Heritage & 
Services Marketing 5: 20–26.
Haraway, Donna J. 2013. A Cyborg Manifesto. Manifestly Haraway  
3–90. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5749/ minne sota/ 97808 16650 477. 003.  
0001.
Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the trouble. Book. Experimental 
futures. North Carolina: Duke University Press. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1215/ 97808 22373 780.
Hassink, Jan, Angela Moriggi, Saverio Senni, Elisabeth Hense, and 
Dries de Moor. 2020. Caring agricultural and food practices. Rout-
ledge Handbook of Sustainable and Regenerative Food Systems  
126–140. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97804 29466 823- 10.
IPCC. 2022. Climate Change and Land. Climate Change and Land. 
Cambridge University Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ 97810 09157  
988.
Johns-Putra, Adeline. 2013. Environmental Care Ethics: Notes Toward 
a New Materialist Critique. symploke 21: 125–135.
Johnson, Elizabeth R. 2015. Of lobsters, Laboratories, and War: Ani-
mal studies and the temporality of more-Than-Human encounters. 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 33: 296–313. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1068/ d23512.
Jones, Bradley M. 2019. (Com)Post-Capitalism: cultivating a more-
than-Human Economy in the Appalachian Anthropocene. Envi -
ronmental Humanities 11: 3–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1215/ 22011  
919- 73493 47.
Kallio, Galina, and Will LaFleur. 2023. Ways of (un)knowing land-
scapes: Tracing more-than-human relations in regenerative 
agriculture. Journal of Rural Studies 101. Elsevier Ltd: 103059. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jrurs  tud. 2023. 103059.
Kawarazuka, Nozomi, Cheryl R. Doss, Cathy R. Farnworth, and Rhian-
non Pyburn. 2022. Myths about the feminization of agriculture: 
Implications for global food security. Global Food Security 33. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. gfs. 2022. 100611.
Kimmerer, Robin. 2013. Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, 
Scientific Knowledge and the teachings of plants. Minneapolis, 
UNITED STATES: Milkweed Editions.
Kronvang, Brian, Hans E. Andersen, Christen Børgesen, Tommy Dal-
gaard, Søren E. Larsen, and Jens Bøgestrand, Gitte Blicher-Mathi-
asen. 2008. Effects of policy measures implemented in Denmark 
on nitrogen pollution of the aquatic environment. Environmental 
Science and Policy 11: 144–152. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envsci.  
2007. 10. 007.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. 2019. Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: 
the role of attentiveness in more-than-human ethics. Transactions 
287 Creating dialogues as a quiet revolution: exploring care with women in regenerative farming  
of the Institute of British Geographers 44: 661–675. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1111/ tran. 12293.
LaCanne, Claire E., and Jonathan G. Lundgren. 2018. Regenerative 
agriculture: Merging farming and natural resource conservation 
profitably. PeerJ 2018: 1–12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 7717/ peerj. 4428.
Latour, Bruno. 2007. Reassembling the Social: an introduction to 
actor-network-theory. Oxford, UNITED KINGDOM: Oxford 
University Press, Incorporated.
Leitheiser, Stephen, Ina Horlings, Alex Franklin, and Trell Elen 
Maarja. 2022. Regeneration at a distance from the state: from 
radical imaginaries to alternative practices in Dutch farming. Soci-
ologia Ruralis 62: 699–725. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ soru. 12403.
Moyer, Jeff, Andrew Smith, Yichao Rui, and Jennifer Hayden. 2020. 
Regenerative agriculture and the soil carbon solution [white 
paper]. Rodale Institute: Kutztown, Pennsylvania.
Naples, Nancy A. 2007. Feminist Methodology. The Blackwell Ency -
clopedia of Sociology. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 97814 05165 518.  
wbeos f042.
Newton, Peter, Nicole Civita, Lee Frankel-Goldwater, Katharine Bar -
tel, and Colleen Johns. 2020. What is regenerative agriculture? A 
review of Scholar and Practitioner definitions based on processes 
and outcomes. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 4: 1–11. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fsufs. 2020. 577723.
Phillips, Louise, Maria Bee Christensen-Strynø, and Lisbeth Frølunde. 
2022a. Thinking with autoethnography in collaborative research: 
A critical, reflexive approach to relational ethics. Qualitative 
Research 22: 761–776. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14687 94121 10334  
46.
Phillips, Louise, Anders Larsen, and Lotte Mengel. 2022b. What 
Coproduction in Participatory Research Means From Participants’ 
Perspectives: A Collaborative Autoethnographic Inquiry. Journal 
of Participatory Research Methods 3. https:// doi. org/ 10. 35844/  
001c. 37638.
Phillips, Louise, Lisbeth Frølunde, and Maria Bee Christensen-Strynø. 
2021. Confronting the Complexities of Co-production in Partici-
patory Health Research: a critical, reflexive Approach to Power 
Dynamics in a collaborative project on Parkinson’s dance. Quali -
tative Health Research 31: 1290–1305. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/  
10497 32321 10038 63.
Plumwood, Val. 1994. Feminism and the mastery of Nature. London: 
Taylor & Francis Group.
Pottinger, Laura. 2020. Treading carefully through tomatoes: Embody -
ing a gentle methodological approach. Area . Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ area. 12650.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2011. Matters of care in technoscience: 
assembling neglected things. Social Studies of Science  41: 
85–106. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12710 380301.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2012. Nothing comes without its world: 
thinking with care. Sociological Review 60: 197–216. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1111/j. 1467- 954X. 2012. 02070.x.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. Making time for soil: technoscien-
tific futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science 45: 
691–716. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12715 599851.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2017. Matters of care: speculative Ethics 
in more than human worlds. Posthumanities. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5749/j. ctt1m mfspt.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2019. Re-animating soils: transforming 
human–soil affections through science, culture and community. 
Sociological Review 67: 391–407. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00380  
26119 830601.
Raider-Roth, Miriam, Amy Rector-Aranda, Tammy Kaiser, Liron 
Lipinsky, Alison Weikel, Sara Wolkenfeld, Liat Zaidenberg. 
Shared, and Power. 2019. Risk-taking, and Innovation: Partici-
patory Action Research in Jewish Education. Journal of Jewish 
Education 85. Routledge: 187–208. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 15244  
113. 2019. 15992 34.Santos, Sousa, Boaventura de. 2014. Epistemologies of the South: jus -
tice against epistemicide /. Boulder, CO: Paradigm: Book.
Schrader, Astrid. 2015. Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: 
how (not) to care about deformed leaf bugs in the aftermath of 
Chernobyl. Social Studies of Science 45: 665–690. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1177/ 03063 12715 603249.
Schreefel, L., R. P. O. Schulte, I. J. M. de Boer, A. Pas Schrijver, and 
H. H. E. van Zanten. 2020. Regenerative agriculture – the soil is 
the base. Global Food Security 26 Elsevier B V 100404. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. gfs. 2020. 100404.
Seymour, Madison, Sean Connelly. 2022. Regenerative agriculture and 
a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to under -
standing transformation. Agriculture and Human Values. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10460- 022- 10350-1.
Shiva, Vandana. 2009. Women and the gendered politics of food. Philo-
sophical Topics 37(2):17–32. http:// www. jstor. org/ stable/ 43154  
554.
Shiva, Vandana. 2013. Caring for what we care about, ed. Jack Apple -
ton. Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97802 03080 177.
Siegfried, Alina. 2020. Insight into regenerative agriculture in New 
Zealand: the good, the bad, and the opportunity. Pure Advantage.  
https:// purea dvant  age. org/ insig ht- into- regen erati ve- agric ulture-  
in- new- zeala nd- the- good- the- bad- and- the- oppor  tunity/. Accessed 
08 Jul 2024.
Staffa, Rachel K., Maraja Riechers, Berta, and Martín-López. 2022. A 
feminist ethos for caring knowledge production in transdiscipli-
nary sustainability science. Sustainability Science  17. Springer 
Japan: 45–63. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11625- 021- 01064-0.
Statistics Denmark. 2020. The Danish agricultural area is large in an 
international perspective (in Danish): 2020–2021. www. dst. dk/  
nyt/ 30807 (Accessed 15/4/2024).
Statistics Denmark. 2021. Women farmers cultivate only 5 per cent 
of the land (in Danish). https:// www. dst. dk/ da/ Stati stik/ nyhed  
er- analy  ser- publ/ nyt/ NytHt ml? cid= 25865 (Accessed 15/4/2024).
Timmermans, Stefan and Iddo Tavory. 2022. Data analysis in qualita-
tive research: theorizing with abductive analysis. Book. Edited 
by Stefan Timmermans and Iddo Tavory. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Tittonell, Pablo, Veronica El Mujtar, Georges Felix, Yodit Kebede, 
and Luciana Laborda. Raquel Luján Soto, and Joris De Vente. 
2022. Regenerative agriculture—agroecology without politics? 
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 6. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/  
fsufs. 2022. 844261.
Toledo, Whitney, Maureen Flint, Caroline N. Sharkey, Sarah McCol-
lum, Brittney Ferrari, Oluwayomi K. Paseda, Adrienne Cottrell-
Yongye, and Nia Mitchell. 2023. Building community through 
feminist collectivity: being and becoming women in academia. 
Gender and Education 35: 365–383. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
09540 253. 2023. 21932 08.
Trevilla Espinal, Diana, María Lorena Soto Lilia, Helda Pinto, Morales, 
and and Erin Ingrid Jane Estrada-Lugo. 2021. Feminist agroecol -
ogy: analyzing power relationships in food systems. Agroecolo-
gySustainable Food Systems 45. Taylor & Francis: 1029–1049. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 21683 565. 2021. 18888 42.
Tronto, Joan. 1993. Moral boundaries: a political argument for an 
Ethic of Care. Routledge.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. 2015. The mushroom at the end of the world: 
on the possibility of life in capitalist ruins. Book. Pilot project. 
eB… Princeton, NJ:: Princeton University Press. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1515/ 97814 00873 548.
Tsing, Anna. 2016. Earth stalked by Man. The Cambridge Journal of 
Anthropology  34: 2–16. https://  doi. org/ 10. 3167/  ca. 2016.  340102 .
UNCCD (United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification). 2017. 
The Global Land Outlook. First edition. Bonn, Germany.
288 A. K. Aare et al.
Van de Pavert, Michiel, and Adriana Ressiore. 2023. Caring with the 
non-human: reciprocity in market gardening. Exchanges: The 
Interdisciplinary Research Journal 10: 163–176.
Veerman, Cees, Teresa Pinto Correia, Catia Bastioli, Borbala Biro, 
Johan Bouma, Emil Cienciala, and Bridget Emmett et al. 2020. 
Caring for soil is caring for life - Publications Office of the EU. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2777/ 4833.
Walsh, Zack, Jessica Böhme, Brooke D. Lavelle, and Christine 
Wamsler. 2020. Transformative education: towards a relational, 
justice-oriented approach to sustainability. International Journal 
of Sustainability in Higher Education 21: 1587–1606. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1108/ IJSHE- 05- 2020- 0176.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Ane Kirstine Aare is trained as an environmental planner engaged with 
research questions regarding transition towards regenerative farming 
practices. She is concerned about the divergent perspectives, needs and 
dreams among different actors within transition processes, especially 
those of farmers. Her concern about farmers’ experiences and role in 
such processes has led to increased focus on different kinds of knowl-
edge (embodied, tacit etc.) as well as the plurality of drivers for change 
including non-economic (care, justice etc.).
Selected publication: Aare, A. K., Lund, S., & Hauggaard-Nielsen, 
H. (2021). Exploring transitions towards sustainable farming practices 
through participatory research: The case of Danish farmers’ use of species mixtures. Agricultural Systems, 189, https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j.  
agsy. 2021. 103053.
Anna Umantseva is a cultural anthropologist, focusing her research and 
teaching on civil society-driven eco-social transitions. Her interdiscipli -
nary research interests are regenerative trends in farming, community 
economies, feminist epistemologies and Epistemologies of the South. 
She is interested in dynamics of knowledge co-production, and under -
standing how engaging with plurality of knowledges can contribute to 
eco-social transitions.
Selected publication:  Umantseva, A (2022). ‘Regenerative’ Social 
Innovation for European Rural Regions? Lessons from Regenerative 
Farming, Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
19420 676. 2022. 21341 80.
Laura Brandt Sørensen is a social scientist within the research field of 
sustainable food and farming systems. She is working with research 
questions concerning food anthropology, agrifood education, and rela-
tional approaches to sustainable and systemic transformations. She is 
especially interested in how knowledge is constructed and emphasizes 
posthuman onto-epistemologies, more-than-human relationality, and 
the role of care, values and embodied experiences.
Selected publication: Sørensen, L. B. (2023). Towards Relational 
Approaches in Education for Sustainable Agrifood Systems: A qualita-
tive and theoretical perspective on educational practices, sustainable 
agrifood systems and more-than-human ontologies. Roskilde Univer -
sity. Ph.D. thesis.
