Introduction to the Special Issue
Critique as Care: Disrupting Narratives of the 
One-Shot Instruction Model
Nicole Pagowsky*
A collective feeling seemed to characterize responses to the “Contested One-Shot” guest edito-
rial I wrote one year ago, which turns a critical eye to the one-shot instruction model.1 It also 
invited proposals for this special issue that you (virtually) hold in your hands. Collective does 
not necessarily mean all of the same feelings or opinions, but there was an overwhelming indi-
cation of catharsis in reading about and potentially contributing to a special issue that would 
dig into this oft-criticized instruction model. There were additionally a handful of defensive 
reactions to support the one-shot. It is clear that this topic draws out strong feelings and needs 
space for critique and discussion. 
Casting a critical eye toward instruction librarianship’s discourse would include investiga-
tion concerning: What stories do we tell about ourselves, individually and collectively, in rela-
tion to one-shots? What stories do one-shots implicate about us externally? How are systems 
and structures replicated in the one-shot model? What impact does this have? What agency do 
we have? I think these questions are at the heart of this special issue and are what this group of 
authors ultimately examine: critical investigation and reflection about how librarians engage 
in teaching—in relation to, and also beyond, the one-shot model. 
When deconstructing one-shots and the attendant rhetoric surrounding library in-
struction work’s often transactional nature, transparency through specificity in how we 
construct, describe, and evaluate our instruction models is important—especially because 
these transactions exist within systems that reinforce and reflect oppressive conditions 
more broadly. Lack of specificity—or abstraction—in the way we perpetuate narratives 
maintains the systems. David James Hudson has discussed this in regards to racial capi-
talism and its enduring dominance (2022). Abstraction can also be violence, as Samuel R. 
Delany has written on the evasion of detail in AIDS sexual health information, particularly 
impacting gay men (2021). Avoiding precision continues to render hegemonic systems as 
invisible. Taking on the responsibility to elaborate is how we connect and create possible 
change. Authors in this special issue have been adept at engaging with specificity in order 
to critically examine and problematize one-shots, from varied points of view. They offer 
depth and creative approaches to discussing these issues that affect us in our work, reflect-
ing from and reverberating to larger issues. I will introduce individual articles toward the 
end of this entrance to the special issue, as well as provide more context on the publication 
* Nicole Pagowsky is Associate Librarian at the University of Arizona Libraries, email: nfp@arizona.edu. ©2022 
Nicole Pagowsky, Attribution-NonCommercial (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) CC BY-NC.
713
714  College & Research Libraries September 2022
process. What I intend to discuss in the space preceding are coalescing themes and sticky 
points to further tie the special issue together.
Engaging in critique can be a risk, particularly so when a format or procedure is so in-
grained that it is viewed as common sense. As Sara Ahmed points out, “Complaint catches 
how those who challenge power become sites of negation: you become a container of negative 
affect, one that is leaky: speaking out as spilling over” (2019, p. 174). I do not want to conflate 
critique and complaint as meaning the same thing, yet there is overlap. Why critique one-shots 
if that is our only way into working with faculty and reaching students? It is the only option 
we have if we do not have the agency to question and imagine differently. What if it is the 
only way to prove our “value” since one-shots are easily quantifiable? To that, I say we need 
different ways to conceive value projects. This is not the only way; it is not our only chance. 
I am not claiming that one-shots are entirely problematic all of the time. However, this deep-
seated, and perhaps innate at this point, instruction model does need to be problematized for 
us to even have the option to break free. We can do this through the lens of critique as care, 
meaning we critique because we care and hope for better. 
There is not some pernicious force strategizing to further deprofessionalize instruction 
librarians’ doubly feminized work, but rather, we have systems in place that maintain the status 
quo. Barthes delineated how mythologies work, turning history into nature by assimilating 
ideological discourse through the stories we maintain (1957). Powerful structures are made 
invisible by becoming nature; it’s just how it is, and these myths reinforce their appearance as 
“timeless and universal, submerging their historical and contingent nature” (Huppatz, 2011, 
p. 89). We carry this way of viewing the world without being able to see how it is imposed 
because we repeat the narrative unaware. De-mystifying taken-for-granted practices is how 
their inner workings and related effects are revealed. Problematizing one-shots does not imply 
any particular decree; it is instead a way for us to see how to make our way to other possibili-
ties, and how larger issues impact and are impacted by replication. A significant roadblock to 
engaging with this critique is power and each of our own levels of agency. Keeping agency in 
mind as coloring experience, I draw to the forefront common themes that envelop one-shots, 
those of which coalesce in this issue’s articles: time, care, and hope.
Time
You know what usually happens: the usual is a field of expectation that derives its 
contours from past experience. The usual is the structural in temporal form.—Sara 
Ahmed, 2019, p. 164
Time can be viewed as a commodity that connotes value, and narratives constructed to 
uphold this form of quantification maintain mythology. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson 
reveal how a culture’s values will be aligned with its metaphorical structure; actions based 
on those values can then be justified and normalized (2003). Within the one-shot, experience 
and use of time quantified as a resource is a primary aspect, dictating what and how much 
can be covered,2 if relationality is possible, and how much agency is accessible to the library 
instructor. This could be present in felt intangibles described with the metaphors of not having  
enough time—whether to teach or to prepare; feeling rushed and losing time; or exasperation 
in time poverty. Considering time as a substance, or the one-shot as an entity, organizes us 
Introduction to the Special Issue   715
ontologically, and “Once we can identify our experiences as entities or substances, we can 
refer to them, categorize them, group them, and quantify them—and, by this means, reason 
about them” (Lakoff and Johnson, 2003, Section 6).
Experiences of time are co-constructed differently based on situation and standing. 
Western cultural values about time expressed in the metaphors above are not present in all 
cultures. We reinforce our perceptions and perpetuate mythologies to uphold our experience 
and quantification structures. Temporal diversity—other worlds outside of hegemonic linear 
and capitalist timescapes—does exist, and we must consider different experiences and perspec-
tives in how we view and value time and the one-shot. Ellen Samuels and Elizabeth Freeman 
refer to crip time to elucidate the contrast in temporal realities of disabled academics, and 
how they “have always done the same work as our peers in profoundly different temporali-
ties” (2021, p. 247). Crip time can be thought of and used as survival and world-making in 
opposition to the normative violence of capitalist time (p. 249).
Another temporal differentiation is between linear and kinship time. Kyle Powys Whyte 
explains that linear time is what westerners are most familiar with, unfolding in uniform, 
sequential units; whereas kinship time is felt through shifts in relationships of mutual care 
and requires taking responsibility for others (2021, p. 42). Though referencing the climate 
crisis and continued subjugation of Indigenous peoples through nation-state environmental 
interventions, Whyte’s points relate here. He distinguishes the harm that reliance on linear 
time can reinforce through reactionary measures: When it feels as if time is running out, 
“taken-for-granted strategies get employed to protect the taken-for-granted state of affairs 
from disruption” (2021, p. 45). This harm is reproduction of hegemony and continued dis-
enfranchisement through reinforcing procedures of dominant groups and structures. We 
profoundly experience hegemonic timescapes and their reproduction in library instruction 
when one-shots are planned out, delivered, and measured through linear time, typically be-
ing reactionary and causing overwhelm. One-shots, as I stated in my editorial, “keep us in 
a holding pattern of reactionary yes-people unable to enact our own agency within campus 
power structures” (Pagowsky, 2021, p. 303).
Within higher education, Ian Kinchin characterizes reactivity as a “neoliberal booby trap 
[of] short-term fixes” (2022, p. 180). Existing primarily in reactivity offers no opportunity for 
reflection, questioning, or work toward change; the only option is to stick with how it has 
always been done using taken-for-granted strategies. It coincides with the one-shot being 
in academic time, which keeps us frantic with little space to be creative or critical. Margaret 
Price connects the structure of linear, academic time with intensification and sustainment of 
structural inequalities: 
[Academic time] draws on both postmodern (for the masses) and premodern (for 
the elite) systems of timekeeping and practices a special regime of nontransparency 
with regard to how time is spent, while at the same time increasing technologies 
of surveillance and encouraging self-surveillance. (2021, p. 262)
We experience bureaucratization of the linear units of time we do our work in, meaning 
an emphasis on counting where quantity proves value of the individual worker and of the 
library. Perspectives on value are individually focused in how we quantify our own output. 
When measurement is constructed to represent the library, it typically is not collaboratively 
716  College & Research Libraries September 2022
or collectively focused, but rather an aggregation of individuals’ metrics. As Mark Fisher 
explains, neoliberalism claims to be anti-bureaucratic through flattening of hierarchy, but 
by moving more responsibility onto the individual academic qua responsibilitization, bu-
reaucracy is enforced through isolated self-surveillance (2009, p. 40). Diligence in one’s own 
constant, unending quantification of time and output for institutional measurement can stand 
in for being a good teacher, worker, librarian. Fisher’s point is apropos of how permanent 
and ubiquitous measurement generates perpetual anxiety (p. 39). Expectations to produce 
a high quantity of outputs to prove value can lead to constant worry about the future, and 
proliferate competition rather than relationality. This anxiety-driven future-focus brings 
forward a number of questions that branch out from what I introduced above, and what 
I would stress as considerations for future research: What stories are we telling about our 
instruction programs, the status of librarians, and our roles on campus by collecting informa-
tion in this way? What ideology or mythos does this quantification reinforce? Why does the 
one-shot continue to be a unit of measure? Why are we counting these numbers in this way? 
Enumeration is an ideological project, and we must be clear on who, why, and how we are 
counting.3 If we think of one-shots as a replication of capitalist structures, it makes sense for 
each individual to be responsible for expanding output, and for the work to be individually 
counted and self-surveilled. 
Perhaps J.K. Gibson-Graham’s argument that “it is the way capitalism has been ‘thought’ 
that has made it so difficult for people to imagine its supersession” (2006, p. 4) is prescient here 
in why we have been stuck in our instruction models for so long. When we say one-shots are 
our only option, or it is the way it has always been done, we maintain the hegemonic timescapes 
and measurement tactics that reinforce this story. The purpose of ideology is to disappear and 
remain invisible, foreclosing on imagining anything different. It ossifies in obscurity through 
the mythology of capitalist time, linear time, abled time, straight time.
Queer temporality is another alterity to affirm relationality and solidarity. Thinking with 
queer temporalities, as José Esteban Muñoz argues, can help us work toward collective fu-
turity, moving away from individualized, isolated futures. Muñoz notes in order to achieve 
the former rather than the latter, we must have awareness that:
Evidencing protocols often fail to enact real hermeneutical inquiry and instead 
opt to reinstate that which is known in advance. Thus, practices of knowledge 
production that are content to merely selectively cull from the past, while striking 
a pose of positivist undertaking or empirical knowledge retrieval, often nullify 
the political imagination. (2007, p. 458) 
As I stated above, all of the themes I am discussing are articulated through the fraught 
issue of agency. We can be aware of hegemonic temporal structures that we feel trapped in—
and bringing awareness to that is one step—but do we actually have the agency (or energy!) to 
even imagine something different, and to make change? This question is emphasized further 
when we see how the pandemic has amplified existing inequalities. Banu Ozkazanc-Pan and 
Alison Pullen question “how the interplay of agency and structures lead to certain ‘choices’ 
by certain bodies/people, and what alternatives there might be to purely economic imaginar-
ies of productivity in our lives” (2020, p. 5). Granted, we are not all mired in unending cycles 
of one-shots semester after semester,4 but there are those who are, and using this model as a 
Introduction to the Special Issue   717
totalizing structure has an impact on how we engage with and measure our work as a field, 
as well as how we are able to imagine futurity and perceive hope for something better. So it 
is important to think about who is existing in this model, who has the choice and agency to 
exist differently, and what those differentiations reinforce. 
Coming back to Whyte’s discussion of “kinship time,” the idea of mutual responsibility 
for relationality (kinship, care) to reframe our experience in time and with each other is one 
way to imagine differently. Jessie Loyer connects kinship and time with library instruction, 
pointing out how: 
[R]elationality is a complicated concept and librarians are already pushed for 
time. So the prompt to ‘do more’ is challenging. With what time? With what re-
sources? wâhkôhtawin, a nêhiyaw concept of relationality that defines roles and 
responsibilities, may give us clearer guidelines on who librarians are accountable 
to and responsible for—a chance for further research. (2018, p. 155)
Loyer primarily focuses on relationality and care between library instructors and students, 
which as she states, tends to be unsupported institutionally. Another aspect to consider where 
institutional care is lacking, aside from supporting care via pedagogical relationships between 
librarian and student, is care and kinship within the field itself.
Care
Moreover, a true politics of relation is attuned to the disagreements, conflicts, 
and tensions that animate solidarity projects oriented around shared points of 
struggle.—Ronjaunee Chatterjee et al., 2020
Temporality and relationality (or, time and care) are connected through being socially 
situated, rather than time being an abstract category (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015, p. 694), with 
isolated, felt effects. A focus on care has been more recently brought to the fore in feminist 
studies in order to overcome these harmful outcomes in a number of fields. To think of rela-
tionality as reparative to current structures could cultivate imagining reciprocal care as uto-
pia. Ideally, all care would be relational and reciprocal, as kinship is responsibility for care. 
However, a politics of care has been fraught from histories of valuing and devaluing of this 
labor; inequitable expectations for those who are expected to care and who gets to be cared for; 
conflation with positive affect that skews care toward feminized characteristics of nurturing 
(and related implications); and impasse when care ultimately contributes to persistent capi-
talist logics, rather than being used for liberatory world-making. If there is not a true culture 
of kinship for interdependence and respect for boundaries, relationships are precarious with 
unequal expectations—particularly so for those within historically marginalized groups. This 
requires reflection on how the cost of care, and when we are unable to care, can turn into sites 
of violence from existing structures.5
Considering this in academic libraries, Maura Seale and Rafia Mirza have stressed the 
essential condition for institutional reciprocity in care, “understanding library work as a pro-
fession, not a vocation, as labour, not as religious calling, acknowledges that this reciprocity 
718  College & Research Libraries September 2022
must flow to the workers as well as the institution and that institutions are sites of historical 
and ongoing structural oppression and inequality” (2020, p. 9). Ethics of care can be emanci-
patory, and we should think about how to use care to create more liberatory and equitable 
worlds. At the same time, we must use critique to question what seems apparent as we live 
and work in sites that reinforce structural oppression and inequality, which we in turn can 
ourselves ultimately reinforce as we exist within these structures. Within the realm of one-shots, 
we must consider omnidirectional flows of care impacting unbalanced affective economies 
between librarian-student, librarian-faculty, librarian-librarian, and librarian-institution.
Michelle Murphy introduces the idea of “unsettling” care. Connected to Donna Haraway’s 
idea of “staying with the trouble” and Sianne Ngai’s concept of “ugly feelings,” critique used 
to unsettle can be seen as care in and of itself. Unsettling intends to disrupt non-innocent nar-
ratives and colonial legacies related to belonging, rescue, and sympathy through troubling 
sedimented arrangements (2015, pp. 721–722). Mindfulness about “romantic temptations” 
caught up in care as collective panacea clarifies what can be a disconnection between what 
feels good and concomitant geopolitical implications (p. 725). Particularly for professions un-
dergirded by care-work (both librarianship and teaching, for example), and especially for 
predominantly white fields (librarianship in particular), unsettling even hopeful rejoinders 
to problematic entrenchments is necessary. Aryn Martin et al. illuminate these concerns, as 
“[i]t is in this sense that care makes palpable how justice for some can easily become injustice 
for others” (2015, p. 627).
Care is often envisioned through normative, dominant identities, as many structures and 
relationships tend to be. In discussing race and feminist care ethics, Parvati Raghuram stresses 
how efforts toward care are typically theorized through the normative white body, and be-
cause of this, “[require] that care is disassembled as well as put together as a critical practice in 
order to shape care ethics” (2019, p. 631). Looking to ethics of care for Black women, Mekada 
Graham discusses this in context of the social professions, cautioning on the inadequacy of 
normatively-theorized relationship-based ethics for the concerns and needs of Black women 
(2007, p. 204). For higher education specifically, Jennifer Nash describes the “body problem” 
for women faculty of color, “the ways in which our bodies must be mitigated, performed, 
inhabited, toned down, and played up in a variety of ways depending on institutional and 
student demands” (2021, p. 31). There are already so many assumptions and expectations 
that academic structures cause women of color to contort into, that care structures—when 
functioning in unequal affective economies—can further complicate. There are divergent 
expectations on women faculty (or librarians) of color that can affect who carries the burden 
of caregiving and how they are perceived in engaging with that care. Additionally, how is 
relational care felt when there is historically entrenched inequity and lack of inclusion in a 
field: Can care be truly reciprocal in such circumstances?
My intent is not to foreclose on care ethics as a way forward, but rather to examine con-
tradictions and potentially harmful outcomes. It is not that care is a problem in and of itself, 
but lack of agency and power asymmetries in connection with care is where concerns arise. 
This can be particularly palpable in doubly-feminized care work such as the convergence of 
librarianship and teaching on the periphery. Kinchin pinpoints this in how teachers need suf-
ficient agency: agency to know, as he states—and I will add: agency to have the choice —when 
to care and when not to care (2022, p. 174). In unequal affective economies, we must consider 
how we define, value, and assign or expect care. 
Introduction to the Special Issue   719
Hope
What we are talking about here is the hardest problem: understanding the difficulty 
of unlearning attachments to regimes of injustice.—Lauren Berlant, 2011, p. 184
Cruel optimism is characterized as when a goal or desire winds up actually being an 
obstacle in one’s ends toward the good life (Berlant, 2011). There is attachment to an object or 
trajectory through belief that life circumstances will improve, whether it is psychic fulfill-
ment, financial security, prestige, or other attributes of what the good life would mean for an 
individual. While cruel optimism traps individuals in perpetual striving for that which might 
not be there, hope promotes collectivity and solidarity toward relational futures.
Berlant uses the term “misrecognition” to explain how fantasy recalibrates desire to affirm 
projection onto the object of desire (p. 122). How does our field use the exercise of misrecog-
nition in regards to one-shots? I want to stress that my argument, both in this introduction 
and my previous guest editorial, is not that one-shots are always horrendously wrong; it is 
more about how we conceive of them and project desires onto their structure that often do 
not materialize that can in fact cause harm. Berlant references Vassilis Tsianos and Dimitris 
Papadopoulos’ list of affective responses to this paradox. Some examples they provide of 
nervous-system symptoms resulting from immaterial labor include:
• Vulnerability: the stead[y] experience of flexibility without any form of protection
• Hyperactivity: the imperative to accommodate constant availability
• Simultaneity: the ability to handle at the same [time] the different tempi and veloci-
ties of multiple activities
• Recombination: the crossings between various networks, social spaces, and available 
resources
• Restless: being exposed to and trying to cope with the overabundance of communica-
tion, cooperation, and interactivity
• Unsettledness: the continuous experience of mobility across different spaces and 
time lines
• Affective exhaustion: emotional exploitation, or, emotion as an important element for 
the control of employability and multiple dependencies (Tsianos & Papadopoulos, 2006).
One-shots are, by bug more than intentional design, a factor in librarianship’s cruel op-
timism.6 For those in particular who are bound up in what seems like never ending one-shot 
cycles, or those in precarious labor roles, or those who feel a broader lack of agency, consider 
if any of these descriptions feel uncanny to you. 
Cruel optimism obstructs us from collectivity because we are preoccupied with our in-
dividual goals that keep us optimistic and distract us from solidarity. When cruel optimism 
alchemizes collective issues into those of the individual, averting us from solidarity, there is 
an imperative to trouble the dominant narrative and how we relate to one another. As linear 
time divides us through isolation and competition, kinship and care should be thought of as a 
collective project in solidarity for hope. Lisa Duggan posits hope and hopelessness as dialecti-
cal rather than oppositional, suggesting the more accurate negation to hope is complacency 
(2009, p. 5). Feelings of hopelessness do not nullify interrogating subjectivity and imagining 
720  College & Research Libraries September 2022
differently. If functioning as a dialectic, there will be shifting and gradients in affect, which 
inspires solidarity toward a collective futurity. 
Moving toward imagining differently and ostensibly taking action can be complicated. As 
Sarah Amsler and Keri Facer pinpoint, “adequate responses… require radical modes of think-
ing and acting which people formed and socialized through formal education in the global 
North—despite being able to identify the problem—are often ill-prepared to imagine or engage 
in” (2017, p. 2). They further validate “that this system systematically diminishes opportuni-
ties for creative emergence and spaces of political possibility in order to reproduce itself at the 
level of society” (p. 9). Thinking in linear time manufactures how we might imagine differently, 
where linear causality and the western need for certainty sequence social imagination. From 
this impasse, imagination and action can be precluded by the overwhelm of complacency and 
lack of agency. An instantiation of this could be categorizing hope and imagination for utopia 
as naivety, which stifles inertia by writing off these social projects as frivolous or futile. 
We could consider the hope/hopelessness dialectic as collective, where turning away 
through complacency is isolated and individual. Bureaucratization’s future-focused anxiety 
of individualized output metrics is an antecedent to the privatization of stress (Fisher, 2009), 
and when we experience lack of fulfillment, overwork, burnout, or endless competition, we are 
divided and contending with alienation. Alienation critique purports that this phenomenon 
occurs when we become divorced from that which we created or believed to be a part of us. 
Rahel Jaeggi explains how alienation is palpable as “objectified relationships that appear to 
take on a life of their own over and against individual agents” (2014, p. 24). Seeing alienation 
reproduced in higher education, Jill Blackmore connects bureaucratic audit and accountabil-
ity culture, which “can lead to disaffection and alienation from teaching, as academics ‘turn 
off’ as teaching becomes routinised and non-reflective, which, ironically, in turn impacts on 
quality” (2009, p. 864). Our field established the one-shot model to meet a need, yet we might 
find ourselves currently alienated from what was once deemed essential. In routinized, repeti-
tive, non-reflective work, if we use the perspective on the traditional meaning of one-shots 
as singular, repetitive, ephemeral (Pagowsky, 2021, p. 300), it would not be surprising to see 
alienation imbricated with one-shot instruction in these circumstances.
As I discussed, ideology and related mythologies reproduce themselves to appear as 
natural and become invisible. We need hope and the ability to imagine utopia to go beyond 
identification of what is obscured. Nash articulates how affect theory invites us to consider 
“how structures of domination feel,” and that “simply naming structures fails to do justice to 
how they move against (and inside of) our bodies” (2021, p. 30). To bring these ideas together, 
Margaret Price engages the intersection between alienation and time, to move toward hope 
through slowing and breaking down timescapes of academia in order to “understand how it 
is mobilized to divide workers against one another,” and against ourselves. Through seeing 
through this dynamic, we move closer toward imagining better futures and taking collective 
action (2021, p. 258).
Conclusion
The shape of these alternative avenues of inquiry remains undetermined and 
contested. If many of us share a dissatisfaction with the state of the field, we also 
internally disagree about how it might otherwise be shaped. A primary aim of our 
Introduction to the Special Issue   721
future endeavors is to render these disagreements the stuff of collective delibera-
tion.—The V21 Collective, 2015
Through this introduction, I have connected time, care, and hope, which although appear 
potentially neutral can be ideological projects, impacted by agency or lack thereof. It can be a 
struggle to think differently and envision what is not-yet or not-yet-conscious toward some -
thing different. Walter Mignolo, from the perspective of decoloniality, introduces the provoca-
tion for epistemic disobedience, to “de-link” from western modernity. Mignolo explains “that 
it is not enough to change the content of the conversation, that it is of the essence to change the 
terms of the conversation” (2009, p. 162). In changing the terms, we must consider different 
timescapes as frameworks for how we could imagine relationality and hope. One-shots are 
not in a binary of good versus bad, but rather in a spectrum with varied experiences resulting 
from differing levels of agency and marginalization.
Even for those who enjoy one-shots and have had primarily good experiences with them, 
I urge us to think collectively and in solidarity because not everyone has that experience or has 
the agency to flourish in this model. This is why imagining and taking action toward change 
must come collectively. For change to happen, we need to normalize these ideals as a field, 
rather than attempting to individually, separately push back. Both hoping for a better future 
or being content with the present are not excused from facing problematic regimes in our 
field that persist in many arenas—one being the one-shot model. Chatterjee et al. expresses 
this accountability profoundly for the field of Victorian studies, another primarily white, 
hegemonic field currently scrutinizing its mythology, saying that 
Wanting a different future does not imply a utopian closing of the eyes to the 
injuries of global racial capitalism. On the contrary, it demands seeing and feel-
ing them more acutely than before. Or, to be more precise, it demands a more 
equitable distribution of that seeing and feeling. The present, perhaps, is always 
a portal, and there is no doing away with the drag of our past. (2020)
They emphasize shared points of struggle in solidarity, and not turning away from the 
work of troubling, unsettling, or problematizing the mythology of a field. Solidarity thrives 
through conflict and discourse. As guest editor, my hope is that conflict and discourse are 
drawn out in this special issue and ignite further research and imaginings. 
The authors in this issue question, examine, and reflect on one-shots through varied ap-
proaches and perspectives. Before I provide a primer on what these articles contribute, I would 
like to first offer context on the making of this special issue. Often, the behind-the-scenes work 
of editing and peer-review, and even multiple revisions by authors, are invisibilized and the 
amount of effort put into publication is unknown. 
When C&RL published the CFP attached to my guest editorial last year, the response 
was immense. I was heartened to see that so many were impassioned to talk about one-
shots, and I received in total just over 80 proposals. Additionally, C&RL has been open to 
experimentation in this issue, and it has been both a fantastic and overwhelming experi-
ence to offer authors a choice between open/developmental or traditional peer-review. The 
disposition of peer-review for this issue was collaboration and mentoring, to use discus-
sion to engage with articles rather than solely critique. Peer-reviewers added exponential 
722  College & Research Libraries September 2022
value to this issue, and their work must not go unnoticed. I will thank them in alphabeti-
cal order at the end of this introduction. Because some authors went through traditional 
review and reviewer anonymity needs to remain intact, I have asked authors who went 
through developmental review to not name specific reviewers in their acknowledgments. 
Last, you will perhaps be surprised to notice that some authors (including myself) have 
opted for APA style, rather than the journal’s standard Chicago style. C&RL was open to 
experimentation in this issue on citation style, and so I was able to offer authors the choice 
between APA and Chicago.
Now, finally, to introduce the authors and their contributions. Beginning the full-length 
articles section, Annie Pho et al. use critical reflection as methodology to investigate how the 
one-shot model has become so ubiquitous with lasting presence in the field. The authors en-
gage with reflective interviews among themselves and additional participants to consider how 
power and positionality influence acculturation, burnout, and tensions between transactional 
and relational iterations of the one-shot. As we perpetuate our structures through story and 
mythology, it is important to use personal reflection to challenge dominant narratives. As 
with Pho et al., other authors engage with these different approaches and theories to examine 
contradictions in order to help us consider creative alternatives to imagine new futures. From 
a more empirical perspective, Dani Brecher Cook uses meta-analysis to examine one-shots’ 
efficacy. Looking toward precision and rigor in collected studies, Brecher Cook establishes 
reasoning for why there is lack of consensus in the field and where we should re-evaluate our 
focus, methodology, and interpretation of results. 
The next two articles interrogate the non-performativity of equity, diversity, and inclusion 
(EDI) initiatives in libraries and beyond, and how that serves as analogy to one-shot models. 
Sofia Leung elucidates how one-shots can serve as afterthoughts and band-aid quick-fixes to 
larger problems, similar to how EDI portends to cure an institution through mere existence 
or even in name. Leung uses the approaches of Critical Race Theory (CRT) and decoloniality 
to problematize these inherent similarities, drawing us to “what is the point” of both of these 
endeavors. Karen P. Nicholson and Maura Seale additionally caution against capitalization 
on one-off approaches to both library instruction and EDI through the lens of neoliberalism, 
responsibilitization of the individual, and the violence of practicality. All of these authors 
look toward relationality and care through pedagogies of affect to begin to amend the results 
of injurious one-off implementation.
Zoe Bastone and Kristina Clement question whether one-shots truly serve us in the way 
they are idealized, or if they instead proliferate faux-equity and ultimately cause harm, particu-
larly for disabled learners. Cautioning on neglectful care toward ourselves, while upholding 
internal and external expectations for outward care, Bastone and Clement consider a 360-view 
of how care functions in affective economies. Contributing to a multi-faceted analysis of harm, 
Yi Ding exposes tensions in how the expectation for flexibility is feminized and its profound 
reverberation in a feminized field. From de-valued instructional labor, Ding engages feminist 
and intersectional lenses to imagine toward equity. 
Veronica Arellano Douglas and Joanna Gadsby take a different approach to considering 
the one-shot, making the argument that this instruction model can serve a positive purpose 
through not giving temporal enumeration the primary focus, and instead look to relationality. 
The authors argue that outcomes of mutual care could be possible if we are able to get unstuck. 
Concluding the full-length articles, Lalitha Nataraj and April Ibarra Siqueiros imagine futurity 
Introduction to the Special Issue   723
through pursuing alterity in timescapes and epistemic demeanors using autoethnography. 
Addressing the harm of hegemonic systems, particularly for those identifying as BIPOC, 
Nataraj and Ibarra Siqueiros draw us toward greater relationality, slowed temporality, and 
epistemic justice in our instruction models. 
To offer space for engagement with creative imaginings, experimentation, and flexibility 
from more standardized academic writing, this special issue additionally has a section of six 
shorter submissions to complement the full-length articles. Nora Almeida provides levity by 
engaging us with a clever reenactment of the one-shot experience that many will likely relate 
to. Urszula Lechtenberg and Carrie Donovan posit innovative instructional model consider -
ations that offer examples for moving beyond the one-shot’s limitations. Sajni Lacey looks 
beyond pedagogy toward racial imposter syndrome in the classroom, and how burnout can 
be a result of this experience. This contribution encourages greater consideration toward 
how these instruction models can catalyze inequitable impacts for those with intersectional 
identities. Gina Schlesselman-Tarango and Monideepa Becerra discuss how they implemented 
their Critical Information Literacy Leadership Institute as an alternative to the one-shot, with 
perspectives from both a librarian and teaching faculty. Specifically addressing special collec -
tions and archives, Colleen Hoelscher discusses how the one-shot model can solicit gatekeep -
ing instructional practices and instead urges teaching from the perspective of a guide. Last, 
Michele Santamaria and Jessica Schomberg map a vaccination metaphor onto one-shots to 
question perception of their practicality and common-sense, troubling how we consider the 
narrative and mythology of this instruction model.
In this multifaceted special issue toward problematizing the one-shot, the authors and 
their contributions will hopefully prompt more discussion and deep critique. As Judith But-
ler affirms, “A structure only remains a structure through being reinstated as one” (1997, p. 
139). Critique is care, and to have the possibility for imagining differently, we can use hope 
to disassemble hegemonic structures in solidarity and work toward more inclusive and 
equitable futures. 
Thank you to all the peer-reviewers who added astronomical value to this special issue, 
sharing their expertise via time, care, and hope. Reviewers (some also authors) are listed 
alphabetically by last name, and those with an asterisk reviewed more than one manuscript: 
Nora Almeida, Roberto A. Arteaga, Candice Benjes-Small, Nimisha Bhat, Nicole Branch, 
Carolyn Ciesla*, nicholae cline, Erica DeFrain*, Carrie Donovan, Meghan Dowell, Gabrielle 
M. Dudley, Romel Espinel, Sarah Fancher, Lindsay Hansen Brown, Colleen Hoelscher, Kate 
Joranson, Sajni Lacey, Jorge R. López-McKnight*, Jessie Loyer, Talitha R. Matlin, Rafia Mirza, 
Lalitha Nataraj, Nirmala Nataraj, Margy MacMillan*, Torie Quiñonez, Jennie Quinonez-
Skinner, Michele Santamaria, Gina Schlesselman-Tarango, Jessica Schomberg*, Maura Seale, 
Maribeth Slebodnik, Eamon Tewell, Richard Thai, Matthew Weirick Johnson, Sam Winn*, 
and Desmond Wong. 
Acknowledgments: It has been a staggering experience collaborating with so many brilliant con-
tributors and peer-reviewers in this issue. Thank you to Wendi Arant Kaspar (outgoing C&RL Editor) 
and Kristen Totleben (incoming C&RL Editor) for their encouragement and support in experimenta-
tion while creating this special issue. I also thank Dr. Reid Gómez for insightful conversations around 
ontologies of care and characterizations of relationality. And a secret shoutout to my peer-reviewers 
for this article; I am keeping with the reasoning for only naming reviewers in the thank you list, but I 
do want them to know how much I appreciated their feedback. 
724  College & Research Libraries September 2022
References
Ahmed, S. (2019). What’s the use? On the uses of use . Duke University Press.
Amsler, S., & Facer, K. (2017). Contesting anticipatory regimes in education: Exploring alternative educational 
orientations to the future. Futures , 94, 6–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2017.01.001
Berlant, L. G. (2011). Cruel optimism . Duke University Press.
Blackmore, J. (2009). Academic pedagogies, quality logics and performative universities: Evaluating teaching 
and what students want. Studies in Higher Education , 34(8), 857–872. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075070902898664
Butler, J. (1997). Excitable speech: A politics of the performative . Routledge.
Chatterjee, R., Christoff, A. M., & Wong, A. R. (2020, July 10). Undisciplining Victorian Studies . Los Angeles Review 
of Books. https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/undisciplining-victorian-studies/
Duggan, L., & Muñoz, J. E. (2009). Hope and hopelessness: A dialogue. Women & Performance: A Journal of Feminist 
Theory , 19(2), 275–283. https://doi.org/10.1080/07407700903064946
Fisher, M. (2009). Capitalist realism: Is there no alternative? Zero Books. 
Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2006). The end of capitalism (as we knew it): A feminist critique of political economy . University 
of Minnesota Press. 
Graham, M. (2007). The ethics of care, Black women and the social professions: Implications of a new analysis. 
Ethics and Social Welfare , 1(2), 194–206. https://doi.org/10.1080/17496530701450372
Hudson, D. J., & Rochat, D. (2022, April 26). Racial capitalism and knowledge production in LIS: A conversation with 
David James Hudson . Concordia University Library Research Forum 2022, Montreal, Quebec (virtual).
Huppatz, D. J. (2011). Roland Barthes, Mythologies. Design and Culture , 3(1), 85–100. https://doi.org/10.2752/1754
70810X12863771378833
Jaeggi, R. (2014). Alienation . Columbia University Press.
Kinchin, I. M. (2022). Care as a threshold concept for teaching in the salutogenic university. Teaching in Higher 
Education , 27(2), 171–184. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2019.1704726
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (2003). Metaphors we live by . University of Chicago Press.
Loyer, J. (2018). Indigenous information literacy: Nêhiyaw Kinship Enabling Self-Care in Research . In K.P Nicholson & 
M. Seale (Eds.), The politics of theory and the practice of critical librarianship (pp. 145-156). Sacramento: Library 
Juice Press. 
Martin, A., Myers, N., & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies of Science , 45(5), 
625–641. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073
Mignolo, W. D. (2009). Epistemic disobedience, independent thought and decolonial freedom. Theory, Culture & 
Society , 26(7–8), 159–181. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276409349275
Muñoz, J. E. (2007). Queerness as horizon: Utopian hermeneutics in the face of gay pragmatism. In A Compan -
ion to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Studies (pp. 452–463). John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. https://doi.
org/10.1002/9780470690864.ch24
Murphy, M. (2015). Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health practices. Social 
Studies of Science , 45(5), 717–737. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715589136
Narayan, U. (1995). Colonialism and its others: Considerations on rights and care discourses. Hypatia , 10(2), 
133–140. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1527-2001.1995.tb01375.x
Nash, J. C. (2021). Black feminism reimagined: After intersectionality . Duke University Press.
Ozkazanc-Pan, B., & Pullen, A. (2021). Reimagining value: A feminist commentary in the midst of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Gender, Work & Organization , 28(1), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12591
Pagowsky, N. (2021). The contested one-shot: Deconstructing power structures to imagine new futures. College 
& Research Libraries, 82 (3), 300-309. https://doi.org/10.5860/crl.82.3.300
Price, M. (2021). Time harms. South Atlantic Quarterly , 120(2), 257–277. https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-8915966
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies 
of Science , 45(5), 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851
Raghuram, P. (2019). Race and feminist care ethics: Intersectionality as method. Gender, Place & Culture , 26(5), 
613–637. https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369X.2019.1567471
Samuels, E., & Freeman, E. (2021). Introduction. South Atlantic Quarterly , 120(2), 245–254. https://doi.
org/10.1215/00382876-8915937
Seale, M., & Mirza, R. (2020). The coin of love and virtue: Academic libraries and value in a global pandemic. 
Canadian Journal of Academic Librarianship , 6, 1–30. https://doi.org/10.33137/cjal-rcbu.v6.34457
Tsianos, V., & Papadopoulos, D. (2006). Precarity: A savage journey to the heart of embodied capitalism. Trans -
versal Texts . Retrieved June 13, 2022, from https://transversal.at/transversal/1106/tsianos-papadopoulos/en
Introduction to the Special Issue   725
V21 Collective. (n.d.). Manifesto of the V21 Collective. V21. Retrieved June 1, 2022, from http://v21collective.org/
manifesto-of-the-v21-collective-ten-theses/
Whyte, K. P. (2021). Time as kinship. In J. Cohen & S. Foote (Eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Environmental 
Humanities  (1st ed., pp. 39–55). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009039369.005
Notes
 1. You might start with the guest editorial if you have not yet read it, to see what has spawned this issue and 
subsequent discussion. The guest editorial focuses more on library instruction and the intricacies of one-shots, 
whereas this article is concerned with the bigger picture. https://crl.acrl.org/index.php/crl/article/view/24912  
 2. “If you can fill the one-shot fifty minute / With a good two hours worth of info lit”-From Margy Mac -
Millan’s poem in MacMillan, M. (2005). Open résumé: Magic words for assessment. College & Research Libraries 
News, 66(7), 516-520. https://doi.org/10.5860/crln.66.7.7476
 3. Reid Gómez, personal communication, 2022
 4. Personally, this is not my current situation; however, I had the experience at a former institution of deliv -
ering approximately 30-50 one-shots per semester, with a 6-8 hour shift on the reference desk when I was not 
teaching. It takes a psychic, psychological, and physical toll.
 5. Reid Gómez, personal communication, 2022
 6. These concepts can dovetail with Fobazi Ettarh’s “vocational awe.”
