  DOI: 10.4324/9781003414896‑27
283 This chapter has been made available under a CC BY NC ND license.22
CULTIV ATING ECOSYSTEM 
CONVIVIALITY THROUGH SOIL 
ARTS AND URBAN GARDENING
Janna Holmstedt, Jenny Lindblad, Christina Fredengren,  
Cecilia Åsberg, Malin Lobell, and Karin Wegsjö
Introduction
Urban soils provide a joyful sense of ecological belonging, yet they are understudied as  co-creative 
sites that cultivate a much-needed sense of conviviality and ecological thriving amongst both 
human and more‑than‑human communities. Over 50% of the world’s human population lives in 
cities. Although more recent as a notion, urban gardening has been a part of urban dwellings since 
the dawn of sedentary civilization. From ancient sedentism to urban sprawl, soils connect people 
to land and sustain a diversity of soil communities and soil cultures. Recently, urban gardens 
and their soils are gaining attention for their provisioning of ecosystem services, and specifically 
 cultural ecosystem services such as recreation and social cohesion, emancipation of local commu -
nities, and offer sites of learning and identity making. Yet, urban gardens, their inhabitants, and the 
multifunctionality of these urban green areas continue to be regularly neglected and overlooked in 
planning and policy despite their key qualities, and their entanglement with wider urban ecosys-
tems for climate mitigation, adaptation, and socioecological resilience.
In today’s world of climatic, environmental, and democratic challenges and uncertainties, it 
is urgent to pay attention to nourishing sites of local empowerment, where the artificial modern 
separation of environment and people, nature and culture get integrated (Rose, 2004), and where 
sustainable practices can be explored despite disciplinary and institutional boundaries. To meet 
this need, several transdisciplinary, relational, and process-oriented approaches have emerged that 
move beyond such binary divisions and the standpoint of human mastery and control that has 
dominated Northern and proto‑European societies’ relationship with nature (Plumwood, 2005).
In this chapter, and through “thinking with soils” (Salazar et al., 2020), we employ such rela -
tional approaches in theory and practice and suggest that cultivating ecosystem conviviality  is a 
generative notion to explore in relation to practices of planning and managing urban ecologies. 
We offer this as a complement to ongoing efforts to alter Cultural Ecosystem Services (CES) 
and Nature’s Contributions to People (NCP) into more integrative ways of grappling with how 
to live, flourish, care and eventually also die differently on a damaged planet. We explore how 
soil- centered urban gardening and soil arts shift the anthropocentric inclination of CES through 
situating local human and more-than-human communities not merely as receivers or producers of 
services, but as entangled co-creators of open-ended ecosystems.
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services284Our engagement with modes of cultivating ecosystem conviviality through soils follows the recent 
‘soils turn’ in environmentally oriented research, which testify to soils as generative for exploring the 
implications and potentials of altered natureculture relations in times of ecological crises (Granjou 
and Meulemans, 2023; Krzywoszynska and Marchesi, 2020; Montag et al., 2016; Norwegian BioArt 
Arena, 2022; Puig de La Bellacasa, 2019). We aim to show how urban soil practices seed “a new 
kind of green urban culture characterized by the cultivation of multispecies practices of care and 
conviviality among diverse communities” (Rigby, 2018, p. 79). These communities are dependent on 
a variety of material and temporal conditions, which in turn afford different forms of socioecological 
relations. More specifically, the chapter proposes that ecosystem conviviality brings attention to how 
gardening and soil growing can build grounds for different species to co-exist and thrive, and for 
urban soil and gardeners to be decommodified and acknowledged as a vital part of urban ecosystems. 
These are crucial insights for urban and environmental planning seeking to support and learn from 
the transformative potential of such soil-centered gardening practices.
Through our examples, we seek to convey how attention to soil inspires altered forms of urban 
naturecultures that sustain multispecies relational webs. It is in recognition of the fundamental 
intertwinement of humans and nature, and the material dimensions of culture, that we refer to 
naturecultures jointly. If the goal for CES is widened beyond human well-being to include eco-
logical well-being, then there is a demand for an altered environmental planning and management 
paradigm that acknowledges such relational webs, which the notion of cultivating ecosystem con-
viviality could support and enable. Conviviality has been employed in for example environmental 
humanities ethnographies to convey how urban life unfolds as a temporally situated, place-based 
togetherness between humans and animals (van Dooren and Rose, 2012). We extend such a multi -
species conviviality to include also plants and soils.
From our mixed‑methodology toolbox, we discuss how artist‑led open stages can both help 
recognize and cultivate convivial relational webs that often go unnoticed. These cultural forums 
offer a much-needed narrative approach, alongside instrumental and deliberative approaches, to 
environmental and ecosystem valuation (Edwards et al., 2016). Artist‑led open stages offer ways to 
acknowledge such webs and their transformative potential, not with the goal of measuring or eval -
uating, but to explore and story them. The chapter suggests that a shift of focus, from benefits and 
valuation to practices of cultivating ecosystem conviviality, could help bring attention to ongoing 
experiments in building engaging and open-ended relations with and in naturecultures, urged by a 
need and desire to better deal with and adapt to multiple crises and uncertainties.
As a transdisciplinary team, we work in the vein of environmental humanities as a form of 
more‑than‑human arts and humanities (Åsberg, 2024; Neimanis et al., 2015). We draw on this and 
a body of long-standing feminist philosophy and care ethics, alongside more recent insights from 
our respective fields. These include anthropology of planning, critical heritage studies, gender 
studies and cultural studies, and multispecies art and artistic research. Our work has been con-
ducted in Sweden, a sparsely populated country of the Global North. The research material pre-
sented in this chapter stems from the art and research project Humus Economicus (which includes 
the authors). The empirical corpus consists of two focus group interviews in Stockholm with com-
munity gardeners and municipality officials, three study visits to a community supported agricul -
ture initiative in the Stockholm region, four art exhibitions, and seven arts‑based open stages. We 
share quotes from written reflections and recorded and transcribed conversations with gardeners 
who participated in the arts‑led open stage called the Soil Celebration over the course of 2021. 
This arts‑based open stage was designed by Holmstedt, Lobell and Wegsjö, who performed six soil 
celebrations. In addition, outdoor educator Germund Sellgren performed three soil celebrations. In 
total, 53 persons participated across the nine events. This said, we acknowledge the limited scope 
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality285
of our corpus and experimental practice, the emergent character of our theory-led practices and 
practice-led theories, and the open-ended results on highly select segments of society from our 
urban testing grounds.
In this chapter, we first explore the material and temporal conditions of urban gardening in 
Sweden and how they variously enable and hinder socioecological relational webs. Thereafter we 
explore soil conviviality with soil-centered gardeners and discuss this in relation to CES theory. 
We conclude with a discussion on the implications of engaging with relational approaches, and 
the potential of attending to practices of cultivating ecosystem conviviality in urban planning and 
environmental management.
Urban gardeners growing soil – conditions and practices in Sweden
An expanded understanding of CES have brought attention to urban gardens as sites for recrea -
tion, social cohesion, healthy lifestyles, pedagogical and educational engagements (Camps-Calvet 
et al., 2016), and emancipation of local communities (Bergame, 2023). Yet, undervalued and with-
out much societal prestige, urban gardens and gardeners find themselves under pressure when 
cities across Europe are densifying and development plans promise financial returns on coveted 
lands (Langemeyer et al., 2016). Furthermore, with Sweden as our example, municipalities mainly 
define and manage green areas either as social user‑areas, or in need of protection from human 
wear and tear (Ernstson et al., 2010). The framing of humans as users providing impact only leaves 
little room for attending to reciprocal relations and caring practices. We will briefly describe three 
forms of urban gardens and show how the material and temporal conditions that frame them vari-
ously enable and disable deep soil relationalites and the cultivation of ecosystem conviviality.
Different forms of allotment gardens spurred in urban areas across Eastern and Northern 
Europe in the wake of the industrialization and urbanization of the 19th century and developed in 
the coming century as a social movement (Keshavarz and Bell, 2016). People moving into cities 
in connection with industrialisation got access, though not ownership, to pieces of land to grow 
food in times of austerity for recreational purposes, and as relief from heavy, harsh, and polluted 
working environments. In early 20th century Sweden, allotment gardens responded to urgencies 
of poverty and food shortages (Barthel et al., 2013). The allotment gardens that still exist today are 
often areas in which each gardener tends their separate plots, while certain facilities such as water 
and tools are communal. They are organized in associations of which the gardeners are members. 
Leasing contracts are nowadays reasonably long-term, allowing for investment of resources into 
the plots. Municipal regulations limit what is allowed in the allotment gardens, often approving 
sheds and sometimes huts where it is possible to sleep (Figure 22.1).
From the mid‑20th century, expanding welfare society and economic developments secured food 
access through other means. Allotment gardens reduced in numbers and were outcompeted by hous-
ing and infrastructure developments. They continue to be so, despite a steadily growing interest in 
urban gardening among city dwellers. Since around 2010, there has been an emerging movement 
across Swedish cities with renewed attention to ecological crises, food security, soil health, biodi-
versity, organic food and a sense of desiring (re)connection with nature and local communities. This 
movement has given rise to various forms of gardens. One is the community gardens run by garden-
ers who jointly cultivate and manage a piece of land (Figure 22.2) and share managing activities 
(Bell et al. 2016). The user agreements with municipal governments are usually short‑term, often 
yearlong leases with a notice period of one month (Bonow and Normark, 2018).
Lately, many city governments advocate gardening in urban pallet collars, a type of wooden 
packaging in the standardized format 120 × 80 cm (the European pallet). Cities authorize the 
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services286placement of pallet collars near apartment buildings with access provided short term, per season, 
and arranged individually, i.e. people are not required to form an association. Meanwhile, these 
pallet collars can also be seen in allotments and community gardens, as they can be used to make 
raised beds for gardening on sealed or polluted ground (Figure 22.3).
In a group discussion that we had with five community garden initiators in Stockholm, of which 
one is a member in our research group, the gardeners pointed out that the local councils favored 
pallet collars because they are easily movable and allow for gardening on top of sealed land. They 
described this as an example of how the city of Stockholm uses gardening for “beautification,” 
rather than being concerned with ecosystems as both social and ecological (personal communica -
tion, 20 December 2021). In contrast, the gardeners’ socioecological approach, which includes 
understanding soils as living, requires engagement with the soil on site and continuity over time 
for the transformative relations among humans and other -than-humans to emerge. In their descrip-
tions, urban gardening is toilsome work. It requires being in the midst of unpredictability, both 
with regards to access to land and to the continuous co-shaping of relations among plants, soil 
critters, and among people who join gardens on voluntary grounds.
The bureaucracy around establishing, and yearly renewing, user agreements situates the 
community gardening in a temporal uncertainty since the efforts put into cultivating both gar -
den and community can be blocked whenever the city chooses to quit the agreement (see also 
Figure 22.1  An individual plot in a larger allotment garden association founded in 1921, Stockholm, 
 Sweden, where tool sheds and huts are allowed.
Source: Photograph by Janna Holmstedt.
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality287
Figure 22.2  Bellevue Farm, Stockholm, Sweden, a collectively tended community garden referred to as a 
citizen garden and food park, near a railway track on a left‑over green area in a public park. No 
tool sheds are allowed. Water is provided by the municipality.
Source: Photograph by Malin Lobell.
Figure 22.3  Growing in pallet collars. Visit to Enskifteshagen during the Soil Celebration by the art plat -
form (p)Art of the Biomass, Malmö, Sweden, 2021. The public park contains polluted soil and bioremediation experiments have been conducted.
Source: Photograph by Malin Lobell.
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services288Bonow and Normark, 2018). With pallet collars for individual use, the conditions are even more 
restricting as the soil in the collar often is sealed off from the ground. This type of gardening 
often depends on the purchase of soil bags, which in turn depends on soil as an exchangeable 
commodity in disaggregated form. The pallet collar encourages short-term engagement, annual 
plants, and linear flows of goods that diminishes the web of microbial relations that makes soil 
living. On the other hand, long-term leases for allotments and community gardens enable engag-
ing with longer life cycles of soil on site and the recycling of resources through e.g., composting. 
These conditions allow for regenerative practices, such as permaculture and forest gardening, 
concerned with biodiversity, soil health, circular flows of resources, and the build‑up of mycelia 
and microbes that benefit perennial plants and long‑lived trees and bushes that mutually support 
each other in larger ecosystems. The gardeners we spoke to pointed to how varying social and 
material conditions either supported or hindered the practicing of soil care. Thus, the emergence 
of ecosystem conviviality relies on factors such as temporal stability, access to land, water and 
sanitation, and social facilities that support recycling and sharing of resources. It also requires 
knowledge of the soil on site, since community gardens in Stockholm often are designated sites 
of polluted soils in poor conditions.
The contemporary urban gardening conditions in Stockholm and their implications form the 
basis of the artistic work that is part of our research team’s transdisciplinary soil arts. The artistic 
practice belongs to a long tradition of eco- and participatory art, which is a context-sensitive cura-
torial practice that creates and hosts events as a way of “curating the convivial”, a notion suggested 
by Fabre et al. (2015). Their practice includes ceremonial and emotional involvement mixed with 
science, craft, farming, and art, with the aim to build empathy, capacity, and inspire change in pol-
icy. In our iteration, curating conviviality also involves nurturing a heightened sensorial attention 
to how we participate in and with other species as entangled with specific environments (Holm-
stedt, 2020). This mode of working allows for unfolding and storying a multitude of interspecies 
relations that make up human‑soil communities. Edwards and colleagues (2016) refer to similar 
practices as “arts-led dialogue” that offer an alternative approach to ecosystem service valuation 
and environmental decision‑making. Arts‑led dialogues bring attention to the much‑needed narra-
tive and interpretative methods offered by arts and humanities that favors dialogue before delibera -
tion. Yet, since “dialogue” is easily mistaken for a verbal and exclusively human affair, we infuse 
this approach with a multispecies-oriented sensitivity and ethics, evident in an explosion of recent 
art and interdisciplinary initiatives (see e.g. Jaque et al., 2020; Serpentine, n.d.). In reworking the 
notion of arts-led dialogue, we consider such critical and creative initiatives more fully compre -
hended as artist‑led open stages. They are stages not for virtuoso performances, but for rehearsals, 
improvisations, and explorations that center a maker perspective and the crafting of stories through 
multisensory aesthetic encounters (Jönsson and Lindström, 2022).
Celebrating soil – an artist‑led open stage for storying  
and cultivating ecosystem conviviality
Across 2021, we initiated an artist‑led open stage called the Soil Celebration that explored soil 
conviviality through a series of gatherings. In these celebrations, the mutual making and sharing 
while getting hands dirty with soils gathered people, matter, places, memories, ecosystems, prac-
tices, and diverse knowledge through an invitation to contemplate soil relations.
The first series of soil celebrations were part of the durational artwork “Four Sisters for Plan-
throposcene”, conceived by Holmstedt and Lobell for the international exhibition Sustainable 
Societies for the Future at Malmö Art Museum, Sweden. The artwork explored human‑plant‑soil 
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality289relations through an installation stretching from the museum gallery on to the courtyard, animated 
by sound, film, seeds, and an almanac suggesting five thematically different events happening 
across the nine months of the installations. At the center of this art installation was an outdoor 
garden. It functioned as a stage for explorations inspired by Natasha Myers’ (2017) notion “Plan-
throposcene”, not to be perceived as a geological era but a way of doing life, since “garden designs 
have the potential to stage both new scenes of, and new ways to see (and even seed)” affective 
ecologies between plants and people. The artwork also alluded to Robin Wall Kimmerer’s (2013) 
writing on humans as a “fourth sister” in relation to the Indigenous companion planting technique 
Three Sisters where corn, beans and squash mutually support each other. The artists’ garden was 
a perennial forest garden, which hosted the sisters alongside other supporting siblings native to a 
Nordic climate. The intention with the garden was to attend to the invisible work performed by 
a plethora of soil workers, human and nonhuman, and their often‑overlooked role in the urban 
ecosystem.
The garden in the museum courtyard functioned as a connecting hub for the soil celebrations 
that were performed 9–11 April by Holmstedt, Lobell, and Wegsjö. These were framed through a 
wordplay twisting the well‑known trope Homo economicus into Humus economicus, to echo the 
contemporary world of economics while simultaneously pointing to other non-monetary values 
and economies grounded in soil ecologies (see also Pentecost, 2012). In the spirit of Humus 
economicus, in the early spring landscape before any green buds had burst, the participants 
joined us to make soil coins out of the soils in the gardens they tended to (Figure 22.4). The soil 
coins were gifted to the Planthroposcene‑garden, merging with its in‑the‑making outside the art 
museum.
To perform the soil celebrations, we collaborated with gardening sites across Malmö and 
the neighboring city Lund. The sites included educational and experimental sites for children, 
allotment gardens, collectively cultivated community gardens, and an educational urban farm-
ing initiative. Their gardening conditions varied, ranging from deep, fertile black soil to raised 
beds in pallet collars isolated from the contaminated ground they were resting on. Across these 
sites, Wegsjö filmed 13 conversations with gardeners. In terms of transferability, the arts‑based 
methods we used can be generative also in other contexts as evinced by our collaboration with 
outdoor educator Sellgren. In partnership with us, Sellgren carried out three soil celebrations in 
other parts of Sweden in May, June, and October 2021 with members of a community garden, 
visitors to a community supported agriculture site, and participants in a course on regenerative 
agriculture. In these, 40 participants wrote down reflections that they shared with each other. 
The quotes that we present below are both transcriptions from the films and excerpts from the 
participants’ written accounts. They have been translated from Swedish and used with consent 
from the gardeners.
During the soil coining, the gardeners shared their thoughts on what soil meant to them. One 
gardener expressed how soil-centered gardening made them aware of the multispecies and inter -
generational processes of soils, which led to a reevaluation of how to grasp soil’ s worth:
Before I thought that soil was something bought in big bags, 4 for 100 Swedish crowns. 
Now I know that I and the animals, trees and bushes create soil, together with the life that 
is in the soil. I am soil. My children are soil. My ancestors are soil. The weird thing about 
those 4‑for‑100 bags is that it’ s kind of expensive, but also way too cheap. In the fields, the 
soil lies bare, almost torn and screaming. There, the soil is worth nothing, while the land is 
expensive.
(SC, 31 October 2021)
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services290In one of the sites, the gardeners grieved that their community garden in former agricultural fields 
was going to be sealed once the construction of the planned urban developments started. One gardener highlighted the tensions between commodification of soil for urban development and as measured for agricultural use: “I feel sad that they will build houses on this class 8–10 soil which is the finest in Europe” (SC, 9–11 April, 2021). The Soil Celebration took place in the midst of the unfolding Covid19 pandemic, which actualized questions of food security and local self- sufficiency. The queues to the approximately 7, 465 lots in Stockholm’s allotment gardens grew fast in this time to over 9000 persons, to which the city administration responded with allowing for pallet collars to be put on designated areas, with little interest shown from residents (Ritzén, 2021). Related to the pandemic spurring interest in gardening and the unfolding climate crisis, one participant situated the renewed attention to food production and justice in relation to earlier periods across the 20th century:
Our older generation told us that before the crash of the 1920s, the city, urban life and new technology had been considered the future. When the crisis hit, the garden and roadside became important for the unemployed, providing vegetables and potatoes for the family and grass for meat rabbits and dairy goats. When hunger struck during WW2, the farmer and cultivated land became of vital importance again.
(SC, 19 June 2021)
The coining of currency in the Soil Celebration invited the participants to engage both in wordplay and workplay that held space for the articulation of soil relations beyond its often taken‑for‑granted role as a resource. As such, the invitation to make a soil coin in the gardening sites where the participants cultivated socioecological relations functioned as a non-textual concept. It offered a 
Figure 22.4  A soil coin is gifted as part of the Soil Celebration to the artwork “Four Sisters for Planthro-
poscene” by the art platform (p)Art of the Biomass, at Malmö Art Museum, Sweden, 2021. The 
donor has written “Living relation with Earth” on the label and marked it with 10+ referencing a soil fertility index scale 1–10.
Source: Photograph by Karin Wegsjö.
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality291framing without definitions. This framing and the joint making opened for contemplation,  laughter, 
 sensuous experiences, and emotions among the participants, through which relations with soil found expression (Figure 22.5). While the soil stories shared within the groups could continue to live on in our collective memories of the event and appreciations of soils, the coins were returned to the ground – in the museum courtyard or locally on site – to acknowledge the circular and eco-
logical economy of soils.
Participants shared stories of how they felt intimately entangled with soils as that which sus-
tains, nurtures, and gives. Several turned to poetic descriptions, bodily sensations, and childhood memories to capture fragments of these larger relational webs, evoked by touching soil in the soil celebrations. One participant put it that:
Feeling [the soil] between my fingers creates a sense of belonging. Fellowship with those I share it with, living plants, animals and people, but also those who have been here before me and who are part of it now. The soil is what I live for, and off. The soil is what grounds me, roots me.
(SC, 19 June 2021)
Yet another participant reflected, based on a self‑experienced illness caused by pathogenic bacte -
ria, on how human-soil entanglements are enabling life and involving death for both humans and other critters:
Once I could have died when I breathed in soil and contracted bacterial pneumonia. Had it been before antibiotics, I most certainly would. I often think about it. I had plowed all spring 
Figure 22.5  Soil coins and storying in the making with Åsa at Brunnshög community garden in Lund, 
 Sweden, during the Soil Celebration by the art platform (p)Art of the Biomass, 2021.
Source: Photograph by Malin Lobell.
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services292and sat harrowing. In the heat of the sun, the tractor’ s windows were open. The inhabitants 
of the earth, whom I had deprived of their homes with my tools, whirled around in the hot early summer air.
(SC, 19 June 2021)
Meanwhile, other participants put forth experience of co-dependence, collaboration, and a sensa-tion of attending to mutual needs. Such as one, who wrote: “I am part of the soil’s life like all other beings. We co‑exist in cooperation, I, the microbes, the antlions, wild cats, and harebells” (SC, 28 May 2021). Yet another participant suggested that:
My presence in [the garden] is an exercise in both separating and uniting, basically to co‑exist. I guess that’ s the point with community gardens, to be rubbed with and against each other, to give and take. Yesterday, I saw how the beans whirled up around the corn. I thought, we are twisted together. Sisterhood. Kinship.
(SC, 9–11 April 2021)
This reflection highlights that conviviality is an ethical practice and exercise of sharing places with “strange others” (Fincher and Iveson, 2015, p. 24), and developing skills for being rubbed against each other with empathy. Several participants depicted soil-centered gardening as a transformative experience, and personal encounters with soil on site stood out as a necessary condition for ecological connections and emotional ties to emerge. In the celebrations, the act of returning the coins to the ground while sharing stories was a deeply moving ceremonial act that for some invited tears in. Similarly, we, the artists, experienced a sense of profound signifi-cance as participants crafted and shared stories. Across the soil stories, people connected to local ecosystems without necessarily having ties to the specific site beforehand but through everyday practices. Soil-centered urban gardening emerged as a naturecultural heritage phenomena in the making (Fredengren, 2015). 
The gardeners did not primarily position themselves as recipients, or users. They rather put 
forth how their gardening practices situated them as part of relational webs for which they cared through soil-centered practices on the land to which they had gained (temporary) access. Their commitment was not based on human well-being, instead multiple relations formed and proliferated over time in a mutual and convivial process not devoid of toil or strain, where giving‑and‑receiving became indivisible. The conversations revealed how relations are knotted together to form and sustain significant patterns of bodies, places, practices, and stories that include previous and future generations, history and heritage, landscapes and communities, as well as nonhuman communities and processes. Such material relational knottings with their ethical binds and considerations, we propose, forms the root system of ecosystem conviviality, as people express how they co-exist, care in and with, and come to live through these patterns that constantly shift and multiply.
Lessons from soil for CES
It has been thoroughly discussed elsewhere that dominant approaches to ecosystem services rely on productionist assumptions, cultural essentialism and anthropocentric inclinations of prioritiz -
ing human benefits from nature (Gould et al. 2020). Tensions inevitably arise when a metaphor stemming from a linear stock‑flow model of exchange inspired by economics is reconstructed and invigorated with cultural and relational insights. The Soil Celebration addressed the problem of 
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality293for whom and in what way soil has value, and exposed the diversity of material relationalities that 
gardening soils hold. The soil stories from the celebrations revealed a range of different emotions, 
meanings, and values that evade the metaphor of services. Critique on the metaphor of services 
have proposed relational values as a concept to acknowledge values formed through people’s or 
communities’ relationship with nature, where the relation itself brings about human well‑being 
(Chan et al., 2016; Jax et al., 2018). As such, relational values offer a much‑needed complement 
to valuations of nature that focus on instrumental values, what nature produces for humans, and 
intrinsic values, nature’s worth in its own right (Chan et al., 2018; Himes and Muraca, 2018). 
Attention to relational values promises to address a web of previously neglected relationships 
with nature. Yet, with economic framings dominating many aspects of society comes a risk that 
non-instrumental relational values might be argued for in utilitarian terms for strategic and com-
municative reasons. This would not only instrumentalize and co-opt them, but also diminish their 
capacity to claim space for alternative and vital people-nature relationships.
Our study might indicate that people could be identified as providing ecosystem services to 
soil, in resonance with generative efforts in CES to emphasize the importance of reciprocity in 
nature‑people relations (Comberti et al., 2015). We would like to add an affirmative critique to 
this reasoning, which risks positioning humans and nature as separate entities with linear flows 
between them. Such visualizations underestimate the depth of the nature-culture divide and 
might downplay the rich knotting of soil relations that we have detailed, which form a living 
web of ecosystem conviviality. Our situated practice-theory of soil arts instead shifts towards 
recognizing the embodied co-becoming of people, soils, and sites. This is not meant as a mere 
hair‑splitting remark. If neglected, onto‑epistemological oversimplifications could undermine 
the capacity of CES to recognize forms of co-existence where humans come into being with eco-
logical conditions, through everyday life sustaining activities. In other words, ecosystem con-
viviality recognizes that values may arise not as extracted from nature, but rather, as we show, 
are co‑cultivated in and with ecosystems. We thus support efforts to rework CES to accommo-
date co-evolution over time of socioecological relations that sustain health and resilience. The 
numerous evictions worldwide of Indigenous communities from their homeland in the name of 
nature protection and conservation (Dowie, 2011) testify to misguided approaches to environ-
mental management that disregards the important role local communities and lifeways may play 
for sustaining ecosystem health. This points beyond recreation, tourism, and idealized concep-
tions of nature that tends to value the scenic and spectacular (Büscher and Fletcher, 2020; van 
Bommel and Boonman‑Berson, 2022). It also highlights the role of culture in environmental 
management.
In the CES framework, ‘cultural’ signifies a separate class of services and is defined as 
 nonmaterial, which as we have seen is problematic since CES emerges as embodied, place-based 
and co‑created relational phenomena (see also Fish et al., 2016; Ojeda et al., 2022; Raymond et al., 
2018;). In the expanded framework of NCP adopted by the Intergovernmental Science‑Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, culture is no longer a subcategory but instead 
considered central and pervasive in all interactions between people and nature (Hill et al., 2021). 
Yet, the separation of material and nonmaterial remains, where the category ‘nonmaterial NCP’ 
more or less is analogous to CES. Our examples from urban gardening show that it is complicated 
to separate material from nonmaterial, as soil care has material effects not only for humans, but for 
several multispecies others in soils and gardens. It is not the individual or collective value mak-
ing, or the exchange between humans and soils in the present that are central. Lessons from soil 
challenge us to approach humans and humus as part of local multispecies soil communities with 
responsibilities across generations.
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services294Urban gardens contribute to human well‑being in many ways. Yet, we wish to emphasize the 
need to shift focus from benefits to modes of cultivating ecosystem conviviality that notice situated 
and entangled worldmakings. The integrative notion of cultivating ecosystem conviviality articu -
lates and claims space for urban imaginaries grounded in care practices, intergenerational justice, 
and future heritage rather than in utility, benefits, and production.
To avoid confusion, we do not suggest replacing CES with a new notion. Cultivating ecosystem 
conviviality is offered as a complement. Engaging the notion through artist-led open stages offers 
opportunities to explore and story natureculture entanglements, while at the same time allow-
ing for shifting values, deepening socioecological relations, and building capacity. Importantly, it 
demands that the limitations of calculability and utility as basis for judgment are clearly articulated 
and acknowledged in planning and decision‑making processes. Practices, places, and conditions 
all interact and differently afford ecosystem conviviality to emerge and thrive. This is what CES, 
environmental assessments, and planning need to capture and better acknowledge to ensure the 
continued cultivation of thriving nature-human entanglements over time.
Concluding remarks on artist‑led open stages in CES work
In this chapter, we have offered an artist-led open stage that presents ways to pay attention and 
story patterns of significance through visiting and listening. Instead of staying with ‘what is’, such 
stages invite considerations of ‘what if?’ Such convivial acts can help strengthen existing com-
munities and inspire new ones to form – new alliances of strange others in research, planning, 
gardening, environmental management, and elsewhere.
Our soil arts and humanities, guided by a Humus economicus relationality rather than a Homo 
economicus rationality, have worked to recognize how urban soils are cultivated in ways where 
humans and nature are decommodified, and constantly braided together in new and altering for -
mations of giving-and-receiving, life-and-death. Such formations are always situated in place, but 
never fixed in time. They are unevenly composed heritage phenomena that entangle humans and 
the more-than-human in a relational dance that stretches across generations.
Soil‑centered gardening responds to calls for re‑embedding societies in soils (Krzywoszynska 
and Marchesi, 2020). It holds transformative potential and contributes to a way of living, learn -
ing, relating, and co-creating with nature. There is limited access to such a mode of engagement 
with nature and soils in many contemporary cities. Yet it shows the potential and vital role urban 
gardens could play as part of urban ecologies to help enable nourishing sites of local resilience 
and empowerment, and the convivial co‑creation of multispecies urban places. We would like to 
prompt CES work in planning and environmental management to take into account such situated 
more-than-human soil entanglement that are on the move towards different futures. This demands 
a new type of practice-theory and multispecies art and humanities collaborations able to encom -
pass an understanding of the world that does not hinge on an outmoded divide between nature 
and culture. Instead, it is on the lookout for the unexpected and unplanned, remaining sensitive to 
unforeseen emergent capacities and relational fields.
For this purpose, we have suggested the notion cultivating ecosystem conviviality to bring 
attention to how soil-centered urban gardening builds multispecies empathy and caring relations 
with and in open‑ended naturecultures (Figure 22.6). Such engagements are urged by a need and 
desire to better deal with and adapt to multiple crises and uncertainties, beyond the management of 
nature as a resource. These local soil-centered gardening practices offer crucial insights for urban 
and environmental planning seeking to support and learn from existing efforts to grow equitable, 
sustainable communities.
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality295Acknowledgements
This chapter stems from the art and research project Humus economicus: Soil Blindness and the 
Value of ‘Dirt’ in Urbanized Landscapes (https://humuseconomicus.se/) at National Historical 
Museums in Sweden, with funding from Formas, a Swedish Research Council for Sustainable 
Development (DNR 2020‑01062). When collaborating as artists, Holmstedt, Lobell and Wegsjö 
work under the name (p)Art of the Biomass (https://partofthebiomass.se/). We wish to thank 
Germund Sellgren for generous contributions of data collection. We extend our gratitude to all 
collaborators and especially to the participants who big‑heartedly shared their reflections and 
insights.
References
Åsberg, Cecilia. 2024. “Promises of Cyborgs: Feminist Practices of Posthumanities (Against the Nested Cri-
ses of the Anthropocene).” NORA  – Nordic Journal of Feminist and Gender Research 32 (2): 125–145. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08038740.2023.2294194.
Barthel, Stephan, John Parker, Carl Folke, and Johan Colding. 2013. “Urban Gardens: Pockets of Social‑ 
Ecological Memory.” In Greening in the Red Zone: Disaster, Resilience and Community Greening , edited 
by Keith G Tidball and Marianne E Krasny, 145–158. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978‑90‑481‑ 
9947‑1_11.
Bell, Simon, Runrid Fox‑Kämper, Nazila Keshavarz, Mary Benson, Silvio Caputo, Susan Noori, and Annette 
V oigt. 2016. Urban Allotment Gardens in Europe. Routledge.
Bergame, Nathalie. 2023. “Cultivating Commoner Subjectivities and Transforming Agency in Commoned 
Urban Gardens.” Geoforum 141: 103725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2023.103725.
Bonow, Madeleine, and Maria Normark. 2018. “Community Gardening in Stockholm: Participation, Driv-
ing Forces and the Role of the Municipality.” Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 33 (6): 503–517.
Büscher, Bram, and Robert Fletcher. 2020. The Conservation Revolution: Radical Ideas for Saving Nature 
beyond the Anthropocene. Verso Books.
Camps‑Calvet, Marta, Johannes Langemeyer, Laura Calvet‑Mir, and Erik Gómez‑Baggethun. 2016. “Ecosys-
tem Services Provided by Urban Gardens in Barcelona, Spain: Insights for Policy and Planning.” Environ‑
mental Science & Policy  62: 14–23.
Figure 22.6  “The importance of being an earthworm”, excerpt from an almanac made for the durational 
artwork “Four Sisters for Planthroposcene” by the artists Janna Holmstedt and Malin Lobell of 
(p)Art of the Biomass, at Malmö Art Museum, Sweden, 2021.
Source: Photograph by Malin Lobell.
The Routledge Handbook of Cultural Ecosystem Services296Chan, Kai M A, Patricia Balvanera, Karina Benessaiah, Mollie Chapman, Sandra Díaz, Erik Gómez‑ 
Baggethun, Rachelle Gould, Neil Hannahs, Kurt Jax, and Sarah Klain. 2016. “Why Protect Nature? 
Rethinking Values and the Environment.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  113 (6): 
1462–1465.
Chan, Kai M A., Rachelle K Gould, and Unai Pascual. 2018. “Editorial Overview: Relational Values: What 
Are They, and What’s the Fuss About?” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability . 35: A1–A7.
Comberti, C, T F Thornton, V Wyllie de Echeverria, and T Patterson. 2015. “Ecosystem Services or Services 
to Ecosystems? Valuing Cultivation and Reciprocal Relationships between Humans and Ecosystems.” 
Global Environmental Change  34: 247–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.07.007.
Dowie, Mark. 2011. Conservation Refugees: The Hundred‑Year Conflict between Global Conservation and 
Native Peoples . MIT Press.
Edwards, David M, Timothy M Collins, and Reiko Goto. 2016. “An Arts‑Led Dialogue to Elicit Shared, 
Plural and Cultural Values of Ecosystems.” Ecosystem Services  21: 319–328.
Ernstson, Henrik, Stephan Barthel, Erik Andersson, and Sara T Borgström. 2010. “Scale‑Crossing Brokers 
and Network Governance of Urban Ecosystem Services: The Case of Stockholm.” Ecology and Society  
15 (4): 28.
Fabre Lewin, Miche, Flora Gathorne‑Hardy, and Clive Adams. 2015. “‘Curating the Convivial’ for Soil Cul-
ture at Create.” GeoHumanities 1 (2): 433–441. https://doi.org/10.1080/2373566X.2015.1109470.
Fincher, Ruth, and Kurt Iveson. 2015. “Conviviality as an Ethics of Care in the City.” In Manifesto for Living 
in the Anthropocene, edited by Katherine Gibson, Deborah Bird Rose, and Ruth Fincher, 23–28. Punctum 
books.
Fish, Robert, Andrew Church, and Michael Winter. 2016. “Conceptualising Cultural Ecosystem Services: 
A Novel Framework for Research and Critical Engagement.” Ecosystem Services  21: 208–217.
Fredengren, Christina. 2015. “Nature: Cultures: Heritage, Sustainability and Feminist Posthumanism.” Cur‑
rent Swedish Archaeology  23: 109–130.
Fredengren, Christina. 2024. Thinking with soil in heritage matters. Landscape Research, 1–14. DOI: 
10.1080/01426397.2024.2424601.
Gould, Rachelle K, Alison Adams, and Luis Vivanco. 2020. “Looking into the Dragons of Cultural Ecosystem 
Services.” Ecosystems and People  16 (1): 257–272.
Granjou, Céline, and Germain Meulemans. 2023. “Bringing Soils to Life in the Human and Social Sciences.” 
Soil Security  10: 100082.
Hill, Rosemary, Sandra Díaz, Unai Pascual, Marie Stenseke, Zsolt Molnár, and Julia Van Velden. 2021. 
“Nature’s Contributions to People: Weaving Plural Perspectives.” One Earth 4 (7): 910–915.
Himes, Austin, and Barbara Muraca. 2018. “Relational Values: The Key to Pluralistic Valuation of Eco-
system Services.” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability  35: 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosust.2018.09.005.
Holmstedt, Janna. 2020. “Interspecies Bodies and Watery Sonospheres: Listening in the Lab, the Archives 
and the Field.” Leonardo Music Journal 30: 95–98. https://doi.org/10.1162/LMJ_a_01099.
Jaque, Andrés, Marina Otero Verzier, Lucia Pietroiusti, and Lisa Mazza. 2020. More‑than‑Human: A Reader. 
Het Nieuwe Instituut.
Jax, Kurt, Melania Calestani, Kai M A Chan, Uta Eser, Hans Keune, Barbara Muraca, Liz O’Brien, Thomas 
Potthast, Lieske V oget‑Kleschin, and Heidi Wittmer. 2018. “Caring for Nature Matters: A Relational 
Approach for Understanding Nature’s Contributions to Human Well‑Being.” Current Opinion in Environ‑
mental Sustainability  35: 22–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2018.10.009.
Jönsson, Li, and Kristina Lindström. 2022. “Narrating Ecological Grief and Hope through Reproduction and 
Translations.” In DRS2022: Bilbao , edited by D. Lockton, S. Lenzi, P. Hekkert, A. Oak, J. Sádaba, and 
P. Lloyd. Design Research Society. https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.333.
Keshavarz, Nazila, and Simon Bell. 2016. “A History of Urban Gardens in Europe.” In Urban Allotment 
Gardens in Europe, edited by Simon Bell, Runrid Fox‑Kämper, Nazila Keshavarz, Mary Benson, Silvio 
Caputo, Susan Noori, and Annette V oigt, 8–32. Routledge.
Kimmerer, Robin. 2013. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge and the Teachings 
of Plants . Milkweed editions.
Krzywoszynska, Anna, and Greta Marchesi. 2020. “Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils: Introduction.” 
Environmental Humanities  12 (1): 190–204.
Langemeyer, Johannes, Monika Joanna Latkowska, Erik Nicolas Gómez‑Baggethun, Annette V oigt, Laura 
Calvet‑Mir, Jeanne Pourias, Marta Camps‑Calvet, Francesco Orsini, Jürgen Breuste, and Martina 
Cultivating ecosystem conviviality297Artmann. 2016. “Ecosystem Services from Urban Gardens.” In Urban Allotment Gardens in Europe, 
edited by Simon Bell, Runrid Fox‑Kämper, Nazila Keshavarz, Mary Benson, Silvio Caputo, Susan Noori, 
and Annette V oigt, 115–141. Routledge.
Montag, Daro, Clive Adams, Patrick Holden, and Bruce Lascelles. 2016. Soil Culture: Bringing the Arts 
Down to Earth. CCANW & Gaia Books.
Myers, Natasha. 2017. “From the Anthropocene to the Planthroposcene: Designing Gardens for Plant/People 
Involution.” History and Anthropology 28 (3): 297–301.
Neimanis, Astrida, Cecilia Åsberg, and Johan Hedrén. 2015. “Four Problems, Four Directions for Environ-
mental Humanities: Toward Critical Posthumanities for the Anthropocene.” Ethics & the Environment 
20 (1): 67–97.
Norwegian BioArt Arena, NOBA. 2022. Humans, Fungi, Rottenness, and the Future of Soil. At Vitenparken 
Campus Ås Science Center . NOBA. Norwegian University of Life Sciences.
Ojeda, Jaime, Anne K Salomon, James K Rowe, and Natalie C Ban. 2022. “Reciprocal Contributions between 
People and Nature: A Conceptual Intervention.” BioScience  72 (10): 952–962.
Pentecost, Claire. 2012. “Soil‑Erg” [Installation]. In Carolyn Christov‑Bakargiev (curator), dOCUMENTA 
13 [Exhibition] .
Plumwood, Val. 2005. Environmental Culture: The Ecological Crisis of Reason . Routledge.
Puig de La Bellacasa, Maria. 2019. “Re‑Animating Soils: Transforming Human–Soil Affections through Sci-
ence, Culture and Community.” The Sociological Review  67 (2): 391–407.
Raymond, Christopher M, Matteo Giusti, and Stephan Barthel. 2018. “An Embodied Perspective on the 
Co‑Production of Cultural Ecosystem Services: Toward Embodied Ecosystems.” Journal of Environmen‑
tal Planning and Management  61 (5–6): 778–799.
Rigby, Kate. 2018. “Feathering the Multispecies Nest: Green Cities, Convivial Spaces.” RCC Perspectives  1: 
73–80. https://doi.org/10.5282/rcc/8469
Ritzén, Jessica. 2021. “Odlingsboom i Stockholm – tusentals köar för kolonilott.” Dagens Nyheter . Accessed 
January 16, 2024. https://www.dn.se/sthlm/odlingsboom‑i‑stockholm‑tusentals‑koar‑for‑kolonilott/
Rose, Deborah Bird. 2004. Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics for Decolonisation . uNSW Press.
Salazar, Juan Francisco, Céline Granjou, Anna Krzywoszynska, Manuel Tironi, and Matthew B Kearnes. 
2020. “Thinking‑with Soils: An Introduction.” In Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social The‑
ory, edited by Juan Francisco Salazar, Céline Granjou, Matthew B Kearnes, Anna Krzywoszynska, and 
Manuel Tironi, 16–28. Bloomsbury.
Serpentine. n.d. “General Ecology.” Serpentine Galleries. Accessed February 8, 2023. https://www. 
serpentinegalleries.org/general‑ecology/.
van Bommel, Severine, and Susan Boonman‑Berson. 2022. “Transforming Convivial Conservation.” Conser ‑
vation & Society  20 (2): 136–145.
van Dooren, Thom, and Deborah Bird Rose. 2012. “Storied‑Places in a Multispecies City.” Humanimalia 
3 (2): 1–27.
