Citation: Miller, K. Cultural
Attunements and Ecological
Wellbeing: Embodied Conditions for
Mental Health Interventions. Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21,
287. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph21030287
Academic Editors: G. Camelia Adams
and Paul B. Tchounwou
Received: 15 January 2024
Revised: 25 February 2024
Accepted: 27 February 2024
Published: 29 February 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Essay
Cultural Attunements and Ecological Wellbeing: Embodied
Conditions for Mental Health Interventions
Kara Miller
Department of Anthropology, California State University, Long Beach, CA 90840, USA; kara.miller@csulb.edu
Abstract: A critical need for mental health interventions is clear in the modern era. Bodily attune-
ments to place and space can help cultivate belongingness and heal the anxious modern body, as well
as facilitate community solidarity to combat the loneliness and isolation that many are experiencing.
Human systems and services have the potential to facilitate meaningful experiences for community
members and to incite joyful, thoughtful, or motivating multisensory interactions. Humans’ sur-
roundings have paramount effects on inhabitants and should offer opportunity and inspiration. This
paper suggests that such inspiration be drawn from ecological knowledge that can garner healing
and wellbeing and offers suggestions and recommendations for doing so. Humane designs are
integrated with nature and include environmental access and information that encourages civic
participation. This work uses theories and models in ecological community psychology and cultural
ecology as well as anthropological approaches to human health to offer somatic principles for healthy
community planning and development and for integrating such nature-based health principles into
existing structures, including the built environment as well as education. Healing through nature is
highlighted here as an approach for attuning to post-pandemic landscapes in order to move into the
future in the most generative, sustainable, and supportive ways possible.
Keywords: embodiment; mental health; community wellbeing; somatic knowledge; self-healing
1. Introduction
In response to the ailments of late-stage capitalist societies, this paper suggests new
modalities for landscapes and communities that are conducive to public wellbeing. Consid-
ering contemporary challenges and applying theories of ecological psychology, community
ecology, and embodied meaning-making, this work suggests that investment in local
environments and preservation of natural spaces benefit communities exponentially. Specif-
ically, this work highlights multidisciplinary research that contributes to understandings of
the direct connections between environments, natural materiality, and human well-being.
This article draws forth secondary research and anthropological explorations of human
needs in relation to experiencing wild ecologies and sensing, learning from, and integrating
with the earth’s processes and textures. This work asks how natural environments can
be integrated into planning the landscapes of the future for optimal health and mental
wellness. Climate and mental health crises are interlinked; eco-anxiety and uncertainty
about the future contribute to the anxious modern condition [ 1]. This paper focuses on
modern severance from nature and suggests that integrating a multisensory approach to
future planning, from development to education, may help alleviate some of the ills of the
present [ 2]. This work follows scholars of re-wilding and similar discourses [ 3] that suggest
learning from ecologically wild processes is necessary in what we have deemed times of
crisis [ 4]. Current and emerging discourses highlighted herein suggest that the cure for the
dispossessions of today includes embodiment and empowered self-discovery, which can be
fostered by meaningful interactions in the places and spaces in which we live. This article
supports with evidence the viewpoint that natural sensorial and embodied experiences
may be embedded into systems and structures, for example, the built environment, in order
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph21030287 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 2 of 11
to create landscapes that promote wellness and infrastructures that are conducive to the
wellbeing of inhabitants.
The modern condition is markedly stressed and individualized, stripped of community
and healing rituals, and plagued with disasters, crises, and a global pandemic. The
distinctive features of the Anthropocene [ 5] are degradation, destruction, and toxicity,
and humans must continuously evaluate our relationship with the earth with regard to
the ethics of being, particularly since development has historically distanced us from
nature [ 6]. Society is deprived not only of wild connectivity but also of relationality,
community, and soul-nurturing experiences; this is felt in human health in increasingly
compounded ways [ 7]. Rates of anxiety and depression are soaring, which is affecting
collective and individual wellbeing as the need for mental health services continues to
expand [ 8,9]. Disconnections from nature are well researched as having negative effects on
human health [ 10,11]. The industrial body is deprived of sensory and somatic experiences
that were once central to human survival and are thusly built into the human condition.
Increasingly, holistic understandings of mental wellbeing turn to nature as nurturing and
even embrace nature as a site to sharpen human cognition [ 12]. There is a call to reset
our attention to attune with nature in world-making and incorporate local ecosystems
into models of health, including preserving and enhancing experiences in nature [ 13].
Discourse suggests that global advances in health gain knowledge from and integrate
ecological understandings such as the Navajo (Din é) concept of H ózhó, which is a complex
wellness philosophy that guides human health and harmony with the earth through values
of respect, relationality, and sacred knowledge, and that such place-based spirituality is
translatable for informed policies and planning [14]. Such guiding principles are part of a
healthy social landscape.
Modern bodies are changed by and continue to endure the “slow violence” and health
inequalities of today, which necessitate understanding through biosocial processes [ 15].
Industrialized bodies are disconnected from nature, meaning that humans are deprived of
sensory and somatic experiences. Cities, in particular, impart neurotic effects and unsettled
mental states [ 16], and predictions for the future include a rise in dense, urban living [ 17].
Evolutionary medicine approaches in biological anthropology suggest that our bodies are
mismatched for contemporary conditions, and essentially, there is a yearning for bodily
connections with the environment [ 18]. The bio-cultural effects of this modernity mismatch
are felt in physiological and psychological ways, and new modalities in health care are
embracing these holistic understandings of the body [ 19]. This work explores antidotes
for the inflictions of contemporary chaos through embodied practices. I ask how we
might counter the effects of modernity by remembering our earth-based bodies. Larson
suggests that lessons for today should come from multispecies perspectives and from the
environment for truly wise and sustainable decision-making [ 20]. Gene Anderson suggests
that tending to and stewarding the environment can contribute to mutuality and what
he calls collective engagement, where people are aligned by place and invested in shared
resources, which can contribute to and create cultural solidarity [ 21]. Culturally informed
systems and public resources best serve communities, and health equity includes access
and livability standards, particularly with regard to mental wellness.
Increasing urbanization calls for better planning for the future. The implications
of public planning on health and well-being cannot be overstated, and decision-making
processes must account for local ecologies. Whiteford points out that globalization and
resource management have reached a paradigm change [ 22], and Puig de la Bellacasa
draws our attention to the questions of care in a technoscientific future; she says that in
order to prepare and protect communities, we must shift the “pace of care” to humanize
our systems and slow the pace that industrialism has set [ 23]. Attention to nature in
public health and planning agendas is noted in the World Health Organization’s (WHO)
broadened models of holistic health, which now include environmental wellness as a central
tenant, which it defines as “good health through pleasant environments that promote well-
being” [ 24]. The moral ecological system accounts for human experience and sensory and
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 3 of 11
emotional perceptions, which affect sensibilities of hope, empathy, or tolerance; for example,
ecofuturism invites new forms of being and new possibilities for new civic engagements, so
integrating natural features into human systems is part of a larger health conversation [ 25].
The tenants shared by such emergent fields include a return to nature.
Using frameworks of cultural and spiritual ecology, this work suggests that doses
of nature are beneficial and examines the principle that humans are meant to live with
nature [ 26]. The question becomes how to incorporate nature into human infrastructure and
practices in ways that benefit community health and bring the anxious modern body back
to ancestral truths and ways of being. Reconnecting with nature can be a simple practice,
but ensuring that wild and natural environments are accessible, safe, clean, and integrated
into social structures is part of the project of decolonizing public services [ 27]. Cultural
stress and the sociopolitical effects felt by marginalized communities are compounded by
structural violence and amplified by polluted, harmful, and hazardous conditions, only
further compounded by COVID-19. Responsible infrastructure considers environmental
health as well as the cultural preferences and behaviors of residents and visitors; it should
also facilitate a sense of identity and belonging through meaningful experiences, such as
interactions with art and nature, for example. Antidotes for industrialism and the modern
condition may include a focus on a healthy landscape with culturally relevant strategies to
protect community health. Opportunities for meaningful emplacement in cities and towns
encourage avenues for belonging, generating concepts of selfhood, and these have the
potential to invoke the enchantment, awe, and wonder necessary for nourishing creativity,
innovation, and resiliency in communities and for confronting current challenges.
2. Cultural Ecology
Such understandings of culturally informed programming as solace from contempo-
rary chaos honor a sense of critical belonging for residents. The following passages explore
investment in place as part of one’s identity and how to foster that through environmental
interactions. Perspectives in cultural ecology and spiritual ecology point out that quality
of life is improved when ethno-historical and environmental knowledge are exchanged.
Community input on the designs of spaces and places is imperative and makes for bet-
ter ideas and more worthwhile projects, for example. Growing literature and curricula
focused on traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) [28] indicates an understanding of the
need for culturally responsive programs as imperative for any sustainability initiative.
The versatility and resilience of communities depend on aligning with local needs and
ecologies, which can be empowering for community members. Healing the self through
healing and stewarding the environment means taking lessons from nature and depends
on knowledge production and participatory planning, which community organizations,
schools, and businesses are increasingly embracing and practicing, like Wildwoods, based
in Los Angeles, CA [ 29]. Narratives, stories, and ideas of the people are powerful tools to
conduct reparative and responsible systems in dynamic ways [ 30]. These priceless cultural
resources should inform and reflect local places and spaces to nourish critical belonging
as well as help to mitigate harm and protect community wellbeing [ 31]. In all manner of
future-building, from standards for city planning to educational curricula, we need a push
toward natural, inclusive spaces, places, and programs for greater overall health.
Cultural ecology models suggest that ecological experiences and sensory informa-
tion can invoke belonging and incite a sense of inspiration. Collaborations with other
community members are necessary for respecting the social imagination and the complex
interrelationships between humans and environments and for integrating meaning-making
practices that foster inspiration and a reparative sensibility [ 32]. Sharing uplifting and vali-
dating experiences collectively should happen regularly. Environmental justice literature
keenly points to solutions for decolonizing land education and adapting bioregional learn-
ing opportunities and experiences to encourage climate literacy and local understandings
of harm [33]. The implications for sustainable environmental pedagogy and education on
climate resilience are tremendous, including better policies that increase quality of life and
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 4 of 11
equitable, safe built environments for all life. Tim Ingold’s dwelling theories [ 34] discuss
the human separation from more-than-human worlds and explain that humans’ constant
engagement with our environment indicates that we are not separate from, but embedded
in, the landscape; therefore, place-based understandings of ecology are linked to our sense
of self. Such work speaks to understandings of humans as integrated into our environments
and as a part of nature, underscoring our innate needs to interconnect.
Out of necessity in contemporary landscapes, ways of protecting communities from
harm and hazards are emerging in inspiring forms. The development work of today must
include meaningful ways of mitigating the effects of modernity, and human systems and
structures must draw upon understanding in health justice work to address disparities
directly. Nature-based health interventions and ecological restoration are inherently inter-
linked, and human projects should honor the reciprocal relationship between people and
place [ 35]. Human systems can and should serve the public—in response to—and enrich
human life. Industrial damage demands ethical and equitable mitigation in new ways for
communities, and landscapes should reflect the flow of life, including the cosmological
and spiritual understandings and the imaginaries of the public [ 36]. Such spirit-based and
personal connections with place further highlight how cultural perspectives are gleaned
from nature as well as how humans are one with nature. Russell et al. present fascinating
research on the effects of knowing, perceiving, interacting with, and living within nature as
constituents of happiness, satisfaction, and wellbeing, and the authors note that those envi-
ronmental experiences should be integrated into daily life for optimal community mental
health [ 37]. Such a cultural ecosystem approach notes the direct influence on services and
quality of life that ecosystems have, specifically the non-material benefits.
New understandings of wellness include not only secure and well-resourced environ-
ments but also personal connections to places and opportunities for community solidarity
and self-expression. Opportunities to attune to nature may provide occasions for trans-
formation and the generation, formation, or reinforcement of ideas and ideologies [ 38].
In other words, connecting with nature and place-based natural interfaces can inspire
and contribute to overall health and happiness. Holistic models include lenses of deep
ecology that recognize human health as linked to the prism of the natural world, and
for the sake of wellbeing, we must be good stewards of the earth and good tenants of
community [ 39]. If culture is an adaptation to nature, the environment guides human
behavior naturally. Local sustainability practices can deploy meaningful interactions with
nature, and socio-environmental models [ 40] of health and ecological wellbeing include
ethnoecology, localized beliefs, attitudes, and practices, and eco-cultural identities, personal
entanglements, investments, and attachments to one’s environment [ 41]. Frameworks of
critical belonging highlight relations that nurture the human spirit and enhance ethical
and collective behaviors. Nature-society relations are shaped by both “spiritual” and
“ecological” factors [ 42]. These understandings belong in our models of health and healing.
3. Eco-Cultural Identity
Eco-cultural identities and connections to place are not only spiritual; they are sen-
sorial [ 43], and the textures of those entanglements must be incorporated in the fabric
of place. Reimagined spaces that enshrine nature can help cultivate a healthy, emplaced
sense of self and enhance ethical and ideological behaviors from stakeholders. In order to
help communities thrive, we must understand and embrace the cultural core of society-
environment relationships and build on a lens of health justice as a way of illuminating
reliable, stable, and sovereign solutions to put holistic wellness philosophies into practice.
Meaningful interactions with the earth and local environments through ceremony and art
allow our bodies and minds to thrive, and we embody those connections through habits
and practices [ 44]. Interfaces with everyday landscapes help people cultivate a sense of
self and influence one’s attitudes towards the world. Relationships with nature and place
are critical for imparting collective hope and optimism. Cultivating a return to earth [ 45]
highlights reverence for ecological communities and fosters local, regenerative solutions.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 5 of 11
Health equity includes protection and mitigations from risk and damage, including
for mental wellness; in other words, our surroundings should nourish us [ 46]. Such impli-
cations and applications for community health are central to the current grand challenges.
For communities of color whose vulnerabilities are compounded by myriad issues of en-
vironmental racism and health injustices, methods to measure geopolitical inequalities
of pathological exposure can lead the way to better policies for healthy community de-
velopment, better policies, informed ethics for new ecological well-being, or guidelines
that bridge lawmakers or other stakeholders with community members. Climate literacy
projects and environmental engagement are about reconstituting our relationships with the
ecologies that hold our pasts and futures through knowledge building and education that
centers equity, opportunity, and empowerment to bring forward healthier human systems.
Health equity and holistic wellness can be reparations and revitalizations of the body
and spirit through practices of empowered ethno-ecology. Modalities and practices that
revitalize and re-enchant create meaningful experiences and interactions with places that
help people adapt and thrive. Such action is meant to ritualize human-nature relationality
and celebrate cultural resources for sovereign community development. Weaving authentic
opportunities for personal and cultural expressions into daily life builds and fosters healthy
development and sustainable community systems.
Identity-forming experiences are imperative for personal and community develop-
ment, and these should include ecological knowledge that feeds a sense of place. Relational-
cultural models of wellness place emphasis on connection and mutuality to create more
nuanced understandings in a therapy context, and such culturally responsive models help
to reduce social injustices and increase personal development [ 47]. Holistic community
wellbeing frameworks should include the awe and wonder of the natural world, as well as
opportunities to interact with that world and reflect on those experiences. Such elements
shape identity and bolster the self by building social and emotional health [ 48]. Integrating
such experiences into our everyday lives necessitates access to wild landscapes and natural
spaces, as well as environmental education. In efforts to preserve and protect environments,
planners should also consider cultural use, meaning, and attachment to space. Ecological
community psychology models [ 49] assert that the pains and deprivations that humans
feel with regard to mental health and overall wellness must be understood through an
ecological lens. When opportunities for self-discovery and self-actualization are embedded
in social and ecological landscapes, there is solace from contemporary chaos. Models of
community ecology suggest a critical approach that centers lived experience and culturally
responsive public resources that reflect potentials for infusing cultural heritage and em-
bodied understandings into local systems and structures. Community-based ecological
perspectives are necessary in planning for generating equitable and responsive program-
ming and sovereign policies that speak to geopolitical inequalities, health disparities, and
the distribution of wellbeing.
The implications for embodied knowledge and earth-based modalities include efforts
to study, manage, or mitigate hazardous effects, including through participatory research
and personal emplacement. From city planning to policy-making, culturally significant
and collaborative approaches are more generative and create better civic foundations, and
such understandings come from authentic expressions of place. As a healing balm for
historical dispossession, art and storytelling can be utilized as tools to reshape uncertainty,
mitigate harm, and manage risk [ 50]. Modern conditions call for adaptation as preventative
medicine for industrial pollutants, including knowledge and awareness of health risks. By
reimagining the potential for meaningful and transformative experiences, communities can
be made more aware of climate and health issues or pathological exposures, for example.
By embodying nature as an antidote, communities can co-regulate with the environment,
which will be imperative for sustainable urban futures where nature thrives in the urban
landscape [ 51]. Celebrating the versatility and vibrancy of life in the city depends on access
to urban nature and public health planning [ 52], which should ensure that access is safe
and meaningful.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 6 of 11
4. Cultural Attunements and Ecological Wellbeing
Adapting to complex landscapes, the textures of which may be anxiety-invoking,
necessitates knowledge exchange and meaningful ways of attuning to place. I am propos-
ing cultural attunement as a concept that refers to practices of engagement with place,
environment, and self. These eco-attunement practices for community-based wellbeing can
contribute to one’s eco-cultural identity and are based on somatic awareness, kinesthetic
learning, and immersion in natural and earthly materials and wild spaces. As part of
conversations on community health and critical belonging, cultural attunements are ways
of enacting socio-environmental wellbeing. A sense of place and belonging contribute to
the ethics of life, and as noted in the sections above, creating informed and responsive envi-
ronments means attending to not only the aesthetics of place but also the lived experiences
within those systems and structures. Humanizing city spaces means creating livability with
equity, and designing for the future entails planning cities that are conducive to partici-
pation and healthy community exchanges. This civic ecology is part of what Sokolovsky
says makes up inclusionary landscapes, and this can come about by reimagining places
and how they can serve the public good, such as in community gardens and urban green
spaces [53].
Curated experiences of emplacements through relational attunements can ease uncer-
tainty on an individual level, and when integrated into larger social systems, these have
the potential to reshape social processes. By aligning with natural processes, communities
encourage members to thrive in their environments. Transformative experiences in nature
with art create self-expression, and this kind of embodied knowledge production can help
to establish a community sense of place [ 54]. Imaginative and immersive understandings
through embodied knowledge-building and attuning to place can happen through play,
awe- and wonder-inducing activities, and creative expression. Such self-discovery, self-
development, and self-reflection contribute to greater wellbeing and are achieved through
bodily sensation and perception. The Network for Public Health Law now embraces
cultural healing, and culturally safe spaces are being identified as a right across institu-
tions [ 55], and this has implications for public health and education. New discourse moves
beyond green spaces and embraces understandings of human systems as socio-ecologically
interconnected, and in order to foster a sense of collective belonging, public services and
resources should reflect cultural perspectives [ 56]. Culturally responsive and significant
programming is a responsibility of public facilities and has effects on mental health, and
future programming has the potential to put forth reparative effects.
Concepts of cultural attunements may be integrated in education systems in the form
of art, story, play, and experimentation, and in public spaces in the form of interactive
art and culturally rich programming, for example. Meaning-making through healing arts
and nature-based interventions encourages thriving-in-place and collective resilience and
recovery [ 57]. Values of belonging and an ethos of civic engagement can illuminate new
paradigms with reliable, stable understandings of place in order to put sustainable philoso-
phies into practice. This is the antidote to toxic, isolated, and depressed modern conditions
and states of mind [ 58]. Experiences of emplacement through relational attunements,
such as spiritual ecologies [ 59] or ritual, can ease uncertainty and reshape social processes
and belief systems in such a way as to affect values of stewardship and environmental
responsibility as well as worldviews of self-reliance. Multisensory learning and processing
generated through authentic interactions with nature contribute to more informed body-
environment ethics and cultural policies that reflect localized nuances and best practices
for wellness. Furthermore, body awareness and somatic understandings can be cultivated
through interactions with nature, and such visceral connections with place and with the
environment can be beneficial and therapeutic and thusly should be incorporated in public
health services, including those resources that focus on mental wellness and coping.
Eco-psychology research reveals that “nature healing” contributes to pro-social be-
haviors (particularly relevant in combating anti-social trends), and encounters with the
environment assist with recovery from stress and attention fatigue, both of which plague
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 7 of 11
the modern body and mind [ 60]. Nature is our ally in the contemporary entanglements
that affect human health [ 61]. Ecologies of well-being, moving forward, shall include
empowered future-making practices based on multisensory encounters and information.
This includes various forms and modalities of storytelling and knowledge production as
well as embodied healing practices, from dance to mindfulness to gardening to engaging
with animals or local biologics. Heritage-based health and healing projects find that well-
established relations are correlated with traditional ecological knowledge, and concepts of
heritage are closely tied to environmental information, beliefs, and understandings [ 62].
Ecological well-being includes an environment that supports healthy forms of discovery
and relationality through personal and sensorial connections. This includes community
development that supports healthy human minds and spirits. Meaningful multisensory
experiences, such as interactive art, allow an embodied imagination to bloom, which has
great ramifications in the present [ 63]. The integration of such creative interactions will
be essential for preserving, accessing, and interfacing with the cities and landscapes of
the future. Reinvigorating the current condition also means repairing socio-ecological
relationships and creating more soothing systems and landscapes with nature as a teacher.
Utilizing somatic and multisensory approaches helps our bodies and emotions accli-
mate and regulate, which is imperative for current conditions. Phenomenologically, the
effects of nature are conducive to relaxation and encourage stress reduction, and integrative
models of nature can inform our human systems [ 64]. The embodied effects of being sub-
merged in nature are well-known, well-regarded, and ripe for well-being interventions [ 65].
Embodiment is understood as a therapeutic channel to affect mental wellness in social
psychology, and such psychosomatic connections are known and embraced by health sci-
ence [ 66]. If we understand the grounded nature of human cognition [ 67], we understand
that we “think” through the body with our perception, and knowing this, we see that
bodily states affect everything from memory to social thought; thus, it is imperative to have
explorative and supportive environments that fulfill human imagination and emotional
development [ 68]. The sensory and somatic effects of nature counter the industrialized and
frazzled body that navigates dense, tense landscapes as well as strained and inadequate
health systems. By reconnecting with nature on a grand scale and in careful, informed
ways, we can improve the quality of life for communities in ways that have exponential
effects on attitudes, social dynamics, collective action, or organization.
The human body craves experiences, feelings, sensations, and inter-relations with
nature [ 69], as our physical bodies have co-evolved, and in order to fill the embodied
need, modern humans mitigate and adapt by attempting to replicate phenomenological
experiences in nature; natural processes are even mimicked through modern devices
and technologies, from virtual reality to LED screens depicting nature scenes to nature
sounds through a speaker [ 70]. Acclimating to the present and designing for the future
means adapting principles of bodily knowledge and awareness that can strengthen mental
wellbeing and enliven the systems and structures that serve people. We see examples
cross-culturally of practices that integrate the reparative effects of nature to soothe the
human condition, from forest bathing [ 71] to cold therapy to grounding with bare feet in
grass, and even “bee beds,” that harness the vibrational power of hives of bees to heal, treat,
and calm the body by relaxing the nervous system [ 72]. I argue that the slime revolution is
an example of humans craving the sensorial textures of mud, for example [ 73]. Not only
does this highlight the human need for ecological interactions, but it also indicates the
role of bodily knowledge and embodied understandings in making meaning in the world.
These practices soothe and regulate human bodies in ways that have become noncustomary
in modern society, and reconnecting with natural environments is necessary for health.
Such co-regulation and calibration with the physiological rhythms of the earth is
considered earth healing, and it supports community wellbeing. These rituals and practices
that highlight the spiritual and soul-nourishing effects of nature [ 74] and that reconnect
one to place and self would traditionally be a part of community living, which we have
largely lost in Western industrial nations. New models of wellness reflect the importance
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 8 of 11
of environments that are favorable and advantageous for thriving, and self-care and self-
sufficiency based in wild and natural modalities are being regarded as integral to sovereign
health and wellbeing [ 75], and we might look to our social structures and public agendas to
integrate such principles of well-being most relevant to the modern condition. Ecological
perspectives are part of intersectional identities, and environmental knowledge must be
celebrated and integrated into models of selfhood and mental wellness, as well as public
health generally. Eco-therapeutic ethos, many physicians agree, can be incorporated into
a range of health applications, from harm reduction to palliative care or as a tool for
crisis recovery to coping with stress-related disorders to occupational therapy, as well
as generally as a comprehensive practice to inform public mental health agendas and
spaces [ 76]. Integrating ecotherapy into public health services can aid collective healing
and help alleviate pain, stress, and adversity for people in holistic, organic ways. There are
opportunities to make these culturally informed, locally significant, and applicable.
5. Conclusions
Built and natural environments not only have tremendous effects on humans—they
are entangled with human health and wellbeing. We are embedded in our worlds, and the
body politics of survival entail somatic and sensory aptitudes. Community health research
shows a need for collective healing, and human sciences show that as social creatures,
people crave interactions for optimal emotional and social health. Inequitable health
effects are compounded by sociopolitical injustices, and the felt needs of communities must
be explored for healthy community development. Decolonizing public health includes
integrating high-quality infrastructure and possibilities for joyful, restful, and meaningful
experiences. People everywhere are resisting disconnection from nature and relishing the
multisensory human experience, but we need our built environments to reflect and protect
those practices. Whether from critical demand or leisurely enjoyment, bodily attunements
allow community members to explore and relate to their environment. Formalizing and
facilitating healthy cultural ecologies are a form of actively healing from the harms of the
past, protecting from the effects of the complex present, and educating for the future by
way of self-celebration through generative engagements and exchanges of solidarity. This
work suggests that relishing the power of ecotherapy may be key for integrating mindful
modalities that foster community, celebrate a sense of self, and prevent the anxiety and
depression that have come to mark the present generation.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: The author’s gratitude extends to all who inspire the work and who have helped
to evolve this scholarship.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Whelan, M.; Rahimi-Golkhandan, S.; Brymer, E. The Relationship Between Climate Change Issue Engagement, Connection to
Nature and Mental Wellbeing. Front. Public Health 2022 ,10, 790578. [CrossRef]
2. Frumkin, H.; Bratman, G.N.; Breslow, S.J.; Cochran, B.; Kahn Jr, P .H.; Lawler, J.J.; Levin, P .S.; Tandon, P .S.; Varanasi, U.; Wolf, K.L.;
et al. Nature Contact and Human Health: A Research Agenda. Environ. Health Perspect. 2017 ,125, 075001. [CrossRef]
3. Kahn, P .H.; Hasbach, P .H. The Rediscovery of the Wild ; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2013.
4. Langwick, S.A. A Politics of Habitability: Plants, Healing, and Sovereignty in a Toxic World. Cult. Anthropol. 2018 ,33, 415–443.
[CrossRef]
5. Jolly, M. Engendering the Anthropocene in Oceania: Fatalism, Resilience, Resistance. Cult. Stud. Rev. 2019 ,25, 172–195. [CrossRef]
6. Peterson, A.L. Being Human: Ethics, Environment, and Our Place in the World ; University of California Press: Berkeley , CA, USA, 2001.
7. Mantler, A.; Logan, A. Natural Environments and Mental Health. Adv. Integr. Med. 2015 ,2, 5–12. [CrossRef]
8. Cantor, J. Spending on Mental Health Services Has Risen by More than Half Since Beginning of Pandemic. RAND.org. 2023.
Available online: https://www.rand.org/news/press/2023/08/25/index1.html (accessed on 1 December 2023).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 9 of 11
9. McBain, R. A Potential Backslide in Mental Health Care for Millions of Americans. RAND.org. 2023. Available online: https:
//www.rand.org/blog/2023/04/a-potential-backslide-in-mental-health-care-for-millions.html (accessed on 1 December 2023).
10. Barton, J.; Rogerson, M. The Importance of Green Space for Mental Health. Br. J. Psychol. 2017 ,14, 79–81.
11. Meredith, G.R.; Rakow, D.A.; Eldermire, E.R.B.; Madsen, C.G.; Shelley, S.P .; Sachs, N.A. Minimum Time Dose in Nature to
Positively Impact the Mental Health of College-Aged Students, and How to Measure It: A Scoping Review. Front. Psychol. 2020 ,
10, 2942. [CrossRef]
12. Weir, K. Nurtured by Nature: Psychological research is advancing our understanding of how time in nature can improve our
mental health and sharpen our cognition. Monit. Psychol. (AP A) 2020 ,51, 50.
13. Bratman, G.N.; Anderson, C.B.; Berman, M.G.; Cochran, B.; De Vries, S.; Flanders, J.; Folke, C.; Frumkin, H.; Gross, J.J.; Hartig, T.;
et al. Nature and mental Health: An Ecosystem Service Perspective. Sci. Adv. 2019 ,5, eaax0903. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Kahn-John, M. Living in Health, Harmony, and Beauty: The Din é(Navajo) H ózhóWellness Philosophy in Global. Adv. Health
Med. 2015 ,4, 24–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Meloni, M.; Wakefield-Rann, R.; Mansfield, B. Bodies of the Anthropocene: On the interactive plasticity of earth systems and
biological organisms. Anthr. Rev. 2022 ,9, 473–493. [CrossRef]
16. Winz, M.; Soderstrom, O. How environments get to the skin: Biosensory ethnography as a method for investigating the relation
between psychosis and the city. BioSocieties 2020 ,16, 157–176. [CrossRef]
17. Redman, C. The Growth of World Urbanism. In The Environment in Anthropology: A Reader in Ecology, Culture, and Sustainable
Living ; Nora, H., Wilk, R.R., Eds.; New York University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp. 145–162.
18. Mallee, H. The evolution of health as an ecological concept. Environ. Sustain. 2017 ,25, 28–32. [CrossRef]
19. Shilling, C. Afterword: Body Work and the Sociological Tradition. In Body Work in Health and Social Care ; Twigg, J., Wolkowitz, C.,
Cohen, R.L., Nettleton, S., Eds.; Blackwell Publishing Ltd.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2011; pp. 162–165.
20. Larson, B. Metaphors for Environmental Sustainability: Redefining Our Relationship with Nature ; Yale University Press: New Haven,
CT, USA, 2011.
21. Anderson, E.N. Caring for Place: Ecology, Ideology, and Emotion in Traditional Landscape Management ; Left Coast Press: Walnut Creek,
CA, USA, 2014.
22. Whiteford, L.; Whiteford, S. (Eds.) Paradigm Change. In Globalization, Water, and Health: Resource Management in Times of Scarcity ;
James Currey Ltd.: Melton, UK, 2005; pp. 1–13.
23. Puig de la Bellacasa, M. Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 2015 ,45, 691–716.
[CrossRef]
24. World Health Organization (WHO). Available online: https://www.who.int/data/gho (accessed on 2 October 2023).
25. Bgazhnokov, B.K. Ethics and Esthetics of the Life Environment. Anthropol. Archeol. Eurasia 2011 ,50, 39–70. [CrossRef]
26. Cox, D.T.; Shanahan, D.F.; Hudson, H.L.; Plummer, K.E.; Siriwardena, G.M.; Fuller, R.A.; Anderson, K.; Hancock, S.; Gaston, K.J.
Doses of Neighborhood Nature: The Benefits for Mental Health of Living with Nature. AIBS Bull. 2017 ,67, 147–155. [CrossRef]
27. Sepulveda, C. Our Sacred Waters: Theorizing Kuuyam as a Decolonial Possibility. Decolonization Indig. Educ. Soc. 2018 ,7, 40–58.
28. Ramos, S.C. Understanding Yurok traditional ecological knowledge and wildlife management. J. Wildl. Manag. 2020 ,86, 1–21.
[CrossRef]
29. Wildwoods Foundation. Available online: https://www.wildwoodsla.org/for-organizations/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
30. Cameron, L. Indigenous Ecological Knowledge Systems—Exploring Sensory Narratives. Ecol. Manag. Restor. 2022 ,23, 27–32.
[CrossRef]
31. Lagbas, A.J. Social valuation of regulating and cultural ecosystem services of Arroceros Forest Park: A man-made forest in the
city of Manila, Philippines. J. Urban Manag. 2018 ,8, 159–177. [CrossRef]
32. Lapka, M.; Vavra, J.; Sokolickova, Z. Cultural Ecology: Contemporary Understanding of the Relationship between Humans and
the Environment. J. Landsc. Ecol. 2012 ,5, 12–24.
33. Neale, T. A Sea of Gamba: Making Environmental Harm Illegible in Northern Australia. Sci. Cult. 2019 ,28, 403–426. [CrossRef]
34. Ingold, T. Being Alive: Essays on Movement, Knowledge, and Description ; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2011.
35. Nabhan, G.P .; Orlando, L.; Smith Monti, L.; Aronson, J. Hands-On Ecological Restoration as a Nature-Based Health Intervention:
Reciprocal Restoration for People and Ecosystems. Ecopsychology 2020 ,12, 195–202. [CrossRef]
36. Janowski, M.; Ingold, T. (Eds.) Imagining Landscapes: Past, Present and Future ; Taylor & Francis: Abingdon, UK, 2012.
37. Russell, R.; Guerry, A.D.; Balvanera, P .; Gould, R.K.; Basurto, X.; Chan, K.M.; Klain, S.; Levine, J.; Tam, J. Humans and Nature:
How Knowing and Experiencing Nature Affect Well-Being. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 2013 ,38, 473–502. [CrossRef]
38. Mathers, B.; Brymer, E. The Power of a Profound Experience with Nature: Living with Meaning. Front. Psychol. 2022 ,13, 764224.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. DeVille, N.V .; Tomasso, L.P .; Stoddard, O.P .; Wilt, G.E.; Horton, T.H.; Wolf, K.L.; Brymer, E.; Kahn, P .H., Jr.; James, P . Time Spent in
Nature Is Associated with Increased Pro-Environmental Attitudes and Behaviors. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021 ,18, 7498.
[CrossRef]
40. Olvera Alvarez, H.A.; Appleton, A.A.; Fuller, C.H.; Belcourt, A.; Kubzansky, L.D. An Integrated Socio-Environmental Model of
Health and Well-Being: A Conceptual Framework Exploring the Joint Contribution of Environmental and Social Exposures to
Health and Disease Over the Life Span. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. Food Health Environ. 2018 ,5, 233–243. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Milstein, T.; Castro-Sotomayor, J. The Routledge Handbook of Ecocultural Identity ; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2020.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 10 of 11
42. Ignatow, G. Cultural Models of Nature and Society: Reconsidering Environmental Attitudes and Concern. Environ. Behav. 2006 ,
38, 441–461. [CrossRef]
43. Geurts, K.L. On Rocks, Walks, and Talks in West Africa: Cultural Categories and an Anthropology of the Senses. Ethos 2003 ,30,
178–198. [CrossRef]
44. Crisp, S. Cultural Ecology Connectors and the Creation of Public Art. Creat. Ind. Clust. J. 2018 ,1, 1–13.
45. Latour, B. Facing Gaia: Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime ; Polity Press: Medford, MA, USA, 2017.
46. Maurer, M. Nourishing Environments, Caring Cities: Gardening and the Social Reproduction of the Urban Environment in
Deindustrial Michigan. City Soc. 2020 ,32, 716–737. [CrossRef]
47. Jordan, J. Relational-Cultural Therapy , 2nd ed.; American Psychological Association (APA): Washington, DC, USA, 2017.
48. Samudra, J.K. Memory in our Body: Thick Participation and the Translation of Kinesthetic Experience. Am. Ethnol. 2008 ,35,
665–681. [CrossRef]
49. Kelly, J.G. Becoming Ecological: An Expedition into Community Psychology ; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2006.
50. Magee, L.; Handmer, J.; Neale, T.; Ladds, M. Locating the Intangible: Integrating a Sense of Place into Cost Estimations of Natural
Disasters. Geoforum 2016 ,77, 61–72. [CrossRef]
51. Ebi, K.L.; Bowen, K. Green and blue spaces: Crucial for healthy, sustainable urban futures. Lancet 2023 ,401, 529–530. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
52. Shanahan, D.F.; Lin, B.B.; Bush, R.; Gaston, K.J.; Dean, J.H.; Barber, E.; Fuller, R.A. Toward Improved Public Health Outcomes
from Urban Nature. Am. J. Public Health 2015 ,105, 470–477. [CrossRef]
53. Sokolovsky, J. Civic Ecology and the Anthropology of Place: Urban Community Gardens and the Creation of Inclusionary
Landscapes. Anthropol. News 2011 ,52, 6. [CrossRef]
54. Karabanow, J.; Naylor, T. Using Art to Tell Stories and Build Safe Spaces: Transforming Academic Research into Action. Can. J.
Community Ment. Health 2015 ,34, 67–85. [CrossRef]
55. Shaw, A. Cultural Healing: A New (Old) Paradigm for Creating Healthy Communities. The Network for Public Health Law.
2022. Available online: https://www.networkforphl.org/news-insights/cultural-healing-a-new-old-paradigm-for-creating-
healthy-communities/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
56. Oishi, S.; Üskül, A.K. Socio-Economic Environment and Human Psychology: Social, Ecological, and Cultural Perspectives ; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK, 2018. [CrossRef]
57. Armiero, M.; Andritsos, T.; Barca, S.; Br ás, R.; Ruiz Cauyela, S.; Dedeo˘ glu, Ç.; Di Pierri, M.; Fernandes, L.D.O.; Gravagno, F.;
Greco, L.; et al. Toxic Bios: Toxic Autobiographies: A Public Environmental Humanities Project. Environ. Justice 2019 ,12, 7–11.
[CrossRef]
58. Roberts, E.S. What Gets Inside: Violent Entanglements and Toxic Boundaries in Mexico City. Cult. Anthropol. 2017 ,32, 592–619.
[CrossRef]
59. Fabjanski, M.; Brymer, E. Enhancing Health and Wellbeing through Immersion in Nature: A Conceptual Perspective Combining
the Stoic and Buddhist Traditions. Front. Psychol. 2017 ,8, 1573. [CrossRef]
60. Mayer, F.S.; Frantz, C.M.; Bruehlman-Senecal, E.; Dolliver, K. Why Is Nature Beneficial? The Role of Connectedness to Nature.
Environ. Behav. 2009 ,41, 607–643. [CrossRef]
61. O’Malley, A. Nature as Ally in Our Chronic Disease Epidemic. Ecopsychology 2020 ,12, 180–187. [CrossRef]
62. Baines, K. The Environmental Heritage and Wellness Assessment: Applying Quantitative Techniques to Traditional Ecological
Knowledge and Wellness Relationships. J. Ecol. Anthropol. 2016 ,18, 4. [CrossRef]
63. Joy, A.; Sherry, J.F., Jr. Speaking of Art as Embodied Imagination Multisensory Approach to Understanding Aesthetic Experience.
J. Consum. Res. 2003 ,30, 259–282. [CrossRef]
64. Kohn, E. How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology Beyond the Human ; University of California Press: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2013.
65. Capaldi, C.A.; Passmore, H.-A.; Nisbet, E.K.; Zelenski, J.M.; Dopko, R.L. Flourishing in nature: A review of the bene fits of
connecting with nature and its application as a wellbeing intervention. Int. J. Wellbeing 2015 ,5, 1–16. [CrossRef]
66. Meier, B.P .; Schnall, S.; Schwarz, N.; Bargh, J.A. Embodiment in Social Psychology. Top. Cogn. Sci. 2012 ,4, 707–716. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
67. Barsalou, L.W. Grounded Cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2007 ,59, 617–645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Shedler, J. The Efficacy of Psychodynamic Psychotherapy. Am. Psychol. 2010 ,65, 98–109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Brymer, E.; Ara újo, D.; Davids, K.; Pepping, G.J. Conceptualizing the Human Health Outcomes of Acting in Natural Environments:
An Ecological Perspective. Front. Psychol. 2020 ,11, 1362. [CrossRef]
70. Bartels, M. Can Virtual Reality Mimic Nature’s Power to Make Us Healthier? American Scientific. 2023. Available online:
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/can-virtual-reality-mimic-natures-power-to-make-us-healthier/ (accessed on 1
December 2023).
71. Li, Q. Forest Bathing: How Trees Can Help You Find Health and Happiness ; Goodwill Books: Hillsboro, OR, USA, 2018.
72. Johnson, S. Buzz of Excitement over UK’s First Bee therapy Retreat. The Telegraph. 2023. Available online: https://www.
telegraph.co.uk/news/2023/05/19/first-bee-therapy-retreat-in-uk/ (accessed on 1 December 2023).
73. Sagner. The Rise of the Slime Economy. NPR. Published 10 January 2017. Available online: https://www.npr.org/2017/10/01/5
52422040/the-rise-of-the-slime-economy (accessed on 1 November 2023).
74. Capper, D. Learning Love from a Tiger: Religious Experiences with Nature ; University of California Press: Oakland, CA, USA, 2016.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2024 ,21, 287 11 of 11
75. Steele, L. Nature and Well-Being. In Good Health and Well-Being. Encyclopedia of the UN Sustainable Development Goals ; Leal Filho,
W., Wall, T., Azul, A.M., Brandli, L., Özuyar, P .G., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020. [CrossRef]
76. Jordan, M.; Hinds, J. Ecotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice ; Bloomsbury: London, UK, 2016.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
