Cult ivating Care through Ambiguity:  
Lessons from a Service Learning Course
Samar Sabie  
Department of Information Science  
 Cornell Tech  
 New York City, NY, USA  
 sks286@cornell.edu  Tapan Parikh  
 Department of Information Science  
 Cornell Tech  
 New York City,  NY, USA  
 tsp53@cornell.edu
 
ABSTRACT  
Given the focus of professional graduate ICT programs on 
technical and managerial skills, pedagogical engagement 
with external organizations tends to be transactional and 
artifact-centered. This inhibits  the students ’ ability to 
understand social, technical and ethical issues in context, 
or to develop affective relationships with users and other 
stakeholders. To address this, we designed a service 
learning course th at partnered students with non -profit 
organizations to help with their technology challenges. The 
service project was deliberately left open -ended to force 
students (and partners) to tackle important questions 
around project scoping and impact. By drawing parallels to 
soil care practices, we explore how “care time” emerged in 
this context, and how the incorporation of ambiguity 
galvanized students, community, and faculty to make time 
to navigate it. This led to non -tangible yet vital outcomes 
such as overcoming social limitations, building symbiotic 
relationships, and enacting acts of care necessary for more 
ethical orchestration of technology . 
CCS CONCEPTS  
• Social and professional topics → Information technology 
education  
KEYWORDS  
Service Learning ; Relation ality; Care;  Community E ngagement   
ACM Reference format:  
Samar Sabie and Tapan Parikh . 2019. Cultivating Care through Ambiguity: 
Lessons from a Service L earning Course . In 2019 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4 –9, 2019, 
Glagsow, Scotland, UK. ACM, New York, NY, USA. 12 pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300507  1 INTROD UCTION  
Technological  development is one of the primary drivers  of 
contemporary political economies. Within its arena, there 
is a deliverance of “restless futurity ” that privileges novelty, 
emphasizes productionism, and cultivates  a sense of  
urgency to act now and fast to catch a future that is being 
“written in the present ” [13]. This dominant mode of 
techno -innovation mirrors  the “anticipatory ” state of our 
daily lives, shaped by a ttempts to manage the unknown 
ahead, inhibit its “states of uncertainty ”, and build “the best 
possible future ” [2]. The present is therefore a tumultuous 
worksite for cultivating capacities and resources, 
compressed in favor of a grand future of a happier “us”, 
enmeshed in safe, healthy, accessible, prospe rous, 
optimized, and more equitable societies.  
Technological advancements do more than promise to 
enhance our lives and tickle our fancies; they perpetuate 
the pervading “Thou shall not regress ” imperative  [66] 
committed to “the speculative extraction of future 
economic value ” in a “progressivis t, productionist and 
restless mode of futurity ” [56]. But in their sweeping 
propagatio n, tech innovations can also produce 
“unnerving, unfair, unsafe, unpredictable, and 
unaccountable” outcomes [64] such as implicit bias [51], 
algorithmic manipulation and opaque politics [12,21,63] , 
impregnable “black box ” systems [5], invasive monitoring 
and control [38], and unbalanced accountability [20]. This 
begs the question of how to responsibilize the “innovate or 
perish ” tech paradigm so that ethical  implications on 
human lives are considered . 
One high -leverage strategy could be to focus on students 
in professional graduate programs, who already are or will 
become  the leaders of this exhilarating yet concerning  
trajectory o f techno -futurity. However, s tudents in short 
and costly graduate programs typically have very little time 
to engage their technological learning in real -world 
context s, or cultivate relations, relatedness, and care 
towards a wide range of worlds  their work will impact  “in 
order to make a difference ” [55]. As a result, w hen these 
professional degree holders  move on to “change the world ”, Permission to make digital or hard copie s of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or  distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work  owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to  lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request perm issions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CHI 2019, May 4 -9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.  
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978 -1-4503-5970-2/19/05...$15.00.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605. 3300507  
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 1

 
 their relational  sensibilities typically lag behind their 
technical mastery . After all, m aking time to enact  care,  
interdependence, patience, attention, attunement, and 
maintenance  towards target users seems obscure  and 
inefficient  in the  context of streamlined notion s of 
productivity, success, and innovation of the field .  
To address these limitations, we designed a service 
learning course titled “Remaking the City ” that asked these 
students to apply their knowledge and skills to help real -
world local non -profit organ izations. We were motivated 
by the work of Science and Technology Studies (STS) 
scholar Maria Puig de la Bellacasa on human -soil relations  
[56], where she weaves a strong case for  augmenting 
productionist logic with making time for care; an 
increasingly popular framework within ICT discourse 
[39,67,72] . In this paper, we report on our experience with  
the course, focusing on the importance of th e design 
principle of ambiguity in creating space for students and 
the partner ing organizations to navigate their relationships 
and understand the value of care in their own terms.  The 
paper’s main  contribution is translating the relational 
notion of care,  typically applied in ICT research contexts, 
to a pedagogical context through the deliberate 
introduction of ambiguity. The tensions to be discussed 
illustrate that it is neither easy nor natural to introduce 
such a framework into professionally -oriented H CI 
graduate programs that rarely go beyond user (and 
product) centered design. We further contribute an analogy 
to holistic soil care practices from STS to make it easier for 
readers and students to concretize the notions of 
contradicting t imelines, harmful consequences, 
interdependence, and collective flourishment that we found 
valuable for our analytic framework.  
2 RELEVANT WORK  
2.1 Service Learning  
Service learning is a project -based teaching technique 
where students apply what they  learn in class at local 
agencies to promote positive change [1,25] . In addition to 
the potential community benefits, service lear ning has been 
shown to create a more positive learning climate [58] and 
help students develop professional skills such as 
collaborative work, project management, and leadership  
[32,52] . On a more interpersonal level, service 
learning  nurtures a sense of civic engagement and 
citizenship  [11,14,42,44] , self -efficacy  [6,26] , critical 
thinking and problem solving  [27,45] , practical knowledge 
application  [69], trade -off analysis  [50], contextual 
awareness  [14,44] , career exploration [69], and role finding 
within a larger context  [22]. Furthermore, service learning transforms the course into a social activity through which 
students find meaning within the context they engage in, 
connect to social networks  [23], develop empathy and 
humility  [29,59] , and feel empowered to be a part of society 
[49]. 
A prevailing challenge in tech service projects is that 
they typically require time to concretize and deploy be yond 
the course timeframe [28,40] . Unless elaborate constructs 
are applied to ensure continuity [68], there is an 
“asymmetr y problem ” [61], with students gaining skills but 
the community not benefiting. Furthermore, there is a 
concerning assumption that “ICT is ultimately a social good 
and hence providing free ICT consulting is by definiti on a 
social good as well”, which Connolly cautions against, 
calling for a more critical and relational approach to the 
paramount complexities of technology and society [15]. 
Our work adopts this critical stance to service learning, by 
engag ing the question of how systems and institutions 
sustain social problems and injustice, and focusing on 
“developing authentic relationships in the classroom and in 
the community” as one way of addressing asymmetry [43]. 
Scholars  have found that foregrounding academia -
community relationships through service learning reveals 
the tensions of doing for  vs. doing with  and the challenge of 
balancing real impact with pedagogical goals  [42]. 
Involving  students in this discussion concretizes, 
augments, and even challenges what they learn as they 
directly grapple with the forces, biases, uncertainty, and 
unexpected circumstances [10]. Hayes and Cuban capture 
the gestalt of such service learning experiences with a 
“border crossing metaphor” , both physical and 
demographic, where “self, knowledge, and culture” are 
constructed [30]. They note that unlike highly -structured 
modes of learnin g, ambiguity and complexity can arise 
when real communities are brought in. But “rather than 
seeing this as problematic, suggesting the need to give 
students more structure or direction” , we must “appreciate 
and value ambiguity and uncertainty as opportuni ties for 
different types of learning from service…[and] constructing 
new kinds of knowledge and relationships …. that go 
beyond what we or they may have anticipated. ” In that 
sense, “knowledge is always partial, continually being 
created and recreated in r esponse to new ideas and 
experience. ”  
Our work echoes many of the positive ou tcomes, 
sentiments, and challenges reported in the literature. But it 
abandons the interventionist approach of technology and 
the “deficit -oriented” view of the community  [16], focusing 
instead on how students and community organizations find 
shared mean ing by facing ambiguity and negotiating 
relationships. Furthermore, we highlight through 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 2
 
 qualitative analysis the often -omitted perspective of 
community organizations  on technology service  projects , 
and how technology served as  a “hook ” for stimulating a 
collective conversation on care, solidarity, accountability 
and situational awareness.  
2.2 Participatory Design and Infrastructuring  
Participatory Design (PD) facilitates direct collaboration 
between users and designers in co ntexts beyond formal 
enterprises and institutional structures, including activist, 
hobbyist, and non -profit community groups [18]. Such 
groups often lack the resources and capacity to successfully 
design, implement and deploy technological solutions. 
Furthermore, their projects often relate to a wid e range of 
stakeholders who may not be fully represented during the 
co-design process  [8]. PD scholars advocate 
“infrastructuring” [19] to address these  limitations and the 
overarching ethical implications of co -designing tech 
ecosystems in community contexts. Le Dantec and DiSalvo 
define infrastructurin g as “the work of creating socio -
technical resources that intentionally enable adoption and 
appropriation beyond the initial scope of the design”  [17]. 
This approach emphasizes the potency of relationships 
within intric ate social spheres in driving tech -infused 
outcomes [34], recognizes their role in supporting “ethics 
in practice” [39], prioritizes “socio -material working 
relations” over artefacts, and broadens the notio n of 
innovation beyond products to include “a principle, an idea, 
a piece of legislation, a social movement, an intervention, 
or some combination of them” [8]. 
In applying this expanded, relationally -charged 
appro ach to design, Le Dantec and Fox narrate the work it 
takes to build and mend relationships with the academic 
institution’s proximate community [37], Bødker and Kyng 
speak about building partnerships for a new impactful form 
of PD [9], Agid theorizes the relational practices em erging 
in her work as a designer with a social justice organization 
[3], and Light and Akama explore the nuances of 
interdependence when intentionally “co-designing 
ongoing future societal relations beyond the immediacy of 
designing objects or services during project time ” [39]. Our 
work translates these frameworks of relationship -building  
from design and research contexts  towards the goal of 
training future ICT practitioners. We show in a pedagogical 
setting what it takes to infrastructure social -mate rial 
relationships, deal with their ambiguities and nuances, and 
enact care for local communities.  
2.3 ICT and Care  
Prior literature includes care as one of the perspectives 
students acquire and demonstrate through service learning [59]. The theoretical lens of care is also increasingly 
adopted in ICT  discourse  [39,46,48,67,71,72] . Maria Puig de 
la Bellacasa posits care as affective enactment, an “ethico -
political obligation ” [54], and a relational ontology; “to care 
about something, or for somebody, is inevitably to c reate 
relation” [55]. She invites us to attune to the care 
permeating everyday relations and  make “care time ” for 
what matters, be it in biological, sociotechnical, or scholarly 
contexts [57]. By foregrounding involvement, affect, 
interdependence, care time, relationality, and repetitive 
adjustment, nurturant relation alities can emerge as 
alternatives to the aggressive temporality of profit -driven 
techno -scientific innovation  [56]. Care supports 
“continuity of life ”, affirms “a moral relation ” to the cared 
for [33], and its “slowness ” nourishes co -existing ecologies 
not running at the speed of innovation -driven capitalist 
economies. In this sense, care  time offers “glimpses into a 
diversity of timelines that, despite being made invisible or 
marginalized in the dominant timescape, can challenge 
traditional notions of technoscientific innovation ” [56]. 
Light and Akami build on Puig’s rationale of caring “as 
intrinsically relational, situated inside interdependency” 
with in the context of pa rticipatory design  [39]. Toombs et 
al.’s ethnographic inquiry of the “sociality of hackerspaces ” 
elucidates how the culture of independence, techno 
proficiency, and neoliberali sm in such spaces is 
counterbalanced by implicit and explicit acts of care, with 
“hidden -but-enacted” interdependence that deepens the 
hackers ’ relationship with the broader community [67]. 
Zegura et al. advocate social good  through the practice of 
“care -oriented data science” that valorizes “collective 
tinkering” from the community [72]. From ICTD, Wong -
Villacres et al.  examine how care helped reconcile online -
offline disaster  relief  efforts  [71] while Karusala et al. reveal 
how caring behaviors create a sense of interdependency 
and community at an underserved learning center in India 
and how to extend that with technology [36]. In academic 
settings, Atkinson -Graham et al. probe care dynamics 
emerging throughout their careers as graduate students 
with advisor, collaborator, and research subject/object 
encounters. When understood as sensitizers to what is 
subjectively important, action s of reflection, tension, 
assurance, puzzlement, engagement, withdrawal, and self -
interest then become facets of “how to care ” [7]. Finally, 
Martin et al. argue that care can emerge out of anxiety and 
uncertainty as much as by positive intentions  [41]. 
Our work translates  this relational notion of care from 
research to  a pedagogical context . Research allows  longer 
timeframes with subjects trained in ethnography and 
focused on research outcomes. It is therefore difficult to 
adapt this framework to pedagogical contexts given 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 3
 
 constrained time frames and different incentives. We probe  
how to make care time when time has a high premium, 
such as in busy and expensive graduate programs, 
mirroring  the high pressure and output -driven work 
environments that students will encounter in the future. 
We show  how dominant pedagogical “timescapes ” can 
team with timelines of care towards the c ommunity even if 
that renders student output  “unproductive ” with in the 
dominant innovation logic.   
3 Background and Motivation  
Soil care practices inspire us to see  an analogy in how  
techno -innovation focuses on the cultivation of novel  
artef acts and intellectual property through the application 
of venture capital the way food production harnesses soil’s 
fertility to intensify crop yield. In both, furious 
productionism eliminate s interdependent relations in order 
to mainta in an uninterrupted production trajectory. Puig de 
la Bellacasa draws our attention to the danger s of the 
eradication  of this interdependence  which in the case of 
soil, includes seasonal rain, bustling predators, and 
fluctuating biota conditions. By (1) ig noring “the complex 
diversity of soil renewal processes ”, asynchronous with 
tight capitalist timeframes, and (2) invisibilizing its wealth 
of organisms with off -farm testing and entomological 
potions, soil is reduced to lifeless substance, its biota 
aggres sively eradicated, and future food outputs 
jeopardized  [56].  
Similarly,  real communit ies are often dismissed in most 
technology development  paradigms , being  compressed to 
personas, stakeholders, prototypes, and other design 
abstractions. This is because external depende ncies, such as 
probing common assumptions about technology at real 
sites of digital divides, can induce delays, complexities, and 
uncertainty transgressive to the tight timeframes of 
implementation and monetization . As a result , deep  
engagement is not recognized as valuable in training 
contexts given the marketable technical and managerial 
skills that students must acquire.  
Indeed, within the applied/professional master’s 
programs at our institution, it is normal for students to take 
6-7 courses per term, work on assignments until the early 
morning hours, continuously prepare  for job and 
internship applications, as well as work as research and 
teaching assistants. Such an intensely productionist 
approach does not leave  future practitioners  enough time 
to fathom their “accountabilities to the worlds that [they] 
co-construct” [41]. Cultivating an ethos of care for the 
community therefore seems as subordinated as slowing down food production to the natural rhythm of the soil 
habitat.  
3.1 Making Care Time through Engagement  
Puig de la Bellacasa and other soil scientists [24,31]  
advocate making food production pra ctices more 
responsible by giving farmers the time to develop a feeling 
for the soil, to appreciate its biology and conditions through 
manual sampling and testing , long-term observation, and 
working with its natural ecological cycl es. Through “co-
mingling with its substance ”, “commitment, co ncern, and 
empathy ” and an appreciation for natural soil dynamics  
develop  [70]. As a result , fertility is improved, output is 
increased, and production is sustained in the long term [56]. 
Analogously, we see the need to cultivate an intrinsic sense 
of care in future ICT practitioners towards communities 
through similar co -mingling, with the hope that trainees 
show “commitment, concern, and empathy ” towards the 
users of their future sy stems. But embodied immersion in 
societal spheres is not as straightforward as the haptic 
engagement of farmers with the soil and its fauna with 
apple corers and basic microscopes. For one thing, a 
relationship already exists between farmers and soil. 
Fostering symbiotic community relationships is typically 
not part of most students’  academic training , especially 
those focused on technology . Care through direct 
engagement, be it in soil or pedagogical contexts, shifts 
relations from obliviousness, defiance,  or control to that of 
interdependence, attention, and maintenance.  
3.2 Situated Engagement  
Puig de la Bellacasa  sees soil for what it really is: a 
community right underneath us, lively, vibrant, and 
teeming with life. She calls on humans to become members 
of th is community , rather than mere consumers  of its 
natural capital . Analogously, there are living communities 
directly “beneath ” campuse s: diverse, human, and lively , 
with robust social capital of their own . University  students 
typic ally relate to them through compulsory spatial 
consumption : sharing streets, communal facilities, transit 
hubs, and zip codes, but not necessarily through 
pedagogical bridges. With such bri dges, t his shared 
physical reality , co-mingling , and inevitable co llision s 
could incentiviz e various forms of collaboration , allow 
“thoughtful and pr otracted observation ”, and give  students 
the chance to “experience  the specific ‘schedules’ 
happening within  the arrangement of life cycles ” [47] in 
their institution’s proximate community . We believe that 
such active  form s of situated membership can carve  more 
opportunities for busy students to make  time to learn to 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 4
 
 enact  care through tech interventions and carry that with 
them in their future practices.   
Our prior ICTD research  in India, Sub -Saharan Africa, 
Central America, and the Middle East  helped us relate to  
how the physical and social detachment from these sites 
made it hard to sustain projects or gauge their positive or 
negative impact in the long term. By situating work in our 
own communities , everyone  can work together to env ision, 
implement, and sustain new technologies, services, and 
delivery models th at we are collectively held accountable 
for. Community members and leaders can then grab us on 
the bus, street, sup ermarket, park, or doctor’s office, and 
ask “What’s going on here? Why is this not working the 
way it should? ”. This forces us to dedicate  “attention and 
fine tuning to the … rhythms of an ‘other ’ and to the 
specific relations that are being woven together .” 
Furthermore, this approach positions us not  as external 
technology designers and implementers , but “as attentive 
members of a specific … community ” [56]. Our pedagogical 
approach to tech that privileges  an open -minded, humble , 
and attentive perspective is further  shaped by  our personal 
involvement with the community by residing  on the island  
and engag ing in various activities such as co-teaching a 
digital humanities unit at the local middle school, hosting a 
civic design summer program for youth, serving with  the 
residents’ association , and organizing events to bring 
together academic and community insights  on relevant 
topics , among others .  
4 REMAKING THE CITY  
Remaking the City  is a master ’s level service learning course 
that we taught to engage  students in service learning 
projects with local community partners .  
4.1 Background  and C ontext  
Our institution’s new  campus started operations  on August 
1st, 2017. It is situated within a large metropolis, on a 
narrow  3.2 km -long island  encompassing affordable and 
luxury residential developments, schools, shops, 
restauran ts, parks, a bank, a postal office, and a long -term 
care hospital. A community affairs director was stationed 
on the island durin g the planning and construction  of the 
campus , holding regular office hours in the art gallery . Over 
these three years, members of the community expressed 
trepidations, curiosity and anticipation of what the island -
university relationship m ight look like. The ir primary 
concerns included fear of continued  gentrification, 
increased load on transportation and other infrastructure, 
too much outside attention that would jeopardize the calm 
and intimate vibe of the island, and highly transient  student populations that come and leave without contributing to 
the community.  
The campus is located on the south end of the island, 
close to the ferry terminal, tramway, and subway station. 
Island residents speculated that these transportation 
options  would act as “a vacuum ”, sucking students to other 
parts of the city to eat, shop, or otherwise hang out. Several 
residents mentioned that they were concerned that 
students would not visit the north part of the island where 
the majority of community lives and most organizations 
and businesses are located .  
Admittedly, our context is unique: a new high -profile 
campus on a small island within but apart  from a busy 
metropolis. We have not concealed the qualities of  our 
location because the specifics matter  – and are intrinsic to 
describing our subjective position in this research . We were 
also inspired and  cautioned by Le Dantec and Fox [37] 
about some of the corrosive dynamics academic institutions 
could enact on their proximate communities . In our case, 
the university h ad already displaced a large public hospital 
that provided long -term rehabilitativ e care to low -income 
patients.  Our goal was to ameliorate some of the disruptive 
impact of our presence, by support ing students in 
becomi ng “confidants ”, “advocates ”, and “collaborators ” 
[37], and by facilitat ing knowledge exchange and care 
between the two populations . This is because to “become of 
the community ” requires a collective ethos , as societal 
relationships entail many individuals, each with their own 
notion of belonging. Furthermore , the outcomes of 
engagement and partnership are “secondary to the issue of 
how we [intend] to work with the community ” [37]. The 
essence of “building rapport ” is in the process itself, akin to 
the way care emerges in o rdinary moments such as 
cultivating soil  [56], working in a hackerspace [67], or 
conversing with a mentor  [7].  
While there were a few faculty and staff who lived on 
the island , our roughly 500 students (more than 75% of 
whom  live on campus)  constitute d the vast bulk of our 
human capital. Most of  these students  are enrolled in one 
to two-year professional  master programs, requiring  five to 
seven courses per term . Many are also employed as 
teaching and research assistants, and intern  during the 
summer  to address the high financial costs of attendance . 
50% are international  and tend to travel home or explore 
the rest of the city and region during downtime rather than 
mesh into the local community. Given these  demands  on 
their time, i t is difficult for students  to collectively 
negotiate societal membership and shared temporality with  
the community, and to be cognizant of the need to co-
construct alternatives immediately outside cam pus while 
simultaneously working towards global impact.  
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 5
 
 4.2 Course Goals and Partnerships  
One of the course goals was to understand the unique 
technological challenges faced by small civic organizations 
and the role technology can play in service delivery in 
urban contexts . Most techn ology ventures focus  on serving 
individual  consumers or large organizations , leaving 
smaller organizations in the lurch.  W e reached out through 
our community affairs  director to several such 
organizations on the island during the summer of 
2017.  Eventual p artnering organizations included the local 
municipal body, historical society, garden club, dance 
theater, senior center, and  art gallery. Some  partner s had 
more than one project  and worked with multiple student 
groups . One student group worked independently with a 
variety of retail and food vendors  on the island . 
4.3 Activities and Timeline  
Remaking  the City was defined  by open -endedness  in terms 
of project scope , nature of deliverables, and level of 
technical innovation expected . To ensure that this 
ambiguity did not result in a lack of accountability  to the 
course or project partners , multiple const ructs  were 
embedded  to (1) create opportunities for students and 
partners  to encounter and navigate this ambiguity, and (2) 
strike a balance between learning, service, impact, and 
affective engagement . 
4.3.1 Service Component : Teams  of 2-3 students  were 
asked to “commit up to 5 hours per week to support their 
partnering organization’s technology needs. ” We left the 
actual requirements open to encourage  student s and 
partner s, each with unique needs, resources,  skills,  and 
interests, to individualize their collaboration. By avoiding  
overly prescriptive requirements, our goal was to foster  
mutual  dependency in navigating this  ambiguity . Examples 
of service projects  include d creating a Google map of  green 
space s on the island , introducing maint enance personnel  to 
a cloud -based GIS service , designing a new website , 
prototyping web literacy cards for sen iors, and helping an 
organization migrate to Google Apps email  hosting . 
4.3.2 Speculative Design Component : Six weeks before the 
end of the course , students were asked to start thinking 
about a plan for a project, technology or initiative that 
would impact  the island or a specific community on it 
within 3 -5 year s. Two of the student teams chose to work 
with their existing partners to come up with this proposal. 
The f inal deliverable was a presentation and report with a  
low-fidelity prototype and  implementat ion plan.   
4.3.3 Meet and Greet Mixer: This informal  event was 
organized  during the first week of class (also the first 
official week of campus) at the island art gallery (also a 
project partner) . Partners  pitched their organizations’ history, mission, whom they serve , and where they need ed 
help (better mapping, mobile GIS, remote access to elderly 
patients, updated websites, etc.). Students had the chance 
to chat with the se organizations before deciding which they 
wanted to work with . The conviviality of this symbolic co-
mingling  at the island’s mid -point , with food, art, and 
impromptu  conversations on life and  technology , prompted  
a sense of togetherness , warranted independent care 
initiat ives, and exposed fertile ground for emerging 
collaboration s.  
4.3.4 Weekly Critical Reflection s: Students were asked to 
post weekly reflections on the course blog addressing the 
activities they did with their partner , their  perceived utility , 
the resultin g outcomes/ design artifacts, emerging needs , 
obstacles, and tensions, and how their vision and ideas 
align ed with their partners ’. Reflections helped students tie 
their “constantly evolving perceptions, beliefs, and 
knowledge” [59] with the class material. It was also an 
opportunity to articulate the troubles they were f acing in 
navigating ambiguity, get feedback from us and their peers, 
and to ensure accountability to the course goals and to their 
partners . We  discussed the blog reflections once a week in 
class, exchanging advice and suggestions, and connecting 
student experien ces to broader themes explored in the 
course .  
4.3.5 Semi -weekly Project Share -Outs: Every 2 -3 weeks , 
project group s shared their progre ss with the whole class 
or in smaller groups . The unique and open -ended nature of 
each project necessitate d a forum for students to vent, hear  
other articulation s of “progress ”, demonstrate value being 
delivered to  the partners , and discuss  various nuances  of 
building relationality . 
4.3.6 Guest Lecturers : Island residents active in civics , 
politics , and business  came as guest speakers to address a 
variety of topics including  island governance, urban 
planning, “civic” technology , the island’s historical 
significance, and  the campus planning and construction 
process. This bolstered the multi -faceted community 
engagement in the course and  helped students understand 
and navigate the  rich historical, economic, and socio -
political dynamics  of the island  they increasingly  
encounter ed through  their service projects .  
4.3.7 Lectures and Readings : Material cover ed in the 
course lectures  include d guidelines on managing 
community relationships, participant observation, user 
research, participatory design, and urban studies covering 
salient issues such as race, immigration and gender . We 
also conducted several design exercises  envision ing new 
technological possibilities for the island including  local  
currenc ies and interactive Internet kiosks.  Through 
discussion  and small group meetings, we emphasized care, 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 6
 
 impact, partnerships, patience, mutual benefit, and 
persistence  over rushed technical interventions .  
4.3.8 Other  Events : During the first we ek of class, the 
president of the local historical society (also a project 
partner)  took students on a walking tour  of the island , 
which for many students was their first time venturing 
north  on the island . Students also engaged with the 
community by organizing  a food fair  on campus , attending 
local townhall meetings, and pitching their speculative 
designs at the end of the term to an audience including 
island organizations and residents.  
5 METHODOLOGY  
This paper is based on  both authors’ firsthand experience 
teaching the course and interacting with students and 
organizations, analyzed through Charmaz grounded theory 
approach , and interpreted  through  the lens of care. The first 
author was a teaching assistant for the cou rse, and the 
second author was the lead instructor. The findings are 
derived  primarily from  the qualitative analysis of 10 in-
depth semi -structured interviews conducted in January 
2018 with 5 (out of 23) students and 5 (out of 6) partnering 
organizations . Interviewees were organizational  leaders or 
board members  with whom  students had worked directly 
during the term. The limited  student participation can be 
attributed to some of them graduating immediately after 
the cour se, and their overall busyness with classes, 
specialization project s, and job hunting. Interview 
questions for both included why they chose to participate, 
their expectations, challenges faced, perceived benefits, and 
recommendat ions for the course.  
The interviews were audio -recorded and transcribed. All 
participants gave their consent to be audio recorded. The 
first author (who was not directly involved in grading or 
establishing partnerships), initiated the interview invites, 
coordinated scheduling, and conducted the interviews.  
Interviews ranged in length from 25 to 120 minutes. The 
first author and a research assistant transcribed interview 
audio recordings and imported transcripts into QDA Miner 
Lite. Charmaz grounded theory approach was applied  to 
inductively cod e the interview data . The first author read 
each transcript, assigning a code to every sentence (open 
coding), focusing on sentiments, actions, and timeframes 
that capture  meaning making between students and 
partnerin g organizations. Example codes included “partner 
indecisiveness”, “enjoyed talking to partners”, “gauging 
meaningfulness to community”, “inviting students to feel at 
home”, and “hard to anticipate timeframes”. Once 
consistent codes began to emerge, we draf ted the first 
round of codes and tentative categories such as “ambiguity causing anxiety”, “non -tangible gains”, and “border 
crossing”. Thematic analysis was further supported by  our 
observations, local media coverage, the final course  
presentations and reports, and 130  student blog posts. We 
did not code this data as  we were highly familiar with it 
through grading, frequent discussions with the students 
and research team, and re -visiting for paper  writing . 
Instead, w e used a constant comparative method to 
simultaneously compare codes and categories with un -
coded data and refine  accordingly. We also discussed 
emerging codes and themes with the research team and 
colleagues. After three iterations, the core theoretical idea 
of “care through ambiguity” began to  emerge and was 
further refined along with the codes.  
6 FINDINGS  
6.1 The Compounded Ambiguity of Service  
Students generally found the  design project  easier to 
navigate as it did not require working with partners (only 
two out of 10 groups continued to work wi th their partners 
on the design project) , and it emulated processes typical in 
their curriculum: visioning, stakeholder analysis, 
requirement elicitation, and pitching . On the other hand, 
the intentional open ended -ness of the service component 
was found t o be much more challenging , for both student s 
and partners . While partners  were excited by the course 
and its potential, interviews showed that they did not know 
what to anticipate , how much to trust students, what to 
make of this initial collabor ation, or what could be expected 
from a 5-hour weekly commitment. As one partner  noted, 
“I don't think I've ever worked with that large a group on 
something that was so completely wide open .”  
9 out of the 10 service projects started with  need -finding 
and participatory project -scoping . Such need -finding 
further compounded the natural uncertainty as sociated 
with real -world rather than “boxed ” and “highly -scripted ” 
classroom problems; “ I never try something like [that], we 
don't have specific needs and we are  trying to find the needs 
not only from them [the partner ] but also people who we are 
targeting ” one student recalled.  
Ambiguity was also nurtured by the students’ sensitivity 
towards their partners , privileging the latter’s needs over 
more technologicall y sophisticated  projects that might 
better augment their CV and skills. This implicit act of care 
was common ly referred to  in student interviews: “ you can't 
go hey this is my tool kit, this is all I can do. You have to be 
open right?  So, we were very open  minded about it .” It was 
also reciprocated by the partners , who worked hard to 
include the students’ abilities, ideas, preferences, and 
“excitement ”. As one partner  put it “ we needed to come to 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 7
 
 some kind of understanding about where each of us is coming 
from.”  
While partners  put in time and effort, they were not 
willing to commit material resources such as licensing fees, 
web hosting fees, or hardware purchases for trust and 
funding purposes . Such constraints  crippled  the ambitious 
proposals students pitched, making them experience a 
looming sense of ambiguity and uncertainty as they could 
not address the partner  needs using their familiar  
knowledge,  skills, and training . Even non-ambiguous  
technological interventions , such as adding a donate/shop 
feature to a website or switching to a mobile -friendly GIS 
platform, were not straightforward to implement due to 
infrastructure constraints  (e.g. organization volunteers 
unable to learn “newer ” platforms such as WordPress ), data 
gaps, and bureaucracy, thus impell ing cycles and cycles of 
need finding and solution scoping  transgressive to well-
defined  homework  problems .  
In general , we tried to nurture  a collective interest in 
impactful rather than novel ideas . This was  supported by 
lecture material, th e partners ’ passion for their work, and 
the students increased sense of accountability towards their 
new community. Ideation and prototyping cycles were like 
a “tug of war ”, as a student phrased it, with all sides 
involved tempted at time s to jump into implementation, but 
ultimately hunting for practical ideas that would truly 
benefit them and the community.  For example, while user 
research revealed that a voice -activate d ride sha ring app 
might be great for seniors, one t eam ended up proposing  a 
less “innovative ” set of paper -based web literacy cards that 
were more practical , and would provide definite and 
immediate value . 
6.2 Navigating Ambiguity through  Interact ions  
Many projects remained in the aforementioned state of flux 
two months into the semester. Partners  were accustomed 
to that, and even found it refreshing; “ I love the organic 'lets 
just wing it’ and see what happens”  a partner  noted. Still, 
many student s reported feeling a sense of a nxiety as their 
projects did not appear to be making “progress” ; “it caused 
me more anxiety just not knowing what was going on…we 
felt we didn't know what we were doing so we need to figure 
something out ”, a student recalled.  “As things went along, it 
goes pretty messy ”, another student declared.  
Nearly all teams reported in interviews or blog posts a 
commitment to regular weekly meetings , primarily in 
person. These  meetings continued  despite the extremely 
hectic sc hedules of students and partners . One partner  
described how she at times forgot about the meetings or 
had to tend to urgent matters, but students were happy to 
chat with other personnel or community members or follow her around and talk as she got things done around 
the organization. A self -described “ socially -awkward ” 
student who felt their partner  did not take them seriously 
at the beginning commented on how their partner  grew 
more “excited ” with each meeting . 
It was through these repeated meeting s that both sides 
report ed that their relationship gradually morph ed into 
oneness. Typically, students are accountable to partners  on 
the one hand and to the professor and TAs in charge of 
their grades on the other : they must help the former and 
meet the curricular  expectations of the latter. In Remaking, 
the interviews reveal a n emerging collective sense of 
responsibility , with the students and partners  becoming 
one body, in one vessel, navigating ambiguity to (1) provide 
benefit to the community and (2) meet course expectations 
collaboratively. As one student boasted, “our partners were 
so willing to tackle the problems with us. They want to design 
with us. They want to propose ideas.”   
Over time, partners  started  to loop in more of their staff 
and community members , sharing their day -to-day tasks  
and challenges. “ They helped us get to know the problems 
and everything that they had. We got three different 
perspectives…we got to see all those thi ngs and with [ the 
partner’s name ] we got to see how the places administered 
and everything.”  These  conversations were not confined to 
offices; they reverberated in streets, coffee shops, 
apartments, festivals, on campus , at the farmers’ market on 
the islan d, and in one case over a Thanksgiving dinner that  
students were invited to .  
One of the most promising projects emerged from a 
team that was committed to  meeting every week and 
talking for hours at various locations throughout the island. 
When  they we re asked about the success of their 
collaboration, they would say “w e're not really sure, but it's 
working. We couldn't explain [to the organization board] the 
gestalt of this really amazing process.”  Frequent interactions  
helped everyone make it through “ the transitionary path ”, 
care about each other, and find joy in  the collaboration.  
6.3 Building Relationships Over Artefacts  
Partners  mentioned in interviews gaining several  indirect  
practical benefits , such as students exposing data gaps, 
realizing th e limits of their financial/infrastructural means, 
discovering new things about their users  through surveys 
and prototype deployment , testing new ideas, and 
completing  dormant tasks.  But s tudents and partners  
seem ed to value  the relationships they developed  more 
than any concrete outcomes or deliverables that did or did 
not result . Partners  were unanimously grateful and 
enthusiastic about future collaborations; even if the project 
did not achieve any material goal, they valued  the 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 8
 
 collaboration, fresh ideas, web and social media guidance, 
and learning things about our institute  (for example, that 
we are not nerds “ who spent their day in the dark starting at  
a computer screen ”), and ultimately their own organizations .  
On the student side, they  seem ed to get the value of 
“partnership with people. I got that idea … to understand their 
needs before rolling up my sleeves to do something for them. 
Pretty quickly I think I got on the right track towards just 
talking with them, having a great time, bu ilding our 
relationship. Talking about work also talking about 
something from everyone's life so we can maintain a 
relationship like friends. ”  
Some students felt that these relational outcomes were 
not usefu l for their portfolios or CVs , especially w hen 
compared to building  sophisticated technologies  like in 
other courses and research activities . But students 
acknowledge d in interviews and course evaluations that 
they valued learning about product design , initiating 
collaborations, talking to the community to find solutions, 
and acquiring  new skills to fit partner  needs.  
Finally, most interviewees appreciated that the course 
was explicitly not about high -tech; “ this kind of a class is a 
break for me from  everything else that I do . For every other 
course I do there are assignments when I'm sitting in front of 
monitor you know staying awake for 3 -4am… I was totally ok 
with not doing machine learning for this course… I wanted to 
have a good experience and I wanted to partner with someone, 
work in a team ”, as one student explained.  
6.4 Partner s’ Co-Ownership of Remaking   
Our partners  took co-ownership  of the course from the 
time they first met students . They also helpe d us frame the 
class pedagogically  by making  the students and us  
understand the value of engagement  and demonstrating 
real acts of care  to students .  
Partners  approached their involvement with Remaking 
as providing value and servic e to our institution ; “we are 
more than willing to do things for the students ”, as one 
partner  summed up her participation. Furthermore, 
partners  named many skills students would have to acquire 
to succeed in life such as interacting with needy customers, 
managing real projects, expanding professional networks, 
taking initiative, and finding people with similar interests. 
As one partner  elaborated, “ this whole island is a network. 
And that's why [your institution]  has to become part of the 
network… the stud ents have to find their own network … 
[because] you have to get a job, you have to deal with people .” 
Another partner  called it  “a sharing experience. They can 
learn from us, we can learn from them .” The learning and 
growth symmetry, propelled by frequent ly ambiguous  
interactions, cultivated respect, care, and commitment, and not only fulfilled the civic mission of service learning, but 
thwarted physical borders, demographic boundaries, and 
power dynamics, allowing both sides to interweave their 
worlds into  “interdependent existences” that fostered 
affective and material engagement ” [55]. 
Our brand -new campus is “ an architect's delight ” where 
novel and revolutionary  ideas are nurtured to drive global 
techno -economic innovation. But it can also feel alienating; 
“too programmed and sanitized ” as one partner  put it. The 
short  duration of the  professional  graduate programs (1 -2 
years) and large international student population further 
exacerbate the issue.  It is no wonder that student 
interviews (and partner  speculations) reflected a sense of 
collective isolation and loneliness. For example, despite  
regularly asking  students to share project updates and 
challenges with the entire class or in smaller groups,  one 
student reported that “ it felt like we were this group 
foundering alone ”. It was therefore heartening to hear the 
students feeling “ warmly embraced ” by the ir neighbors.  
Students were invited to  Thanksgiving dinners , 
festivals, and pizza, were given gifts and hugs, and asked 
caring questions such as “are you eating enough?”, “do you 
miss your family?”, and “aren’t you working too darn 
hard?”. “ It’s something that doesn’t happen at [our campus] !” 
a student exclaimed. She had found a warm refuge at the 
senior center where she connected with many seniors 
despite the ir age and culture gap. Others interacted with 
local immigrants who were also building their “ own 
American dream. ” These affective dynamics  and acts of care  
“changed a lot of my life on [the island]  ... I was so happy 
throughout the semester… now I owe [the island] ” another 
student fondly reported.  
In return, partners  spoke fondly of the excitement of 
interacting with the students and our institution , the 
students’ persistence in working ar ound obstacles, the 
energy that made residents “ come alive” , and engagement 
beyond the service project. For example, a partner  recalled 
how one student “would just stop in and say hello. I love that. 
I thought it was really wonderful that he would just sto p in 
and say hello.”  
7 DISCUSSION  
The service dynamics in Remaking the City and its inherent 
ambiguity helped co -creat e social relations, rapport, and 
shared contexts with in our community. This entailed 
challenging predominant pedagogical strategies aligned 
with future -driven productionist paradigms and the 
“erosion of casual encounters ” [39]. By revealing the 
“invisible cement” [39] of relationship building, we showed 
what it means to appreciate  the “biology ” of the community 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 9
 
 through care time and  learn to share space (figuratively and 
materially) rather than being mere consumers . 
Furthermore, since c are “unfolds in action ” [72] and is 
“vague ” [53] and “messy ” [48], we articulated examples of 
its specificities that legitimize its varied forms and 
sentime nts of enactment. This is especially important for 
tech students who are typically exposed to streamlined and 
alienated notions of productivity, success, and innovation . 
7.1 Ambiguity as a Way for F inding  Meaning  
Students a nd partners  had un ique needs, resources, skills, 
and expectations . Therefore, the course valued emergent 
qualities, processual frameworks, and persistence 
implicitly (through open -ended requirements ) and 
explicitly (through  feedback , discussion,  readings, and 
grades). Students who regularly talked to us about their fear 
of not meeting expectations were assured  that they were 
fine as long as they were  making effort and  letting the 
process take its course. But students and partners  still 
experienced the “forms of discomfort, confrontation, 
tension an d precariousness” that Akama et al. report on 
their uncertainty -promoting  design  project  [4]. 
In our case , the pragmatic and symbolic role of 
ambiguity was to (1) democratize the collaboration  process 
so that partners  and students had full control over what 
was meaningful to implement, (2) grant both sides the 
choice to purposefully forgo parts of the formal design 
processes given the tight semester timeline, and (3) free 
students from their intrinsic tendenc y to optimize for 
grades and CV credentials. In return , we legitimized less 
utilitarian, less measurable, and more affective dynamics 
such as care, shared ethos, civic engagement, situatedness, 
and dismantling interaction barriers. That he lped students 
learn firsthand that knowing takes commitment and 
immersion, good ideas require time, partners  are not 
predictable, and the shear messiness of the interaction of 
technology with real life .  
To navigate ambiguity, students had to leave behind the 
artefact -centric, investor/manager (for which the professor 
serves as a proxy) mindset , involve their partners  in the 
quest to negotiate desired outcomes given the time and  
resource constraints, build relationships, and handle the 
emergent together, making that in itself a “central and 
welcome quality of how both … experience  processes, 
relationality and environments”, and that experience 
“…relies upon trust – in the process and in one another – 
and a sense of optimism and confidence that something will 
come through” [4]. The result was not only interventions 
and proposals, but symbiotic caring practices, each being 
“affective state”, “ethical obligation”, and “practical labor ” 
[55]. Avoiding prescriptive orientations presented a 
challenge, particularly when it came to the fine line 
between negotiating emergent relations and just “ slacking  
off”. We introduc ed collective accountability through  
student progress reports on the blog, semi -weekly project 
updates in class , and meeting with  groups that were 
confused or not making progress . We repeatedly stressed 
in class that the service project should provide immediate 
and tangible value for organizations  - we just did not 
specify exactly what should be produced , hence the 
diversity of outcomes in 4.3.1. Our goal in introducing 
ambiguity was to redirect accountability from the class and 
university to relations with and within the community 
itself. Constructs in 4.3 (weekly blogs, class updates, 
presentations, fi nal reports, check -ins with organizations, 
and final presentations with an audience of community 
members) were incorporated  to support an active process 
of reflection  while ensuring that students were learning 
and partners benefiting, as evident in section  6.3. We also 
modeled care through our own involvement in the 
community. Ultimately , by giving students the time to care 
and embark on a journey to get the “biology ” of the 
community despite the “looming time limits ”, we aimed to 
transcend the transactiona l and achieve the relational .  
7.2 The Cost and Value of Making Care Time  
ICT literature narrates the  unfolding of care within a 
specific orchestration such as data collection or working in 
a hackerspace [67,72] . In the case of Remaking, care time 
was not marginal to the tasks on hand; it was the chief 
vessel for navigating ambiguity that it compressed the 
innovation expected by predominant pedagogical sc opes in 
tech. From a capitalist perspective, care here was not 
“value-creating work ” [56] because it contradicted material 
production and efficiency: the time students spent 
interacting with the community in various capacities was 
time not spent on coding, conducting rigorous user studies, 
or perfecting elevator pitches to attract VCs.  Indee d, none  
of the service projects were novel or innovative from a 
technical  perspective. Students and partners  discovered 
through the course of their collaboration that good ideas 
take a long time to procure, as does building relationships.  
To justify the i mportance of making time for care, Puig 
de la Bellacasa argues that such time is irreducible to 
productionist agendas, so we should not be “focusing on 
demonstrating the productive c haracter of activities of 
care”  and must instead show the importance of th e “vital 
practices and experiences that are discounted, or crushed, 
by the productionist ethos”  [56]. Steve Jackson’s work on 
care and repair [33] shows that “no output, no growth in 
the future, and …. no innovation or emergence of newness 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 10
are possible without a commitment to the everyday 
maintenance and repair that supports the work of ca re and 
continuity of life”  [56]. Care is vital for creating “livable ”, 
“lively ”, and r elevant worlds.  
When we see soil as “living ” and care -worthy, we are 
humbled by its ability to take care of its internal processes 
more holistically than alternative techno -scientific 
methods. Analogously, as students experienced “the 
fragility of the wor lds we inhabit ”, and saw innovation and 
development counteracted by fragmentation, and resource 
asymmetry, they experienced the “the ongoing activities by 
which stability …. is maintaine d” [33], and how they as 
technologists and designers might participate in that 
careful balance . Furthermore, whether they started  out as 
student s, partners , or instructors, everyone’s identities 
inflated into listeners, messengers, teachers, learners, and 
advocators. That fed into a collaboration that was “a 
collective achievement” [53], ethically -engrossed, and 
driven by “persistent tinkering in a world full of complex 
ambivalence and shifting tensions” [46].  
Working with paper cards, “legacy”  web platforms , and 
existing software tools , contradicted innovation as “the 
start of the technology chai n, in moments of q uasi-mythical 
origination ” [33]. It tackled the “inescapable troubles of 
interdependent existences ” [55]. As one partner  put it, “the 
win-win is knowing each  other. The win is walking up that 
staircase together with you. This isn't about Cornell  doing 
something for you or the island being genuine and welcoming 
people, this is about all of us together because we're all in this 
together whether anyone likes it or doesn't like it, this is the 
way it is. And we need to go forward with that.”  
When the transactional transcended to relational, we co -
constructed infrastructures, which is a “fundamentally 
relational concept” critical to participatory design [65]. 
Whereas  technical skills are taught pervasively in course 
after course, societal membership is not; “ if not for the 
course, I would never have the chance to know those people, 
to have time to make conversation with local residents and 
have this relationship that we get to meet weekly and share 
our insights ” a student explained. Once we accepted this 
interdependence, then in our “worlds made of 
heterogeneous interdependent forms”, we found that “to 
care about something, or for somebody, is inevitably to 
create rela tion” [55]. When we run into each other now at 
the bus stop, subway station, supermarket, doctor’s office, 
we all have a reason to engage in a conversation, to exercise 
care, and be accountable towa rds each other.   
7.3 Technology was the Starting P oint 
We cannot forget that technology was a starting point for 
these conversation s. As one partner  put it: “ manpower is not necessarily  something that we are looking for. It’s much more, 
we run a business and every business these days has to have 
a strong tech department. What often happens with non -
profits is they don't have that because they don't have the 
finances to support it .” 
Farme rs have a relationship with soil ; students have no 
such pre -existing relationship with the community . What 
they have is a desire to serve the community with what 
they know best: technology . Furthermore, s tudents, 
partners, and community members being  “differently 
positioned in their capabilities and readiness with rega rd to 
information literacy and …  technology use ” [35] was a form 
of “social lubrication ” [39] that helped interactions  flourish 
and discarded in its manifestation “the positivist [HCI] 
tradition  .... of producing an unambiguous result ” [62]. 
Remaking  emulated  Light  and Akama’s  design  model 
where designing  “is no longer led or owned  by designers, 
but becomes  a co-articulation  of concerns  and issues  in a 
world highly mediated by technology ” [39].  
Furthermore,  if making  time for care  as a goal  seems 
disengaged from the futuristic techno drive, what if we see 
it as a form of “ancient wisdom ” for instilling ethics of care 
in tech programs or as an alternative ontology within the 
innovation paradigm? It (1) has the tension, tiresomeness, 
and messiness  of wiring  circuit  boards,  cleaning  training 
sets, and debugging  code,  (2) is as non-linear  as the 
innovation  trajectory  itself,  (3)  it galvanizes  our 
imagination and problem-solving neurons, and (4) it is real: 
care after  all is  “a necessary  everyday  doing ” [56].  While 
most  technology  curricula “ suspend  and compress ” the 
present,  Remaking  distended  the present,  “thickening  it 
with a myriad  of deman ding attachments”  [56].  Fear, 
urgency, and output had to be distanced  in order to focus 
on caring,  and it was  repetition  and  commitment  that 
helped navigate the restless anxiety of the ambiguous.  
We hope  that  this bricolage  of technology-time-care  is 
reflected in the students’ future work  and careers , and that 
the complex  relationships  of people to each  other  are 
considered  within  participatory  design  practice  as 
“embodied,  located,  and emergent ” [3]. After  all, it  is 
increasingly  accept ed that design  activities  do not 
“specifically  involve  the making  of digital  products  or 
services  as a means  of structuring  relations,  but instead, 
they attempt  to co-design  awareness  and understanding, 
and scaffold  connections  among  people,  some  of which 
may manifest  in  enhanced  design,  deployment, 
customization or use of ICT ” [39].  
CHI 2019 Paper 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 11
Despite the positive interviews and course evaluations, the 
course was not without its pitfalls.  Not all of the service 
projects led to a succ essful outcome. Students  had to work 
hard to overcome or work around mistrust (e.g. partner  
declining to divulge credentials for students to access  their 
social media accounts), skeptical board members (to 
approve  proposed service projects), and communication 
hiccups (e.g. forgotten meetings). They also had to 
demonstrate commitment and set boundaries (e.g. partners  
expecting our institution to pay for licenses). In return, 
some partners  felt the students, while “ brilliant ” and “ work 
too darn hard”, did not have the skills the partner  really 
needed to advance their organiz ational mission .  
It also not clear how to qualify or measure the  care 
emerg ing. Our findings are  based on observation and 
interview data : through crossing to uncomfortable  and 
unfamiliar worlds, discovering ways to relate to the 
community through hobbies, food, and events, maintaining 
patience  and persistence when facing resource limitations, 
and prioritizing the organizations’ needs  over their own 
were some of the ways students demonstrated care. Clearly 
more work is needed to explore different pedagogical 
approaches to cultivating care  and studying  the results 
empirically. 
Furthermore,  not all of the students appreciated the 
peda gogical goals and values of the class  (perhaps that is 
why some of them declined to be interviewed) . Some 
students felt that they were being used to improve the 
image of our institution on the island. This is a justifiable 
sentiment  if students did not appreciate the soft skills they 
acquired , what they learned  as citizens and human beings , 
or how these skills  would (or would  not) translate into 
direct economic benefit for themselves  and their future 
projects  – especially on a campus founded on notions of 
innovation -driven entrepreneurial activity . We observed 
this tension first hand as students completed the course and 
moved on to their other endeavors. As far as we know, 
none of the students continued their projects beyond the 
class . It is an open question how long the ir relationships 
will last, although  we do know of a few instances where 
students and partners are still in touch.  
In some ways, the legacy of Remaking the City lies in (1) 
relationships that have already outlived the projects and 
artefacts as friendship and mentorship, and (2) the good 
will created on both sides of the university -community 
divide. The issue of sustai nability though leads us to ask: 
what is next?  Robertson and Wagner  draw our attention to 
the ethics of envisi oning the future in participatory design, 
recommending that “increased attention be paid to the 
ways that design is completed as a way to contribute to 
resolving ethical issues/conflicts that arise in use” [60]. But we also share Akama’s emphasis on the design of relations, 
which is “intangible , on-going and never completed, 
spreading through encounter and exchange” [39], which, as 
shown in this paper, takes significan t time and effort  on 
both sides . 
9 CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we discuss how we introduced  care and 
care time within a futurity -driven  graduate  technology  
program through service learning pedagogy. We showed 
how the course became an “initiation ri tual” between a 
brand -new campus and its skeptical community. Through 
the deliberate incorporation of ambiguity in the course, 
what started as an endeavor to engage students in 
responsible citizenship and help  local civic organization s 
improve their technology  infrastructure, culminated with 
building relationships, transforming roles, and all of the 
involved parties expressing acts of care towards each other. 
The course created a structured entry point, a purpose, a 
timeslot on busy calendars, and a c ontext for "strangers" 
with shyness and other social limitations to enact care with 
new people who may become their friends, neighbors, and 
future design targets. Finally, starting  with Puig de la 
Bellaca’s invitation to consider care in more -than-human 
relations , we showed how this can be operationalized  in a 
more -than-university context. We invite the community to 
consider what would be the care vessel and time constructs 
for other contexts  because “to care about something,  or for 
somebody, is inevitably to create relation ” [55]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The authors would like to thank Jane Swanson for her 
endless support, enthusiasm , and help in planning, 
running, and finding  partners for the course. We thank our 
research assistant Arunima Grover  for her indispensable 
help with data processing and analysis , professors Solon 
Barocas and Malte  Ziewitz for their valuable suggestions , 
as well as all the course  partners, students, and guest 
speak ers. This work is based in part upon projects  
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant 
Number IIS -1319849. We also acknowledge the support of 
a Sloan Foundation fellowship, a Kaplan Fellowship , and 
Engaged Cornell . 
REFERENCES  
[1] Joseph Brian Adams and Erica Runkles. 2004. “May We Have Class 
Outside?”: Implementing Service Learning in a CS1 Curriculum. 
Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges  19, 5: 25 –34. 
[2] Vincanne Adam s, Michelle Murphy, and Adele E  Clarke. 2009. 
Anticipation: Technoscience, Life, Affect, Temporality. Subjectivity  
28, 1: 246 –265. 
CHI 2019 Paper 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 128 LIMITATIONS 
[3] Shana Agid. 2016. “...it’s your project, but it’s not necessarily your 
work...”: Infrastructuring, Situated ness, and Designing Relational 
Practice. In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference  
(PDC’16), 81 –90. 
[4] Yoko Akama, Sarah Pink, and Annie Fergusson. 2015. Design + 
Ethnography + Futures: Surrendering in Uncertainty. In Proceedings 
of the 3 3rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI EA ’15), 531 –542. 
[5] Mike Ananny and Kate Crawford. 2018. Seeing without Knowing: 
Limitations of the Transparency Ideal and its Application to 
Algorithmic Accountabili ty. New Media & Society  20, 3: 973 –989. 
[6] Alexander W  Astin, Lori J Vogelgesang, Elaine K  Ikeda, and Jennifer 
A Yee. 2000. How Service Learning Affects Students . Higher 
Education Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles.  
[7] Melissa Atkinson -Graham, Martha Kenney, Kelly Ladd, Cameron 
Michael Murray, and Emily Astra -Jean Simmonds. 2015. Care in 
Context: Becoming an STS Researcher. Social Studies of Science  45, 
5: 738 –748. 
[8] Erling Björgvinsson, Pelle Ehn, and Per -Anders Hillgren. 201 0. 
Participatory Design and “Democratizing Innovation.” In 
Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference
(PDC ’10), 41 –50. 
[9] Susanne Bødker and Morten Kyng. 2018. Participatory Design That 
Matters —Facing the Big Issues. ACM Trans. Comp ut.-Hum. Interact.  
25, 1: 4:1 –4:31. 
[10] Marilynne Boyle -Baise. 2002. Multicultural Service Learning: 
Educating Teachers in Diverse Communities . Teachers College Press , 
New York. 
[11] David J Burns. 2011. Motivations to Volunteer and Benefits from 
Service Learning: An Exploration of Marketing Students. Journal for 
Advancement of Marketing Education  18, Summer 2011: 10 –23. 
[12] Jenna Burrell. 2016. How the Machine ‘Thinks’: Understanding 
Opacity in Machine Learning Algorithms. Big Data & Society  3, 1: 
1-12. 
[13] Tim Chatterton and Georgia Newmarch. 2017. The Future is 
Already Here: It’s Just Not Very Evenly Distributed. Interactions  24, 
2: 42 –45. 
[14] Susan Benigni Cipolle. 2010. Service -Learning and Social Justice: 
Engaging Students in Social Change . Rowma n & Littlefield 
Publishers, Lanham, M D. 
[15] Randy W  Connolly. 2012. Is There Service in Computing Service 
Learning? In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education  (SIGCSE ’12), 337 –342. 
[16] Cynthia Gordon da Cruz. 2017.  Are We Really Helping 
Communities? A Teaching Case to Challenge Dominant Narratives 
about Sources of Inequity. Journal of Community Engagement and 
Scholarship  10, 1: 100 –108. 
[17] Christopher A Le Dantec and Carl DiSalvo. 2013. Infrastructuring 
and the Fo rmation of Publics in Participatory Design. Social Studies 
of Science  43, 2: 241 –264. 
[18] Carl DiSalvo, Andrew Clement , and Volkmar Pipek. 2012. 
Communities: Participatory Design for, with and by Communities. 
In Routledge International Handbook of Parti cipatory Design , Jesper 
Simonsen and Toni Robertson (eds.). Taylor & Francis Group, 
London, 182 –209. 
[19] Pelle Ehn. 2017. Learning in Participatory Design as I Found It 
(1970 –2015). In Participatory Design for Learning: Perspectives from 
Practice and Rese arch (1st edition), Betsy DiSalvo, Jason Yip, 
Elizabeth Bonsignore and Carl DiSalvo (eds.). Routledge, New York, 
7–21. 
[20] Madeleine Elish. 2016. Moral Crumple Zones: Cautionary Tales in 
Human -Robot Interaction. In Proceedings of We Robot 2016 . 
[21] Virginia Eubanks. 2018. Automating In equality: How High -Tech 
Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor . St. Martin’s Press, New 
York, NY.  
[22] Janet Eyler and Dwight Giles. 2002. Beyond Surveys: Using the
Problem Solving Interview to Assess the Impact of Service -Learning 
on Understanding and  Critical Thinking. In Service -Learning: The 
Essence of the Pedagogy , Andrew Furco and Shelley H. Billig (eds.). 
Information Age Publishing, Greenwich, 147 –159. [23] Constance Flanagan and Peter Levine. 2010. Civic Engagement and 
the Transition to Adulthoo d. The Future of Children  20, 1: 159 –179. 
[24] Masanobu Fukuoka. 1978. The One -Straw Revolution: An 
Introduction to Natural Farming . Rodale Press, Emmaus.  
[25] Andrew Furco. 1996. Is Service -Learning Really Better Than 
Community Service? In Service Learnin g: The Essence of the 
Pedagogy , Andrew Furco and Shelley H. Billigs (eds.). Information 
Age Pub, Greenwich, CT, 23 –50. 
[26] Karl-Heinz Gerholz, Verena Liszt, and Katrin B Klingsieck. 2018. 
Effects of Learning Design Patterns in Service Learning Courses. 
Active Learning in Higher Education  19, 1: 47 –59. 
[27] Michele A  Govekar and Meenakshi Rishi. 2007. Service Learning: 
Bringing Real -World Education Into the B -School Classroom. 
Journal of Education for Business  83, 1: 3 –10. 
[28] Charles Hannon. 2006. Servic e Learning in Information Technology 
Leadership: A Natural Connection. Peer Review  8, 4: 16 –19. 
[29] Andrew Hatala, Lisa Erickson, Osemis Isbister -Bear, Stryker Calvez, 
Kelley Naytowhow, Tamara Pearl, Omeasoo Wahpasiw, Rachel 
Engler -Stringer, and Pamela Do wne. 2017. The Interpersonal Skills 
of Community -Engaged Scholarship: Insights from Collaborators 
Working at the University of Saskatchewan’s Community 
Engagement Office. Journal of Community Engagement and 
Scholarship  10: 44 –58. 
[30] Elisabeth Hayes and Sondra Cuban. 1997. Border Pedagogy: A 
Critical Framework for Service -Learning. Michigan Journal of 
Community Service Learning  4, 1: 72 –80.
[31] Elaine R Ingham and Matthew D Slaughter. 2014. The Soil Foodweb 
–Soil and Composts as Livi ng Ecosystems. In  Proceedings of the 
International Conference Soil and Compost Eco -Biology , 127–139. 
[32] M M Irfan and P  Sammaiah. 2017. Service Learning Course in the 
Engineering Curriculum: EPICS. Journal of Engineering Education 
Transformations , Special Issue.  
[33] Steven J  Jackson. 2014. Rethinking Repair. In Media Technologies , 
Tarleton Gillespie, Pablo J  Boczkowski and Kirsten A  Foot (eds.). 
The MIT Press, 221 –240. 
[34] Helena Karasti. 2014. Infrastructuring in Participatory Design. In 
Proceedings of the 13th Par ticipatory Design Conference: Research 
Papers - Volume 1  (PDC ’14), 141 –150. 
[35] Helena Karasti and Karen S Baker. Community Design: Growing 
One’s Own Information Infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 2008 
Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design  (PDC '08) : 
217–220. 
[36] Naveena Karusala, Aditya Vishwanath, Arkadeep Kumar, Aman 
Mang al, and Neha Kumar. 2017. Care a s a Resource in Underserved 
Learning Environments. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact.  1, 
CSCW: 104:1 –104:22.  
[37] Christopher A  Le Dantec and Sarah Fox.  2015. Strangers at the Gate: 
Gaining Access, Building Rapport, and Co -Constructing 
Community -Based Research. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing  (CSCW ’15), 1348 –1358.  
[38] Karen E C  Levy. 2015. The Contexts of Control: Information, Power, 
and Truck -Driving Work. The Information Society  31, 2: 160 –174. 
[39] Ann Light and Yoko Akama. 2014. Structuring Future Social 
Relations: The Politics of Care in Participatory Practice. In 
Proceedings of t he 13th Participatory Design Conference: Research 
Papers - Volume 1  (PDC ’14), 151 –160. 
[40] Panagiotis K  Linos. 2012. Ten Years of EPICS at Butler University: 
Experiences from Crafting a Service -Learning Program for 
Computer Science and Software Engineer ing. In Service -Learning in 
the Computer and Information Sciences , Brian A. Nejmeh (ed.). 
Wiley -IEEE Press, 39 –75. 
[41] Aryn Martin, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu. 2015. The Politics of 
Care in Technoscience. Social Studies of Science  45, 5: 625 –641. 
[42] Jed Metzger. 2012. Teaching Civic Engagement: Evaluating an 
Integrative Service -Learning Program. Gateways: International 
Journal of Community Research and Engagement  5: 98–114. 
[43] Tania D Mitchell. 2008. Traditional vs. Critical Service -Learning: 
Engagin g the Literature to Differentiate Two Models. Michigan 
Journal of Community Service Learning  14, 2: 50 –65. 
CHI 2019 Paper 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 13
 
 [44] Tania D  Mitchell. 2015. Using a Critical Service -Learning Approach 
to Facilitate Civic Identity Development. Theory into Practice  54, 1: 
20–28. 
[45] Barbara E. Moely and Vincent Ilustre. 2014. The Impact of Service -
Learning Course Characteristics on University Students’ Learning 
Outcomes. Michigan Journal of Community Service Learning  21, 1: 
5–16. 
[46] Annemarie Mol, Ingunn Moser, and Jeannette P ols (eds.). 2010. Care 
in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms . Transcript -
Verlag, Bielefeld, Germany.  
[47] Bill Mollison. 1992. Permaculture: A Designers’ Manual . Tagari 
Publications, Tyalgum, N.S.W., Australia.  
[48] Michelle Murphy. 2015. Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational 
Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health Practices. Social Studies of 
Science  45, 5: 717 –737. 
[49] Rodica Neamtu. 2013. The Classroom as an Extension of Our 
Society: Empowering Students through Technology in Ser vice 
Learning to Bridge the Global Digital Divide. Procedia - Social and 
Behavioral Sciences  106: 2636 –2644.  
[50] Brian A  Nejmeh. 2012. Preface. In Service -Learning in Computer and 
Information Sciences: Practical Applications in Engineering 
Education , Brian A. Nejmeh (ed.). Wiley -Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.  
[51] Safiya Umoja Noble. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search 
Engines Reinforce Racism . NYU Press, New York.  
[52] William  Oakes and J  Spencer. 2005. EPICS: Engineering Projects in 
Community Service. 34th Annual Frontiers in Education, 2004. FIE 
2004.  21, 1: 139 –150. 
[53] Anna Pichelstorfer. 2012. Thematic Review of Annemarie Mol’s The 
Logic of Care and Care in Practice. Culture Unbound  4, 2012: 533 –
535. 
[54] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa. 2011. Matters of Car e in Technoscience: 
Assembling Neglected Things. Social Studies of Science  41, 1: 85 –106. 
[55] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa. 2012. ‘Nothing Comes Without Its 
World’: Thinking with Care. The Sociological Review  60, 2: 197 –216. 
[56] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa.  2015. Making Time for Soil: 
Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care. Social Studies of 
Science  45, 5: 691 –716. 
[57] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa. 2017. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics 
in More than Human Worlds . University of Minnesota Press, 
Minn eapolis.  
[58] Dan Richard, Cheryl Keen, Julie A Hatcher, and Heather A  Pease. 
2016. Pathways to Adult Civic Engagement: Benefits of Reflection 
and Dialogue across Difference in Higher Education Service -
Learning Programs. Michigan Journal of Community Service 
Learning  23, 1: 60 -74. 
[59] Janet C  Richards. 2017. Transformations in Graduate Education 
Majors’ Relational Care in a Service -Learning Writing Course. 
Reading Improvement  54.3: 112.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [60] Toni Robertson and Ina Wagner. 2012.  Ethics: Engagement, 
Representation and Politics -in-Action. In Routledge Handbook of 
Participatory Design , Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson (eds .). 
Taylor and Francis, Hoboken, 6 4-87. 
[61] Tony Robinson. 2000. Service Learning as Justice Advocacy: Can 
Political  Scientists Do Politics? PS: Political Science and Politics  33, 3: 
605–612. 
[62] Jennifer A  Rode. 2011. Reflexivity in Digital Anthropology. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (CHI ’11), 123 –132. 
[63] Christian S andvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios, and Cedric 
Langbort. 2014. Auditing Algorithms: Research Methods for 
Detecting Discrimination on Internet Platforms. The 64th Annual 
Meeting of the International Communication  Association . Data and 
Discrimination: Converting Critical Concerns  into Productive I nquiry : 
1–23. 
[64] Andrew  D Selbst and Solon Barocas. 2018. The Intuitive Appeal of 
Explainable Machines. Fordham Law Review  87, 3: 1085 –1139.  
[65] Susan Leigh Star and Karen Ruhleder. 1996. Steps Toward an 
Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information 
Spaces . Information Systems Research  7, 1: 111 –134. 
[66] Isabelle Stengers. 2012. Reclaiming Animism. e-flux 36, July 2012.  
[67] Austin L  Toombs, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2015. The 
Proper Care and Feeding of Hackerspaces: Care Ethics and Cultures  
of Making. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI ’15), 629 –638. 
[68] David Vader. 2012. The Collaborator. In Service -Learning in the 
Computer and Information Sciences: Practical Applications in 
Enginee ring Education , Brian A. Nejmeh (ed.). Wiley -IEEE Press, 77 –
116. 
[69] Marie Watkins and Linda Braun. 2005. Service -Learning from 
Classroom to Community to Career . JIST Publishing, Inc, 
Indianapolis, USA.  
[70] Guy Watson and Jane Baxter. 2008. Riverford Far m Recipe Book . 
Fourth Estate, London.  
[71] Marisol Wong -Villacres, Cristina M  Velasquez, and Neha Kumar. 
2017. Social Media for Earthquake Response: Unpacking Its 
Limitations with Care. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact.  1, CSCW: 
112:1 –112:22.  
[72] Ellen Ze gura, Carl DiSalvo, and Amanda Meng. 2018. Care and the 
Practice of Data Science for Social Good. In Proceedings of the 1st 
ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies  
(COMPASS ’18), Article 34 (June 2018), 9 pages.  
 
CHI 2019 Paper 
 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Paper 277
Page 14
