173
PARALELOSDeep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice *
María Torres
Arizona State University, United States
Lindsay A. Smith
Arizona State University, United States
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
How to cite this article: Torres, María and Lindsay A. Smith. 2023. “Deep Forensics for a 
More-than-Human Justice. ” Antípoda. Revista de Antropología y Arqueología  50: 173-195. https://
doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
Received: June 10, 2022; accepted: October 26, 2022; modified: November 26, 2022.
Abstract: Buscadora  collectives in Mexico have developed unique and trans-
formative forensic practices to search for their disappeared loved ones. We 
examine the work of three collectives, each working in distinct political, 
ecological, and historical contexts to better understand emergent forms of 
local citizen-led forensic practice. Attending to spaces, that exist alongside but 
exceed contemporary forensic practice, we critically reexamine the practice 
of forensics in the context of the humanitarian and forensic ‘crisis’ in Mexico. 
Drawing on ethnographic fieldwork and interviews with forensic scientists 
and buscadora  collectives between 2015-2022, we develop three case studies 
that analyze the collectives’ work in three registers: the (inter)relational, the 
geo-logic, and the more-than-human. We argue for the emergence of a deep 
forensics based on collective practices that privilege fragile, multi-valent 
forms of knowledge production, attend to slow violence, and move beyond 
an exclusively human-centered episteme. These alternative practices have the 
potential to displace the crisis time of contemporary state-led forensics and 
better document the entangled contexts of ‘stratigraphic violence’ in contem-
porary Mexico allowing for an emergent more-than-human justice.
Keywords: Buscadoras , citizen science, deep forensics, geo-logics, more-
than-human, stratigraphic violence.
* This article is a product of the insights derived from the following projects: “Migrant DNA: The Science 
of Disappearance and Death across the Mexican Borderlands, ” Wenner-Gren Foundation, International 
Collaborative Research Grant, January 2016-December 2018; “Technologies on the Border; Migration, 
Human, Rights, and Security, ” National Science Foundation CAREER Grant #1944981, July 2020-present.
174
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
Investigación forense profunda para una justicia más que humana
Resumen:  los colectivos de buscadoras en México han desarrollado prácticas 
forenses únicas y transformadoras para buscar a sus seres queridos desapa-
recidos. Examinamos el trabajo de tres colectivos que trabajan en distintos 
contextos políticos, ecológicos e históricos para entender mejor las formas 
emergentes de la práctica forense local dirigida por ciudadanos. Al prestar 
atención a los espacios, que existen junto a la práctica forense contemporánea, 
pero que la exceden, reexaminamos de manera crítica la práctica forense en 
el contexto de la “crisis” humanitaria y forense en México. Desarrollamos tres 
estudios de caso que analizan el trabajo de los colectivos de buscadoras en  
tres registros: el (inter)relacional, el geo-lógico y el más que humano. La infor -
mación para hacer este trabajo fue recopilada entre 2015 y 2022 y se constituye, 
por un lado, de trabajo de campo etnográfico y, por otro lado, de entrevistas 
con científicos forenses y colectivos de buscadoras. Argumentamos el surgi-
miento de una investigación forense profunda basada en prácticas colectivas 
que privilegian formas frágiles y multivalentes de producción de conoci-
miento, prestan atención a la violencia lenta y van más allá de una episteme 
exclusivamente centrada en lo humano. Estas prácticas alternativas tienen 
el potencial de desplazar la temporalidad de la crisis definida por la ciencia 
forense contemporánea estatal y de documentar mejor los contextos entrela-
zados de la violencia estratigráfica en México contemporáneo, lo que permite 
una justicia emergente más que humana.
Palabras clave: buscadoras, ciencia ciudadana, investigación forense profunda, 
geo-lógica, más que humana, violencia estratigráfica.
Investigação forense profunda para uma justiça mais que humana
Resumo: os coletivos de buscadoras no México vêm desenvolvendo práticas 
forenses únicas e transformadoras para buscar seus seres queridos desapare-
cidos. Analisamos o trabalho de três coletivos que trabalham em diferentes 
contextos políticos, ecológicos e históricos para entender melhor as formas 
emergentes da prática forense local dirigida por cidadãos. Ao prestar atenção 
aos espaços, que existem junto à prática forense contemporânea, mas que a 
ultrapassam, reexaminamos de maneira crítica a prática forense no contexto 
da “crise” humanitária e forense no México. Desenvolvemos três estudos de 
caso que analisam o trabalho dos coletivos de buscadoras em três registros: 
o (inter)relacional, o geo-lógico e o mais que humano. As informações para 
fazer esse trabalho foram coletadas entre 2015 e 2022, e se constituem, por 
um lado, de trabalho de campo etnográfico e, por outro, de entrevistas com 
cientistas forenses e coletivos de buscadoras. Argumentamos o surgimento 
de uma investigação forense profunda baseada em práticas coletivas que 
PARALELOS175
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
privilegiam formas frágeis e multivalentes de produção de conhecimento, 
prestam atenção à violência lenta e vão mais além de uma episteme exclusi-
vamente centralizada no humano. Essas práticas alternativas têm o potencial 
de deslocar o tempo de crise da ciência forense contemporânea dirigida pelo 
Estado e de documentar melhor os contextos vinculados da violência estra-
tigráfica no México contemporâneo, o que permite uma justiça emergente 
mais que humana.
Palavras-chave: buscadoras, ciência cidadã, investigação forense profunda, 
geo-lógica, mais que humana, violência estratigráfica.
They said we were engaging in civil disobedience. But I think that if we, the 
families, the mothers, had not engaged in civil disobedience, there would be no 
clandestine graves in any part of this country. Of course, there would be thousands 
of disappeared people, but there would be not one clandestine grave without the 
defiance that motivated us to act.1
(Araceli Salcedo, interview with authors, July 30, 2022)
Araceli reflected on the early days of her organizing as a buscadora , 
when she and other family members whose loved ones had disap-
peared, began searching for potential sites of clandestine burial. She 
was at a point of desperation after her daughter, Rubi, had gone out to 
a party one evening in early September 2012 and never came home. In 
what has been recognized as the common official response to feminicide in Mexico, 
Rubi’s disappearance was dismissed by the police who said she must be out drunk or 
have run off. In what Araceli described as “the terribleness of the authorities, ”2 they 
didn’t even bother to record any information about her case or even Rubi’s name 
(Salcedo, interview with authors, July 30, 2022). When Rubi disappeared and the 
local police dismissed her concerns, Araceli didn’t know where to turn or what to 
do. Ten years later, at the time of our conversation, Araceli has become a self-taught 
expert in forensic science, appropriating tools from entomology, geospatial analysis, 
1 The original in Spanish reads: Decían que hacíamos desobediencia civil. Pero yo creo que si las familias, las 
madres no hubiésemos hecho desobediencia civil, en ninguna parte de este país existieran fosas clandestinas. 
Claro, claro, existirían miles de desaparecidos, pero no existiría ni una fosa clandestina sin la rebeldía que nos 
motivó a salir.
2 The original in Spanish reads: Lo terrible de las autoridades .
176
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
archeology, forensic anthropology, and genetics in her search for Rubi and the other 
disappeared of Veracruz.
She acknowledges herself as one of the oldest members (viejas) of the busca -
dora  movement in Mexico. She, along with the other buscadoras  in her collective 
have helped identify hundreds of clandestine burial sites. They dedicate their time 
to searching for potential clandestine grave sites and then attending state-led exca -
vations to ensure the Mexican police and forensic authorities conduct proper 
analyses, collect remains, and work to identify them. Ten years of searching 
has transformed Araceli, and her and her compañeras’  community-led forensic 
work has transformed Mexico. Their work of scouring the countryside with their  
varillas — iron bars used to pierce the ground to detect odors, textures, color 
changes, and different levels of compaction—, searching for bodies, has made 
disappearance actionable. Their searching and support of state forensic inves-
tigations has made finding and identifying Mexico’s disappeared a reality. With 
each excavation, they have demonstrated the existence of thousands of clandestine 
burials and shown that they could and should be investigated. Without the busca -
dora  collectives there would be no graves only desaparecidos .
In this paper, we draw on ethnographic research and interviews with buscadoras  
and forensic scientists working in contemporary Mexico to examine three cases of 
community-led forensics from different parts of Mexico. Attending to spaces that 
exist alongside but exceed contemporary forensic practice, we critically reexamine the 
imagination and practice of community-led forensics in the context of the humani-
tarian and forensic “crisis” in Mexico. We analyze the work of the buscadoras  in three 
registers: the (inter)relational, the geo-logic, and the more than human, showing how 
buscadora  collectives reimagine one of the central practices of forensic anthropology 
—excavation—, relating differently to history, space, and place, moving beyond an 
exclusively human-centered episteme, and centering emergent forms of relationality 
(Povinelli 2016; Yusoff 2018). We argue that these emergent practices offer a deep 
forensics  that displaces the crisis time of contemporary state-led forensics to under -
stand the entangled contexts of “stratigraphic violence” in contemporary Mexico.
Scholars and activists in Mexico have pointed to the crisis of violence and impu-
nity in the country where several thousand clandestine graves have been identified 
nationwide in the last fifteen years. Forensic science has been posited as a crucial 
tool of justice and healing (García-Deister and Lopez-Beltrán 2017) and at the same 
time critiqued as reductive, inaccessible, and a bureaucratic tool of necro-sovereignty 
(García-Deister and Smith 2020) in a landscape of neoliberal dispossession (Robledo 
2019). Groups of family members have seized the tools of forensic science, forming 
teams of lay buscadoras,  finding sites of mass extermination, excavating them to try 
and find their missing loved ones (Cruz-Santiago 2017; Torres 2020). Here we fore-
ground the emergent, partial, and experimental aspects of the buscadoras  approach to 
forensic science, to show how their work offers new imaginaries of what forensics can 
be, what it might deal with, who and what it is for, and what worlds it might help to 
PARALELOS177
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
create. Their praxis offers complex accounts of living alongside multiple, overlapping 
violences, and how histories and futures might be re-imagined and invoked to care 
for the present (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017; Tsing 2015).
Drawing on twenty-two months of ethnographic research and more than five 
years of collaborations with buscadora  collectives in Mexico between 2015 and 2022, 
we present three ethnographic case studies of the work of these collectives in different 
geographical and political contexts in Mexico. Based on quotes from ethnographic 
interviews with buscadoras  working in each site, we highlight their experience and 
expertise in reshaping forensic practice towards deep forensics based on new forms of 
interdependence and expertise (inter-relationality), time, environment, and violence 
(geo-logics), and emergent ontologies that rethink human-animal-environmental 
relationships (more-than-human). First, we focus on buscadora  collectives working 
near Río de Los Remedios, which crosses the central area of the country. El Río de Los 
Remedios, once part of a massive modern hydraulic engineering project designed to 
drain the old lake system of the Valley of Mexico, has recently turned into a dumping 
ground for chemical, industrial and urban waste, including human bodies. In this latter 
sense, this river of dark waters has become a clandestine mass grave for women in the 
State of Mexico. Then, we move to an area of the desert of Coahuila, where a group of 
buscadoras scour the cracked earth, inch by inch, looking at the ground, sharpening 
their sense of smell, identifying changes in the color and texture of the soil that could 
indicate the presence of buried human remains. Along with the human remains, these 
practices trace the violent means by which contested minerals, fossils and objects are 
exhumed from their natural environments. Finally, we examine the work of busca -
doras  in the rainforest of Veracruz, where a cadaver dog signaling at a tree leads to the 
unearthing of a complex root system which has transported the chemicals released in 
the bodies’ decomposition. By excavating this relational more-than-human complex 
of groundwater, root systems, and chemical signals, the buscadora  collectives were able 
to identify a clandestine burial site.
Beyond Forensic Crisis: Institutional Reform, Levantamientos 
Exprés , and Collective Action
Crisis has become a watchword in Mexico. Leaders describe the multiple and intri-
cate economic, humanitarian, ecological, and political challenges facing the nation 
in stark language. For example, in an interview about his annual report on Latin 
America, published at the beginning of 2019, executive director of Human Rights 
Watch, Kenneth Roth, states: “The world is living in dark times. ” And in this world, 
he continues, “[M]exico is a human rights catastrophe” (Guevara 2019). From “the 
grave humanitarian crisis” (Isacson, Beltrán, and Meyer 2019) to the recurring 
“water crises in Mexico” due to unrestrained extractivism, drought, and conta-
mination (Brooks 2022), to the “crisis of migration and climate change” (Ramírez 
2021), the social, ecological, and political challenges are discussed in catastrophic 
178
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
terms. These narratives of crisis have come to inhabit everyday language in Mexi-
co’s public and political spaces. No event better exposes the interrelatedness of the 
crises, than the “forensic crisis” in Mexico, and, with it, the recognition of both a 
profound and ongoing humanitarian crisis and a crisis of innumerable, uncounted, 
and unidentified dead.
As of July 2022, the Mexican government officially recognizes 103,130 disap-
peared individuals between 1964 and 2022, making the official numbers match 
the estimates long put forward by search groups (Comisión Nacional de Búsqueda 
2022). A public-facing database now allows visitors to find the data on disappear -
ances by age, gender, and region in Mexico. The transparency of the new database 
created in 2017 and maintained by the Mexican Comisión Nacional de Búsqueda 
(CNB) is part of a series of measures meant to respond to the government’s failure 
to address the problem of disappearance and death. The Mexican government only 
officially recognized 40,000 disappeared between 2006 and 2019 (Cordero 2019) 
as recently as 2019; there was no consensus on the number of victims. Data came 
from multiple official and unofficial sources on the crime of enforced and involun-
tary disappearance, but none of them made it possible for searching families or the 
Mexican public to know the precise number of missing persons in Mexico (Smith 
and García-Deister 2017).
Even with improvements to the system of registering and reporting on the 
number of disappeared people, there remains an entrenched problem surrounding 
the forensic processing of clandestine burial sites and the identification of bodies. 
Mexico has lacked an effective system for exhaustive and precise counting of the 
clandestine graves discovered, much less of the human remains found in them. In 
addition to the discrepancies in the official accounts, the lack of coordination and 
ineffectiveness of the institutions was also evident in other areas. In 2019, there were 
more than 37,000 unidentified bodies in the custody of forensic services, distributed 
among refrigerators, containers, osteotecas3, and mass graves, the latter spread out 
without any order or methodology in municipal cemeteries throughout the country 
(Cordero 2019). The procedures established for the recovery and analysis of the 
bodies found were not rigorously and systematically applied. Morgues had no more 
space for bodies, so that in the rare cases where autopsies were performed, it was 
often in nearby funeral homes.
In 2019, Mexico officially recognized this set of challenges as a “forensic crisis” 
before the InterAmerican Human Rights Commission and proposed to create the 
Mecanismo Extraordinario de Identificación Forense, an autonomous, multi-dis-
ciplinary mechanism responsible for the expert analysis of unidentified remains 
(SNBP/001/2019) to address these challenges. This new mechanism was designed 
to work alongside several other legislative and government initiatives to address 
the demands of searching families and the lack of coordination, capacity, and 
3 A biobank is a space for the preservation and grouping of human bone material and anatomical models, 
intended for educational and research activities.
PARALELOS179
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
transparency in identification processes. In 2020, the Protocolo Homologado para la 
búsqueda de personas desaparecidas y no localizadas  was passed, offering a central-
ized set of legal norms around searching for missing people (SNBP/002/2020), 
legalizing, and protecting many of the practices that collectives had been engaging 
in for years. Unearthing bodies and naming the dead has become a priority social, 
scientific, and political activity.
Although buscadora  collectives depend on the CNB to begin excavating poten-
tial clandestine burial sites, the people we interviewed remain wary of government 
experts. They describe the work of these forensic experts as levantamientos exprés, a 
rapid gathering of remains without proper attention to forensic protocols. They see 
this express forensic work as focusing narrowly on getting excavations completed and 
remains useful for DNA analysis collected (key metrics measured and reported by the 
CNB).4 Searching family members argue that too many officials are unwilling to do 
the careful work of systematically collecting all the remains at the site. Graciela Pérez 
Rodriguez, a leader in the buscadora  movement described the mismatch between 
these two forms of searching in these terms:
With every body or remains that we find, I imagine that it could be my daughter. 
And if that were the case, I would reconstruct her piece by piece. I wouldn’t 
leave behind even the smallest piece of her. That’s what I would want. I imagine 
that other families must feel the same. That is why we organize, at least those of 
us that are here, the collectives that do this work.5 (Pérez 2021)
At a recent excavation that one of us attended, there was a disagreement 
between the collectives and the officials about how thoroughly to examine the site 
for multiple burials and the appropriate items to bring back to the laboratory for 
analysis. The expert working with the buscadora  collective argued that the group 
needed to excavate the grid carefully and collect as much of the remains as possible at 
a defined site; the state expert wanted to collect only the clearly recognizable remains 
on the surface and move quickly to other areas. The expert explained her position: 
“It’s that this is a forensic excavation, not a case of ancient remains where you have 
all the time in the world. Here we don’t have time. We must be practical”6 (interview 
with authors, June 2022). Expediency and necessity drove the state official’s focus on 
rapid forensics. The family groups focused both on good scientific practice and care 
for the dead. In one interview, a mother discussing a different, but similar situated 
4 To find out more about the CNB, see, “Contexto General - Dashboard CNB. ” Database. Registro Nacional 
de Personas Desaparecidas y No Localizadas (RNPDNO), January 8, 2022. https://versionpublicarnpdno.
segob.gob.mx/Dashboard/ContextoGeneral
5 The original in Spanish reads: Con cada cuerpo o resto que encontramos yo me imagino que podría ser mi 
hija. Y si ese fuera el caso, la reconstruiría pedacito a pedacito, no dejaría ni un pedacito de ella. Eso desearía. 
Yo me imagino que eso mismo sienten las demás familias. Y por eso es que luchamos, es por eso que estamos 
acá los colectivos que hacemos esto .
6 The original in Spanish reads: Es que esto es una excavación forense, no de restos antiguos en donde tienen 
todo el tiempo del mundo. Aqui no hay tiempo, hay que ser prácticos.
180
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
debate with an official, described how she could, of course, understand the position 
of the officials. They were busy and had families, work, and lives to attend to. She 
understood the need to limit the activities on that site visit but still she couldn’t help 
her sense of responsibility to the dead they had not found in that area. As they left, 
she felt compelled to address them:
I swear that I turned around as we were leaving the site and I started to cry… 
and I told them, don’t, don’t think that we are leaving and forgetting you. We will 
come back next year so that you can all reach your homes.7 (Salcedo, interview 
with authors, July 30, 2022)
The Mexican government has taken important steps towards realizing the 
most basic requests of search groups: an accurate accounting of the missing, 
public information about forensic activities and their outcomes, and centralized, 
unified laws governing the search process. However, these procedures, even when 
followed, expose the enormous gap between the lived realities on the ground 
of buscadoras  and the state’s “solution” to the forensic crisis. Here, we describe 
how disappearance in Mexico and the government response has been governed 
by crisis thinking (Roitman 2013; Rudnyckyj 2018), which has prompted narrow, 
short-sighted technical, individualistic, human-centered understanding of truth 
and justice (García-Deister and Smith 2016; Smith 2017; Wagner 2008) while 
displacing the deep temporalities and inter-relationalities in which the human-
itarian and forensic crisis unfolded in a context of neoliberal dispossession and 
grave ecological and environmental conditions. By rethinking the excavation 
through the lens of deep forensics, we show how emergent practices open a space 
to attend to overlapping systems of violence and emergent relationalities as a 
counter to the levantamientos exprés of state-led forensics.
The River: Weaving (Inter)Relational Forensics
My name is Maria Eugenia Fuentes, I am the mother of a victim of femicide, of 
Diana Angélica Castañeda, 14 years old... [gets emotional] …sorry for so much 
emotion... I’ll calm down now... She disappeared on September 7, 2013, in Ecatepec 
in the State of Mexico and […] a year later in the month of September the State 
Attorney’s Office tells me that they found a skull [silence] and some feet [silence]... 
She had been kidnapped, held for five months […] Apart from what she suffered 
[there], they killed her, dismembered her, and threw her into a canal... After a year 
the Attorney General’s Office calls me. They found a torso... I am putting together 
7 The original in Spanish reads: Te juro que yo volteé mientras nos íbamos del sitio y se me salían las lágri-
mas… y les dije, no, no crean que nos vamos y los olvidamos. Regresaremos el año que viene para que ustedes 
puedan llegar a sus hogares.
PARALELOS181
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
my puzzle. I am still missing her legs, her arms, her hands.8 (Encuentro Red de 
Madres, Espacio Cultural Punto Gozadera, November 24, 2016)
We first heard the testimony of Maria Eugenia, a member of the Red de Madres 
Buscando a sus Hijas collective, at a 2016 meeting on the problem of femicide in the 
State of Mexico. She told her story as part of a broader conversation in the feminist 
militant center, Punto Gozadera, in Mexico City, which brought together several 
women from the Red de Madres buscadora  collective, mostly linked to cases of femi-
cide in the State of Mexico, with independent scientists, academics, feminist activists 
and artists such as the Chilean composer Ana Tijoux. The meeting was organized 
by the Mexican Forensic Anthropology Team (EMAF), which have supported and 
collaborated Red de Madres in their search for justice since 2015.
Maria Eugenia described the identification of her daughter Diana Angélica as 
a macabre forensic process of recovering her body like the many pieces of a puzzle. 
“What they [EMAF scientists] have taught us on this path, ” Maria Eugenia continued, 
“is how to tackle this search process with wisdom and patience, especially with regard 
to the authorities” (Encuentro Red de Madres, Espacio Cultural Punto Gozadera, 
November 24, 2016). Dealing with the authorities, their cruelty, their disrespect, the 
ways in which they didn’t value the lives of the young women they were tasked with 
finding, their total disregard for the social and economic realities that many families 
experienced, was described as a form of relentless violence. From being forced to go 
to the authorities on several occasions to report their case to the aspersions cast on 
their daughters’ behavior and actions, the women described the apparent impossi-
bility of reporting and then finding a missing young woman in the State of Mexico. 
Searching was like putting together a puzzle, the EMAF suggested offering this meta-
phor as a way to make sense of both the social and forensic aspects of searching. For 
EMAF, and now also for this group of mothers, the so-called “search process” not 
only involved the location and recovery of bones and their identification by DNA in 
a laboratory, but a meticulous, patient, and fragile interweaving work that involved 
both material and discursive aspects and intricate relations between science, tech-
nology, activism, and the State. In Maria Eugenia’s experience the puzzle metaphor 
was all too literal. Despite being one of the “successful” cases where her daughter’s 
body had been found and identified, the slow, partial, and unfeeling process to which 
the Mexican state had subjected her, highlighted for the group the humanitarian and 
forensic failures of the state.
The remains of Diana Angélica Castañeda Fuentes, 14, were found in February 
2014 in the municipality of Ecatepec de Morelos, in the State of Mexico. She was found 
8 The original in Spanish reads: Mi nombre es Maria Eugenia Fuentes, soy mamá de una víctima de feminicidio, 
de Diana Angélica Castañeda, de 14 años… [se emociona]…perdón con tanta emoción… ahora ya me relajo…
Ella desaparece el 7 de septiembre de 2013 en Ecatepec en el Estado de México [...] y hasta un año después en 
el mes de septiembre me avisan por parte de la Procuraduría del Estado que encontraron un cráneo [silencio] 
y unos pies [silencio]…La tuvieron secuestrada cinco meses […] Aparte de lo que vivió la mataron, la descuar -
tizaron y la echaron a un canal… Después de un año la Procuraduría me avisa otra vez que encontró un torso…
Voy recopilando mi rompecabezas, me faltan sus piernas, sus brazos, sus manos.
182
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
between streets C-1 and C-10 of an industrial estate delimited by the so-called “curve 
of the devil” on Carlos Hank González Avenue and Texcoco Street. Attached to these 
streets runs a river that is known as De la Compañía or De los Remedios, whose banks 
house urban developments with more than 200 homes as well as large factories and 
warehouses, which until a few years ago served to strip stolen cars, and are now an area 
of great industrial activity. Diana Angélica’s remains were found while dredging this 
small section of Rio de los Remedios, along with 20 other bodies, 16 of them women, 
and an indeterminate amount of biological remains in different states of decompo-
sition scrambled with debris, waste, and industrial objects and remains of all kinds. 
Authorities were never able to determine whether they were human or other animal 
fragments and, after several days of media coverage, nothing more was reported: offi-
cials did not collect any other evidence, there was no confirmation in relation to the 
analysis of the findings, nor is it known where the remains ended up.
At some point in the process of identifying and recovering her daughter’s 
remains, Maria Eugenia managed to access the report on the excavation in the 
canal. Attached were images of the site and a list with a brief description of the 
evidence recovered in the river. These showed a “large mountain of garbage” from 
which they extracted her daughter’s remains. Experts from the Attorney General’s 
Office of the State of Mexico excavated various sections of the Remedios River and 
the Grand Canal. Within a mountain of several meters of mud mixed with garbage 
and human remains, extracted from the river bottom by a backhoe they discov-
ered: “a raffia sack inside which there were two meticulously closed black garbage 
bags, tied with a very long black shoelace in a fisherman’s knot. ” (Carrión 2018, 
167). That was the 27th find of that day. During the excavation, carried out over 
several days along 19 kilometers of the Grand Canal, the backhoe raised seven 
thousand biological remains of “indeterminate” origin from the river, of which 
they managed to identify remains from, at least, twenty different people.
In the collective, there were several cases of mothers who had recovered the 
body of their daughters in the Rio de los Remedios, most of them victims of femi-
cide, and all of them, without exception, cases marked by bad police and forensic 
practices. The excavation and survey of the findings was hurried and careless; the 
exact location of each piece of evidence was not recorded and/or there is no chain 
of custody; the body was often recovered incomplete and sometimes injured by the 
backhoe exhumation technique; the forensic context of recovery had been system-
atically destroyed, and the remains scrambled with those of other bodies. Clothing 
and personal belongings were rarely recovered.
Scholars of feminicide in Mexico have described scenes like this as part of 
broader technologies of disappearance. Robledo Silvestre and Hernández Castillo 
warn, already in the 1990s, of a “disappearing device” being applied to the bodies of 
poor and racialized women, in what is known as the crisis of femicides in Ciudad 
Juárez. These bodies were no longer of political dissidents deemed a threat to 
national security but instead understood as disposable within a sexist, racist, and 
PARALELOS183
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
classist system (Hernández 2019). Feminist thinkers and theorists have pointed out 
the importance of analyzing what Segato calls “pedagogy of cruelty” in feminicides 
(Mendoza 2006; Segato 2013) This is, according to Segato, an “expressive rather than 
instrumental violence” that promotes and normalizes the “spectacle of the plun-
dering of life until waste, until leaving only remains” (Segato 2013, 83). Rather than 
an extraordinary or scientific failure, these scholars point to the violence and care-
lessness of excavations like that of the Rio de los Remedios as a purposive spectacle 
of patriarchal power.
Explaining the role of forensic expertise as part of the work of combatting 
feminicide, an archeologist from the EMAF advocated weaving as an antidote to the 
disappearing devices of the official forensic response to feminicide: “It is never about 
only one approach or an isolated technology”9 (EMAF interview with the authors, 
February 2020). Instead, good forensic praxis, they explained was a work of weaving 
both as practice and process. It requires situated analysis based on systematic tech-
niques and forensic expertise, but also the expertise of the buscadora  collectives and 
the individual experiences of its members. The rehearsing of the personal and collec-
tive histories of this group was an integral part of the buscadora  collectives’ forensic 
practice of both recovering and remembering unimaginably wounded bodies like those 
of Diana Angelica. This inter-relational forensic praxis was grounded in individual, 
cultural, and historical experiences, forming, meticulously and patiently, a very fragile 
fabric of materiality and stories. Although slow and partial, this process elaborated by 
the EMAF and the buscadora  collectives fostered richer and more unique connections 
between science, technology, and remains. It also offered pathways to (re)connect 
places and people with their stories and their continuous struggles.
Nigerian visual artist, Otobong Nkanga invented a term to talk about people 
working on, with and from fragility, calling them Fragilologists, and places them 
in the contemporary Nigerian context in relation to the processes of social and 
environmental devastation linked to colonial extraction and exploitation in her 
homeland (Nkanga 2010). Nkanga does this work materially weaving delicate 
fabrics out of objects from deeply wounded contexts. The buscadoras  could also be 
understood as fragilologists weaving with their words, their clues from searching, 
the partial, violated remains they recover into emergent relationalities. This 
fragility of things, objects, bodies and their deeply violated environments indicates 
that everything can disappear, disarticulate, break or be irreversibly contaminated 
and at any time, but it also reminds us that there is always a thread, a trace —even 
to the slightest remnant or memory— that invokes us to resume the urgent and 
complicated task of connecting, interweaving and bonding fragilely with other(s); 
to learn to read in unexpected and risky associations the fragile, delicate, and 
fleeting writing of wounded matter.
9 The original in Spanish reads: Nunca se trata de una sola técnica o de una tecnología aislada.
184
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
At the EMAF meeting in Mexico City, the Rio de los Remedios remained in the 
background. It was the site of the failure of the Mexican forensic response, a compli-
cating factor. Here it was the turbulent, dark, and dirty waters of a contaminated 
city river. In another case in Tamaulipas, which collectives discussed with us, the 
problem was that the bodies were deposited in an abandoned well filled with water. 
In another case in Veracruz, the jungle was too thick and the canopy too dense for 
an effective excavation. In yet another, the conditions of the desert paired with the 
practices of delinquent groups left the remains too scattered and degraded to collect 
and process. Place mattered to the government experts but only as a background 
to the real, practical work of collecting the remains. The diversity of environments, 
their contamination, the extremes of weather, and geographic features mattered 
primarily as an excuse for incomplete forensic work. However, for the buscadora  
collectives, these clandestine burial sites, their histories, their geographies, and the 
evidence they offered of layered violence mattered. That day at the meeting, the river 
remained firmly in the background. In the remainder of this paper, we describe how 
the absent presence of the river that day in 2016, presaged the increasing impor -
tance of geographic, environmental, and more-than-human relationalities in the 
work of collectives. The specificity of a space and place that had once been the mere 
background of the central scene —the scientifically purified forensic excavation— 
emerged as a protagonist.
The Land: Geo-logics and Stratigraphic Violence
The search begins when you reach the point, this is usually a large area of 
the Coahuila Desert that some ejidatario  [rancher] or chivero  [goatherd] 
mentioned in passing. …When you get out of the vans, the first thing you 
think is where the hell do you start? The sun is at its peak; the earth, is loose and 
unending… Y ou walk, a lot, carrying the varilla  [T rod] and a bottle of water, 
looking over every inch of the cracked earth, trying to determine whether 
underneath there are the remains of what was once a man, a woman, a son... 
any remains. At times, you stop, you look up, you observe the majesty of the 
scenery, you breathe, you try to imagine where those bodies were before they 
ended up here. Y ou feel the pain, the hopelessness, the tiredness, then the 
hope. Y ou continue walking.10 (Ortiz 2019)
10 The original in Spanish reads: La búsqueda inicia cuando se llega al punto, éste suele ser una zona extensa 
del Desierto de Coahuila que algún ejidatario o chivero mencionó de pasada… Al bajarte de las camionetas, 
lo primero que piensas es ¿por dónde chingados se empieza? El sol está en su máximo resplandor; la tierra, 
suave e inagotable; …Se camina, mucho, cargando la varilla y la botella de agua, mirando cada centímetro 
del suelo agrietado, observando si aquí tiraron lo que alguna vez fue un hombre, una mujer, un hijo... un 
resto. En momentos, te detienes, levantas la mirada, observas la majestuosidad del escenario, respiras, tratas 
de imaginar dónde estuvieron esos cuerpos antes de acabar aquí. Sientes el dolor, la desesperanza, el cansan-
cio, la esperanza. Continúas caminando.
PARALELOS185
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
In 2019, a member of the Grupo Vida buscadoras  collective, Silvia Ortiz, 
searching for her daughter, Fanny Sánchez Viesca Ortiz, in the Mexican State of 
Coahuila, narrated an eloquent and evocative account of searching in the desert 
at a presentation of the EMAF’s project Forensic Pedagogies. In her telling of the 
embodied experience of walking the desert, she drew our attention to the heat,  
the sunlight, the sand slipping under her feet. She explains that even in these condi-
tions, the majesty of the landscape often acts as an anchor, grounding her and the 
other members of the collective to the place and to the history of the bones they 
are searching for, histories of land and lives that exceed the meticulous, exhausting 
forensic processes they were engaged in. Her narration went on for 10 minutes and 
brought us into the intimacies of their search: the ways they have learned to use their 
eyes and noses to find anomalies; the reality that the remains they find in the desert 
are almost always burned and on the surface, “esparcidos en un desierto habitable solo 
para las gobernadoras y las aves de rapiña / scattered in a desert habitable only by 
Chapparal [plants] and birds of prey” (Ortiz 2019).
The relationship that collectives formed with the land by walking slowly, 
deliberately, repeatedly scouring meter-by-meter for signs of clandestine burial 
came up often in our interviews. The buscadoras  emphasized the expertise that 
comes from being in a place, of taking time, of knowing the signs that matter in a 
specific environment. Graciela Pérez, the leader of a Tamaulipas-based buscadoras 
collective, Milynali Red, like Araceli and Silvia, is one of the founders of busca -
doras . She has been searching for her daughter Milynali Peña Pérez, since 2012. 
Milynali was 13 when she disappeared along with her uncle and three teenage 
cousins as they were crossing Tamaulipas returning to San Luis Potosí from a short 
trip to the United States.
Graciela, organizes one of the largest networks of buscadora  collectives, holding 
annual meetings to share their experiences, support one another, and hold the 
Mexican State accountable to their promises to improve their search and identification 
processes. In 2020, mirroring the work of the Protocolo homologado de búsqueda  that 
the Mexican State established as law, Milynali Red published its own set of protocols, 
Protocolo estandarizado de búsqueda ciudadana en sitios de exterminio,11 codifying 
its experiences and expertise (Pérez, Lopéz, and Pérez 2020). Graciela had learned to 
ignore those who dismissed their work as naïve or lacking expertise explaining:
[W]e’ve been learning as we go along, with the finds that we have, we’ve learned 
how things are …When you are there and you see a tree or some unique charac-
teristics, that is what draws your attention telling you that there was something 
here or allows you to dismiss it saying, no this is trash or it is recent, this has 
11 Standardized Protocol for Citizen Searches at Extermination Sites.
186
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
only been here for a little [while].12 (Graciela Pérez Rodríguez, interview with the 
authors October 14, 2021, Mexico)
Like Silvia, Graciela, emphasized both the embodied expertise of the searcher 
and how that articulated with the place in which they search. At a recent virtual 
meeting of representatives from buscadora  collectives located around Mexico that 
we attended, ecology and its local history came up repeatedly. First, the group talked 
about the lack of rain in the North and how this was affecting both the searches 
and community life in general. One participant spoke about the desperate situation 
in her state, Nuevo León, where access to drinking water was being affected. More 
participants joined in discussing the weather, water, risk, and shifts in climate and 
vegetation. The environment turned into a main topic at the meeting, which had 
been planned to focus on technological needs, as another participant quickly side-
tracked the conversation saying that before technology needs were assessed we had 
to consider context. She explained that by context she meant both the socio-political 
context of disappearance and searching and the flora and the fauna, the landscape, 
and the environmental realities that they experienced on their searches. It wasn’t the 
same to search in Veracruz with its wet conditions and use of clandestine burials as 
it was to search in the desert where it was dry, and bodies had been burned and scat-
tered. She added that animals and plants played a huge part in their work and that 
they were context specific. They could not talk about new technologies until they 
understood context: social, political, and environmental.
A 2020 special issue of the Journal of Latin American Cultural studies edited 
by Gabriel Gatti and David Casado-Neira introduces the concept of ecologies of 
disappearance  arguing that contemporary disappearances as opposed to the disap-
pearances that characterized cold-war Latin America have a unique spatiality  
(Gatti and Casado-Neira 2020). As opposed to dedicated spaces of disappearance 
like the clandestine detention centers of Argentina’s dirty war (Armony, Menjivar, 
and Rodriguez 2005), disappearances are increasingly intertwined with natural 
spaces. The essays included highlight the central role of ecologies, in both a theoret-
ical sense and literal sense, as under “democracy” people disappear when they and 
their communities’ needs come into conflict with extractivism (Andermann 2020), 
when bodies are dumped in rivers to hide the crime of disappearance (Guglielmucci 
2020), and when the criminalization of migration has weaponized jungles and deserts 
as spaces of death (Gatti, Irazuzta, and Martínez 2020). In these new ecologies of 
disappearance, nature and repression are intertwined in new “pedagogies of cruelty” 
(Segato [2006] 2013) but also offer the potential of new forms of sanctuary and shelter.
The buscadora  collectives’ call for a greater analysis and recognition of the unique 
political, social, and environmental realities that each group faced, aligns with the 
12 The original in Spanish reads: [H]emos ido aprendiendo en el camino, con los hallazgos que tene-
mos, hemos ido aprendiendo a saber cómo es… Cuando estás caminando y ves un árbol o ves alguna 
característica diferente eso es lo que te hace que te llame la atención como para decir aquí hubo algo, 
o descartarlo sencillamente diciendo, no, esto es basura, o esto es nuevo, esto es de hace poquito.
PARALELOS187
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
ecological thinking Gatti and Casado-Neira advocate. Here an attention to the mate-
riality, history, and political economy of the spaces where people disappear, where the 
collectives search, and where remains are found becomes the foundation for searching 
and finding. Unlike the Rio de los Remedios, relegated to the background of Maria 
Eugenia’s search, the desert, the mountains, and the jungle were front and center. It 
was the embodied knowledge of fieldwork in Tamaulipas over ten years which allows 
Graciela to see and recognize sites of extermination. It was the majesty of the desert 
that sustained Silvia as she scoured its surface to find burned remains.
Through their embodied knowledge of searching within specific spatial ecol-
ogies, the buscadora  collectives were engaging in what we argue is a new kind 
of deep forensics, one that re-articulates the relationship between place, ecologies of 
disappearance, and broader movements for justice. With their discussion regarding 
the lack of water, the participants at the meeting discussed local environmental 
concerns and the ways in which the violence they document in citizen searches 
overlaps with other systemic forms of precarity. In many of the meetings we have 
attended, community members mention a presentation by a geo-spatial geographer 
with maps showing the overlap of extractivism (mining and oil extraction) and 
the rate of disappearances, arguing for a relationship between these two forms of 
violence. This too is part of the context the buscadora  collectives felt was essential 
to guide their future forms of searching. We suggest that this type of organizing 
represents an attention to new types of stratigraphic violence, that is, slow violence 
(Davies 2022; Nixon 2011) which becomes sedimented in the earth and is often made 
visible through the types of expertise and inter-relationality they practice. Although 
their work remains firmly centered on finding the disappeared, it has also brought to 
light historical and ecological violences.
The Roots: Entanglements in a More-than-Human Forensics
It’s amazing how the land and trees are giving us, the families of disappeared 
people, a little bit of peace. Nature is a witness to suffering. Despite having felt the 
pain of all these people who were buried clandestinely in their forests, the trees, 
through their roots, are pointing us to ways to find them. Life puts us in very 
difficult situations, but it somehow wove bonds so that together we can give truth 
about what happened in […] this extermination site.13 (Araceli Salcedo, Roots of 
Pain , documentary 2019)
13 The original in Spanish reads: Es increíble cómo la tierra y los árboles nos están devolviendo a las familias 
de personas desaparecidas un poco de paz. La naturaleza es testiga del sufrimiento. A pesar de haber sentido 
el dolor de todas estas personas que fueron inhumadas clandestinamente en sus bosques, los árboles, a través 
de sus raíces, nos están señalando caminos para encontrarlos. La vida nos pone en situaciones muy difíciles, 
pero de alguna manera tejió lazos para que juntas podemos dar verdad sobre lo que pasó en […] este campo 
de exterminio.
188
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
At the beginning of 2019, Veracruz activist Araceli Salcedo, whose story 
opened this paper, and her colleagues from the Collective of Relatives of the 
Disappeared of the Córdoba-Orizaba area anonymously received a map and two 
photographs with information about an area of clandestine burials located in the 
municipality of Río Blanco, in the central mountainous region of Veracruz. In a 
wooded and steep terrain located in the Cerro de Los Arenales, more than 350 
meters up the mountain, the women of the collective began their search without 
much of an idea of what they would find there.
Loaded with shovels, water canisters and varillas, the women quickly identi-
fied signs they recognized as markers of a potential clandestine burial in this region 
of Veracruz. Disturbed earth, piled stones, an intense and characteristic smell, and 
many flies. They returned the next day accompanied by experts from the Mexican 
State and a cadaver dog. These trained dog-human teams are known in Mexico as 
“canine binomials” in police and forensic slang because of their symbiotic alliance with 
their trainer and their sympathy with the pain of humans. Araceli and her collective 
call them angelitos , little angels aiding them in their search. These symbiont animals, 
whose physical characteristics allow them to transit through small, overgrown spaces 
to which their human companion does not have access, are specially trained to search 
and are able to detect specific odors associated with dead bodies with precision. Araceli 
recounted the strangeness of this particular search when within a few meters of the 
start of the search with the canine binomial, it stopped and began to bark, not towards 
a potential grave site on the ground, but up towards the trees: “We did not understand 
how or why the dog gave us so many false positives in this tree, a large tree. Because 
they couldn’t have removed the tree, dug a grave and then replanted it. That’s impossi-
b l e .”14 (Salcedo, interview with authors, July 30, 2022).
The buscadoras  discussed the case with the anthropologists and forensic 
scientists from the Mexican federal police. The only theory that seemed plausible 
was that the roots of this tree were extracting water from the grave sites, taking it 
up, and then emitting the chemicals the dog associated with cadavers. That might 
explain the dog’s behavior and how such a large tree could relate to a grave site. 
They then decided to follow the roots until they found two sites side by side. The 
clandestine burial sites were rocky and close to a river. The dog passed right over 
them, signaling nothing, but the tree roots led the search teams to the exact spot. 
Since that excavation, Araceli has become a vocal proponent for the important 
role of nature and its wisdom in the work of the buscadora  collectives. She speaks 
of the trees, the cadaver dogs, even the butterflies that, in semi-mystical terms, 
accompany them in their search,
14 The original in Spanish reads: No entendíamos cómo o por qué, el perrito nos marcaba muchos falsos positi-
vos en un árbol, un árbol grande, y pues decíamos este árbol no lo quitaron, hicieron la fosa y lo volvieron a 
sembrar, es imposible .
PARALELOS189
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
We call them roots of pain because they led us to our dead... And because the 
specific characteristics of the find reflect the pain of all those people who are 
buried in that place and of which the trees have been silent witnesses. […] It 
is incredible to see how nature, with the passage of time, mixes with what is on 
earth, in this case the bodies. The mountain, the land and its forests through the 
roots showed us the way... That’s why we say nature returned us to our own.15 
(Salcedo, interview with authors, July 30, 2022)
In searches like those in Veracruz, buscadoras  are part of a rich and strange 
universe of enormous trees fed by pain, sympathetic binomials, butterflies, and 
mortal bugs, as a painful and contradictory space of flourishing (Haraway 2016). 
They discuss their complex relationships with “weeds” like the creosote covering the 
desert, or with the fungi, bacteria and microorganisms that nest in the foliage and the 
soil and decomposed remains; they discuss the wisdom and signals of insects, scav-
enger birds, wild packs of dogs and other “cadaveric” species that guide and connect 
them with the land, each other, and their missing in multiple and reciprocal ways. 
In these ecologies of disappearance, multi-species relationships abound, survive, 
and emerge in times and places of massive extinctions, pauperizations, and exter -
minations. These wild/monstrous multi-species searches are their witness, the strange 
relatives of disappeared, displaced, extinct and annihilated creatures that populate this 
dense history of transformations and dispossessions. In Haraway’s words, these rela-
tionalities “twist, delight and grow profusely in manifold forms and manifold names 
in all the airs, waters, and places of earth. They make and unmake; they are made and 
unmade” (2016, 2), while they challenge and demand responsibility from us.
Conclusion: Towards a More-than-Human Justice
The Coahuila desert, Veracruz’ roots of pain, the urban Mexico’s Rio de los Reme-
dios, these ecologies of búsqueda , of searching, with their natural and artificial 
landscapes, constructed by extraction, violence, and the careful intervention 
of the buscadora  collectives make up a sedimented history of transformations, 
dispossessions, and struggles. These nature/cultures, their waste as well as their 
technologies and infrastructures, hold ways of living and dying that return and 
insist on our present.
By excavating the human-nonhuman, living-nonliving relational complex of 
these ecosystems, the buscadoras  open a horizon to a new kind of deep forensics 
that acknowledges the multiple temporalities, scales, and processes of deep, strati-
fied forms of violence, which operates by way of entangled forms of life-destruction 
15 The original in Spanish reads: Las llamamos raíces del dolor porque nos guiaron hacia nuestros muertos... 
Y porque las características particulares del hallazgo reflejan el dolor de todas aquellas personas que se 
encuentran enterradas en ese lugar y del que los árboles han sido testigos mudos. […] Es increíble ver cómo 
la naturaleza, con el paso del tiempo, se mezcla con lo que haya en la tierra, en este caso los cuerpos. La 
montaña, la tierra y sus bosques a través de las raíces nos enseñaron el camino…Es por eso que decimos que 
la naturaleza nos regresó a los nuestros.
190
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
—for humans and nonhumans alike— and finds its expression not solely in the 
so-called Mexican drug war, but also in slower violence of resource extraction, 
historical and current colonialism and state domination in a landscape of neolib-
eral dispossession (Meszaros 2018).
These ways of making time and space for soil and bones, as Puig de la 
Bellacasa says, could help “to reveal a diversity of more-than-human interdepen-
dent temporalities, disrupting the anthropocentric appeal of predominant timescales 
of technoscientific futurity, ” solutionism, and their reductive notion of responsibility 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2015). This taking care of environments, soils, and situated 
human-nonhuman relations by the buscadora  collectives, highlights the importance 
of “practices and experiences made invisible or marginalized by dominant, solutionist, 
short-term forms of technoscientific mobilization” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015, 692) 
that tends to permeate forensic science and crisis thinking in Mexico.
Attending to practices and relations that exist alongside but exceed contem-
porary forensic domains, we argue that this deep, geo-logical, more-than-human 
forensics led by local communities of buscadoras , emerges from self-organized prac-
tices as well as new sets of aesthetic and narrative sensibilities. Deep forensics could 
contribute to displacing the short-term time scale of the current Mexican forensic 
crisis and the exclusive human-centered episteme of forensic practice, to bring 
about new understandings of the intertwined contexts of ‘stratigraphic violence’ as 
is inscribed in the earthly records of contemporary Mexico.  But it remains emergent, 
rather than dominant.
The more-than-human alliances described by Aracelli and the politico-eco-
nomic-environmental concerns raised by buscadoras  searching in landscapes 
marred by extraction and drought are all-too-often dismissed as fanciful by 
experts. Some of the forensic experts we interviewed, saw this animism or magical 
sensibilities as signs as of the buscadoras  lack of scientific expertise. Forensics 
and its attendant justice in their terms came from state-based forensics focused 
on efficiency and accountability. Justice, for the buscadoras  remained a complex, 
multilayered concept: “What do we want? Justice!” The chant is the background of 
their marches demanding shifts in Mexican state forensic practice. But, as scholars 
working on the issue have shown, prosecution of perpetrators of disappearance 
is all but absent and the searching techniques of the collectives tacitly promise 
anonymity for tips about where bodies can be found (Aranda 2022; Martínez and 
Martínez 2022; Villarreal 2016). In our interviews and fieldwork, justice was artic-
ulated in affective terms, of returning the disappeared to their families or political 
terms, of holding the state and its officials responsible for fulfilling their duties. 
In this analysis, we offer another register for contemplating forms of justice, one 
which exceeds the narrow temporal dimensions of a crime and its prosecution, 
that is a more-than-human justice. In scholarship on the Anthropocene, climate 
justice, and decolonial social movements, scholars have pointed to the entangle-
ments between colonial violence and its legacies, environmental justice, structural 
PARALELOS191
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
violence, and multi-species relationalities arguing for the potential of new forms of 
solidarity and justice emerging from more temporally and relationally expansive 
frameworks (Fieuw, Foth, and Caldwell 2022; Tschakert 2022). Although a more-
than-human justice does not resolve or address the very real and violent lack of 
accountability in Mexico, it can and does also exist alongside juridical concep-
tualizations of justice. The buscadora  collectives’ experiments in deep forensics 
may offer new methods for articulating forms of justice that include these longer 
histories and multi-species communities.
References
1. Andermann, Jens. 2020. “Memories of Extractivism: Slow Violence, Terror, and Matter. ” 
Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 29 (4): 537-554. https://doi.org/10.1080/1356
9325.2020.1805589
2. Aranda, Salvador Maldonado. 2022. “‘Una tumba a donde llorar’: cuerpo, rituales y 
justicia en torno a la desaparición en México. ” Dilemas: Revista de Estudos de Conflito e 
Controle Social  15: 431-454. https://doi.org/10.4322 /dilemas.v15n2.45758
3. Armony, Ariel C. 2005. “Producing and Exporting State Terror: The Case of Argentina. ” 
When States Kill: Latin America, the US, and Technologies of Terror, edited by Cecilia 
Menjívar and Néstor Rodríguez, 305-334. https://doi.org/10.7560/706477-014
4. Brooks, Darío. 2022. “‘ A Monterrey le llegó el día cero’: la grave crisis de falta de agua que 
vive la segunda ciudad más poblada de México. ” BBC News Mundo, June 27. https://www.
bbc.com/mundo/noticias-america-latina-61917457
5. Carrión, Lydiette. 2018. La fosa de agua: desapariciones y feminicidios en el Río de Los 
Remedios . Mexico City: Debate.
6. Cordero, Natalia. 2019. “Mecanismo extraordinario de identificación forense, un camino 
para afrontar la crisis forense en México. ” Animal Político , December 12. https://www.
animalpolitico.com/res-publica/mecanismo-extraordinario-de-identificacion-forense-
un-camino-para-afrontar-la-crisis-forense-en-mexico/
7. Cruz-Santiago, Arely. 2017. “Forensic Citizens: The Politics of Searching for Disappeared 
Persons in Mexico. ” Doctoral Thesis, Faculty of Social Sciences and Health, Department 
of Geography, Durham University, Durham. http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/12315/
8. Davies, Thom. 2022. “Slow Violence and Toxic Geographies: ‘Out of Sight’ to 
Whom?” Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space 40 (2): 409-427. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2399654419841063
9. Fieuw, Walter, Marcus Foth, and Glenda Amayo Caldwell. 2022. “Towards a More-
than-Human Approach to Smart and Sustainable Urban Development: Designing for 
Multispecies Justice. ” Sustainability  14 (2): 948. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14020948
10. García-Deister, Vivette and Lindsay A. Smith. 2020. “Migrant Flows and Necro-
Sovereignty: The Itineraries of Bodies, Samples, and Data across the US-Mexico 
Borderlands. ” BioSocieties  15 (3): 420-437. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41292-019-00166-4
192
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
11. García-Deister, Vivette and Carlos Lopez-Beltrán. 2017. “ ADN en un país de muertos. 
La genética forense como medio y remedio. ” In Violencia y discurso, coordinated by 
Margarita Palacios Sierra, 157-181. Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México (UNAM).
12. García-Deister, Vivette and Lindsay Smith. 2016. “Ensamblajes de la ciencia forense en 
América Latina. ” In Aproximaciones a lo local y lo global: América Latina en la historia de 
la ciencia contemporánea, compiled by Gisela Mateos and Edna Suárez-Díaz, 269-300. 
Mexico City: Centro de Estudios Filosóficos, Políticos y Sociales Vicente Lombardo 
Toledano. https://www.centrolombardo.edu.mx/aproximaciones-a-lo-local-y-lo-global/
13. Gatti, Gabriel and David Casado-Neira. 2020. “Ecologies of Disappearance Today. 
Introduction. ” Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 29 (4): 501-505. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13569325.2021.1883571
14. Gatti, Gabriel, Ignacio Irazuzta, and María Martínez. 2020. “Inverted Exception. Ideas 
for Thinking about the New Disappearances through Two Case Studies. ” Journal of Latin 
American Cultural Studies  29 (4): 581-604. https://doi.org/10.1080/1356932 5.2020.1839869
15. Guevara Muñoz, Laura Viviana. 2019. “Which Are the Worst Countries in Human 
Rights?” Latin American Post, January 23. https://latinamericanpost.com/25972-which-
are-the-worst-countries-in-human-rights
16. Guglielmucci, Ana. 2020. “Necroscapes: The Political Life of Mutilated and Errant Bodies 
in the Rivers of Colombia. ” Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 29 (4): 555-580. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13569325.2021.1885356
17. Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Duke 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv11cw25q
18. Hernández Castillo, Rosalva. 2019. “La antropología jurídica feminista y sus aportes al trabajo 
forense con familiares de desaparecidos: alianzas y colaboraciones con ‘Las Rastreadoras de 
El Fuerte’ . ” Abya-Yala: Revista Sobre Acesso á Justiça e Direitos Nas Américas 3 (2): 94-119. 
https://doi.org/10.2 6512 /abyayala.v3i2 .23700
19. Isacson, Adam, Adriana Beltrán, and Maureen Meyer. 2019. “There Is a Crisis at the 
U.S.-Mexico Border. But it’s Manageable. ” WOLA  (blog). April 4. https://www.wola.org/
analysis/fix-us-mexico-border-humanitarian-crisis/
20. Martínez Mejía, Fátima Esther, and Mónica Natalia Martínez Mejía. 2022. “Los colectivos 
de víctimas y el acceso a la justicia en México. ” Revista de Direito da Cidade  14 (1): 
430-456. https://doi.org/10.12957/rdc.202 2.64700
21. Mendoza, Breny. 2006. “Los fundamentos no democráticos de la democracia: un 
enunciado desde Latinoamérica pos occidental. ” Revista Centroamericana de Ciencias 
Sociales (RCCS) 3 (2): 85-94. https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=2658177
22. Meszaros Martin, Hannah. 2018. “‘Defoliating the World. ’ Ecocide, Visual Evidence and 
‘Earthly Memory’ . ” Third Text 32 (2-3): 230-253.  https://doi.org/10.1080/0952 8822 .201
8.148652 6
23. Nixon, Rob. 2011. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Cambridge 
Harvard University Press.
PARALELOS193
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
24. Nkanga, Otobong. 2010. Fragilologist’s Predicament . Textile. Museum of Contemporary 
Art Kiasma. https://stsinfrastructures.org/content/series-fragilologist%E2 %80%99s-
predicament
25. Olarte-Sierra, María Fernanda and Tania Pérez-Bustos. 2020. “Careful Speculations: 
Toward a Caring Science of Forensic Genetics in Colombia. ” Feminist Studies  46 (1): 
158-177. https://doi.org/10.1353/fem.2020.0003
26. Ortiz, Silvia. 2019. “Sobre La Búsqueda En PATROCINIO, Torreón Coahuila. ” Presented 
at the En Presentación del proyecto Pedagogía Forense, EMAF, CDMX.
27. Pérez Rodríguez, Graciela. 2021. Extermination Sites in Tamaulipas from the Perspective 
of Citizen Action. Video. 69 min., October 14. Produced by Borderlands Technologies: 
Data, Practices, and Stories. School for the Future of Innovation in Society, Arizona State 
University. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vCO24bNff0o
28. Pérez Rodríguez, Graciela, Sara López Cerón, and Evencio Pérez Ruiz. 2020. “Protocolo 
estandarizado de búsqueda ciudadana en sitios de exterminio, ” protocol presented at the 
Segundo Encuentro de Buscadoras/es México, March 7, Tlaxcala, Mexico. https://www.
milynaliredcfc.org/protocolo-de-busqueda
29. Povinelli, Elizabeth A. 2016. Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism. Durham; 
London: Duke University Press. https://doi.org/10.1215/9780822 373810
30. Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2017. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human 
Worlds . London: University of Minnesota Press.
31. Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2015. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity 
and the Pace of Care. ” Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691-716. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851
32. Ramírez Uresti, Arlene. 2021. “Cambio climático y la migración que viene. ” Forbes México, 
November 2. https://www.forbes.com.mx/red-forbes-cambio-climatico-y-la-migracion-
que-viene/
33. Robledo Silvestre, Carolina. 2019. “Peinar la historia a contrapelo: reflexiones en torno a 
la búsqueda y Exhumación de fosas comunes en México. ” Encartes  2 (3): 13-42. https://
doi.org/10.29340/en.v2n3.62
34. Roitman, Janet. 2013. Anti-Crisis. Durham; London: Duke University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1515/9780822 377436
35. Rudnyckyj, Daromir. 2018. “Crisis Effects. ” Cultural Anthropology  33 (4): 547-557. https://
doi.org/10.14506/ca33.4.04
36. Segato, Rita Laura. [2006] 2013. La escritura en el cuerpo de las mujeres asesinadas en 
Ciudad Juárez: territorio, soberanía y crímenes de segundo Estado. Buenos Aires: Tinta 
Limón. http://repositorio.ciem.ucr.ac.cr/jspui/handle/123456789/149
37. Smith, Lindsay A. 2017. “The Missing, the Martyred and the Disappeared: Global 
Networks, Technical Intensification and the End of Human Rights Genetics. ” Social 
Studies of Science 47 (3): 398-416. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312716678489
38. Smith, Lindsay A. and Vivette García-Deister. 2017. “Capturing Los Migrantes 
Desaparecidos: Crisis, Unknowability, and the Making of the Missing. ” Perspectives on 
Science  25 (5): 680-697. https://doi.org/10.1162/POSC_a_00259
194
Antipod. Rev. Antropol. Arqueol. n.° 50 · Bogotá, enero-marzo 2023· ISSN 1900-5407 · e-ISSN 2011-4273 · pp. 173-195 
https://doi.org/10.7440/antipoda50.2023.08
39. Torres-Martínez, María. 2020. “ ADN Ciudadano: Autoorganización Forense y 
Tecnociencia Ciudadana En México. ” Doctoral Thesis, Facultad de Filosofía y Letras, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City. https://ru.dgb.unam.
mx/handle/DGB_UNAM/TES01000805887
40. Tschakert, Petra. 2022. “More-than-Human Solidarity and Multispecies Justice in the 
Climate Crisis. ” Environmental Politics  31 (2): 277-296. https://doi.org/10.1080/096440
16.2020.1853448
41. Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400873548
42. Villarreal Martínez, María Teresa. 2016. “Los colectivos de familiares de personas 
desaparecidas y la procuración de justicia. ” Intersticios Sociales  11: 1-28. https://doi.
org/10.55555/IS.11.94
43. Wagner, Sarah E. 2008. To Know Where He Lies: DNA Technology and the Search for Srebrenica’s 
Missing . Berkeley: University of California Press. https://doi.org/10.152 5/978052 0942 622
44. Yusoff, Kathryn. 2018. A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None. Minneapolis: The University 
of Minnesota Press. https://doi.org/10.5749/9781452 962054
María Torres
Ph.D. in Philosophical and Social Studies of Science and Technology from the National 
Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), Mexico. MA in Contemporary Art History 
and Visual Culture from the inter-institutional program offered jointly by Universidad 
Complutense, Autonomous University of Madrid, and Museo Nacional Centro de Arte 
Reina Sofía. BA in New Media and Communication Theory from the Carlos III University 
of Madrid with a joint degree at the School of Economics. Postdoctoral Fellow in the School 
for the Future of Innovation in Society at Arizona State University, United States.  Her re-
cent publications include: “Huesos y ADN: autoorganización  forense y ADN ciudadano en 
México, ”  in ADN, protagonista inesperado. Promesas y realidades de la investigación genética 
ante nuestra crisis forense, coord. by Vivette García-Deister (Mexico City: Siglo Veintiuno 
Editores, 2022), 135-158. https://orcid.org/0 000- 0003- 0663-4023 * mtorr110@asu.edu
Lindsay A. Smith
Ph.D and MA in Anthropology from Harvard University, Cambridge, United States. BA 
in Anthropology and Psychology from Rice University, Houston, United States. Assistant 
professor in the School for the Future of Innovation in Society at Arizona State University, 
United States. Senior Global Futures Scientist, Julie Ann Wrigley Global Futures Laboratory, 
Arizona State University, United States. Her recent publications include: (co-authored wi-
th Graciela S. Cabana, Marcela Mendoza, Hugo Delfino, Carla Martínez, Bárbara Mazza, 
Loruhama Teruya Rossi, and Francisco Di Fabio Rocca) “Crossing at y/Our Own Peril: 
PARALELOS195
Deep Forensics for a More-than-Human Justice
María Torres y Lindsay A. Smith 
Biocultural Boundary Crossing in Anthropology, ” American Anthropologist  124, n.o 3 (2022): 
479-489, https://doi.org/10. 1111/aman. 13729 ; (co-authored with Martín Pérez Comisso, 
Manuela Fonseca, Ayelen Cavalli, Octavio Muciño, Tomás Carroza, Mary Jane Parmentier, 
Jeanne Simon, Annel Vasquez, and Clara Tinoco) “Pedagogia descolonizante: experiências 
CTS que descentralizam nossas ideias CTS, ” CTS em Foco 4 (2021): 70-75, https://doi.
org/10.29327/ 233515. 1.4-9; (co-authored with Vivette García-Deister) “Genetic Syncretism: 
Latin American Forensics and Global Indigenous Organizing, ” BioSocieties  16, n.o 4 (2021): 
447-469, https://doi.org/10. 1057/s4129 2-021- 0026 3-3. https://orcid.org/0000- 0003- 0708-
0317 * lsmit101@asu.edu
