Review
Designing with non-humans for agricultural systems transformation: An 
interdisciplinary review and framework for reflection
Tatiana Moreiraa, Marieke E. Meestersb,c, Kristiaan P.W. Kokd, Katharine Leguna,  
Lenora Ditzlere, Laurens Klerkxa,f,*
aKnowledge, Technology & Innovation Group, Wageningen University, the Netherlands
bKnowledge, Transformation and Society, University of Twente, the Netherlands
cSchool of Sociological Studies, Politics and International Relations, University of Sheffield, United Kingdom
dAthena Institute, VU Amsterdam, the Netherlands
eFarming Systems Ecology Group, Wageningen University, the Netherlands
fDepartamento de Economía Agraria, Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, Universidad de Talca, Chile
HIGHLIGHTS GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
≡Agriculture must move beyond anthro -
pocentrism to tackle socio-ecological 
crises.
≡Participatory design is increasingly used 
to foster democratic systems design.
≡Non-humans are largely overlooked in 
participatory agricultural design 
processes.
≡Critical social sciences offer insights for 
fostering transformative systems design.
≡We propose practical interventions to 
better integrate non-humans in systems 
design.
ARTICLE INFO
Editor: Guillaume Martin
Keywords:
Participatory design
More-than-human
Agricultural systems
Sustainability transitions
Food systems transformation
Transdisciplinary research
Transition design
Relational approachesABSTRACT
CONTEXT: In response to growing concern over agriculture ’s contribution to climate and ecological crises, recent 
definitions of sustainable food systems have expanded beyond productivity to emphasize interconnected 
ecological and social dimensions. Responding to this challenge, agricultural system design scholars have moved 
beyond a focus on merely increasing productivity, supply, and profitability, to include goals such as animal 
welfare and ecological health. However, this selection often fails to move beyond anthropocentric needs and 
values. For design to be transformative, addressing who can participate in design and how participating actors 
relate to each other is critical. Notably, non-humans, which are foundational to agricultural systems, are largely 
overlooked as actors to be involved in design processes.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the article is to develop a framework to assist agricultural design scholars in mean -
ingfully integrating non-human needs in agricultural design processes by identifying and reflecting upon trade- 
*Corresponding author at: Departamento de Economía Agraria, Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, Universidad de Talca, Chile; Knowledge, Technology & Innovation 
Group, Wageningen University, the Netherlands.
E-mail address: laurens.klerkx@wur.nl (L. Klerkx). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Agricultural Systems
u{�~zkw! s{yo| kro>! ÐÐÐ1ow�o�t o~1m{y2w{mk�o 2kr�Þ
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2025.104512
Received 26 June 2025; Received in revised form 22 August 2025; Accepted 10 September 2025  Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
Available  online  16 September  2025  
0308-521X/©  2025  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier  Ltd. This is an open access  article  under  the CC BY license  ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ). 
Posthuman design
Bioeconomyoffs and providing methodological tools with the goal of contributing to just and sustainable transformations of 
agricultural systems.
METHODS: A critical review of the state-of-the-art of non-human participation in agricultural systems design 
research was done. This was followed by a narrative review, consulting several approaches from critical social 
sciences, such as transition studies, Actor Network Theory, animal studies, feminist posthumanism, post-
colonialism and indigenous scholarship to enhance our understanding of participation by non-humans. This 
analysis informed a synthesized framework for reflection.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The review points at three themes for better engagement of non-humans in 
design, notably regarding the role of (1) agency; (2) temporality; and (3) deliberation of non-humans. Based on 
these themes, practical steps forward are proposed to include non-humans in five design phases: problem defi-
nition; system analysis; design requirements; measurements; and selecting design solutions.
SIGNIFICANCE: By opening a dialogue between agricultural systems design and different bodies of research on 
inclusion of non-humans, this article aims to support agricultural systems designers in their reflection, making 
informed, context-sensitive decisions by fostering new ways of thinking and relating to non-humans as active 
rather than passive actors in these processes, thereby enhancing the transformative potential of agricultural 
systems research and design beyond anthropocentric perspectives.
1.Introduction
In response to growing concern over agriculture ’s contribution to 
climate and ecological crises (Campbell et al., 2017 ), recent definitions 
of sustainable food systems have expanded beyond productivity to 
emphasize interconnected ecological and social dimensions (FAO, F, 
2018 ; Rockstr om et al., 2020 ). For agricultural systems, as a crucial part 
of food systems, to be considered sustainable, they must now simulta -
neously address climate adaptation and mitigation, ecosystem and soil 
restoration, biodiversity conservation, nutritious food production, 
poverty eradication, resilience enhancement, inequality reduction, and 
promotion of political stability (Çakmakçı et al., 2023 ), in order to 
promote health and wellbeing of farmers, consumers, and the planet as a 
whole. These broad understandings of sustainable agriculture recognize 
that agriculture ’s enormous ecological, social, and economic influence 
must be leveraged to integrate a broad set of goals rather than priori -
tizing supply for affluent human populations (Caron et al., 2018 ; Trib-
aldos and Kortetm aki, 2022 ).
Agricultural systems design plays an important role in shaping 
agricultural and hence food system outcomes and therefore bears sub-
stantial responsibility for creating systems aligned with comprehensive 
sustainability goals. Responding to this challenge, design scholars have 
moved beyond a focus on merely increasing supply, production, and 
profitability (Martin et al., 2013 ). Participatory design has emerged in 
design scholarship as a process that increasingly incorporates diverse 
stakeholders and marginalized groups throughout the design stages, 
with the intention of yielding outcomes that are more integrated, 
effective, and just (Huttunen et al., 2022 ; Robertson and Simonsen, 
2012 ; Martin et al., 2013 ; Cerf et al., 2012 ). Building on the work in 
participatory design, a growing body of scholarship argues that to meet 
comprehensive sustainability goals we must extend participation 
beyond humans. Various scholars have called for acknowledging a wider 
range of values, stakes, and interests, highlighting the need to actively 
address the stakes of non-humans within participatory processes in 
agriculture (Bastian, 2017 ; de Bruin et al., 2024 ; Kok and Klerkx, 2023 ; 
Nicenboim et al., 2024 ; Tschersich and Kok, 2022 ).
An interdisciplinary body of work is therefore developing concepts 
and methodologies to meaningfully include non-humans in agricultural 
system transitions and design. Examples include recent extensions of the 
Agricultural Innovation Systems approach (Pigford et al., 2018 ; Plum -
mer et al., 2024 ) and work on sustainability transitions in agricultural 
systems (Contesse et al., 2021; Vermunt et al., 2020 ), where non- 
humans are now considered as participants in innovation processes 
next to humans, and Reflexive Interactive Design (Bos and Grin, 2008 ; 
Romera et al., 2020 ), where non-humans are considered stakeholders 
with needs in the design process. Within this lineage of work, two 
recurring challenges have emerged. First, agricultural systems inher -
ently present tradeoffs between goals, including between human and non-human needs and interests, as these systems fundamentally inter-
vene in food webs where life, death, consumption, and ecological pro-
cesses are intertwined. Second, despite efforts to incorporate natural 
actors in design processes, both methodological and conceptual tools 
remain limited for including non-humans as meaningful participants. 
Particularly integrating non-human considerations beyond anthropo -
centric ideals and utilitarian lenses has been less conceptualized so far. 
Even within nature-inclusive agriculture frameworks, conventional 
productivity aims often remain the standard to which nature must 
accommodate (Runhaar, 2017 ). While non-humans are the foundation 
of agricultural systems, they remain largely overlooked as actors to be 
meaningfully and dynamically involved in design processes (Pigford 
et al., 2018 ). Such superficial engagement with goals beyond production 
may mitigate damage but risks reinforcing and prolonging conventional 
agricultural paradigms (Kothari et al., 2014 ).
We recognize that agricultural systems will always present tradeoffs 
between human and non-human needs and interests. However, we 
contend that the overlooked non-human element of agricultural systems 
design (ASD) is a critical aspect for more effective agri-food transitions 
that meet comprehensive sustainability goals. In view of this gap, this 
article develops a framework to assist agricultural design scholars in 
identifying and reflecting upon trade-offs and to provide methodological 
tools to engage with natural entities and meaningfully integrate non- 
human needs in agricultural design processes. To do so, we consult 
disciplines which have further developed on the theme of more-than- 
human inclusion, including transition studies, Actor Network Theory, 
animal studies, feminist posthumanism, postcolonialism and indigenous 
scholarship. These disciplines have developed diverse and complemen -
tary theory-based practices to meaningfully engage with natural 
entities.
Our article continues as follows. After explaining our methods in 
Section 2, in Section 3we provide a brief interdisciplinary state-of-the- 
art review of non-human inclusion in agricultural design processes. 
Next, in Section 4we introduce concepts and methodological tools to 
foster engagement with and by non-humans. Then, in Section 5we 
present a reflective framework to assist agricultural systems designers in 
better participating with non-humans based on five design phases 
(problem definition, system analysis, design requirements, measure -
ment practices, design solutions). We conclude by critically discussing 
the framework ’s utility for integrated sustainability and its limitations 
and propose questions for further research.
2.Definition and methods
2.1. Non-human working definition
Non-humans can be defined broadly to include any being or entity 
that is not human, whether it be animals, plants, ecosystems, water T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
2 
bodies, tools, or systems like the economy. We conceptualize non- 
humans on a continuum, from natural to human-made (Fig. 1).
On one side of the spectrum, for example, there might be a wild 
animal and at the other end a tractor, with a whole range of actors in 
between. While it is beyond the scope of the article to engage with de-
bates over artificiality and human-nature binaries here, for the purposes 
of this article it is helpful to reflect on the extent of human intervention 
in the creation of non-humans. There is a long tradition of research on 
the role of human-made materials in agriculture (such as machinery or 
artificial fertilizers) and how they shape and co-evolve with agricultural 
systems (Glover, 2022 ; Jansen and Vellema, 2011 ; Rosin et al., 2017 ) 
and through actual use by farmers, in processes which have been 
referred to as ‘innofusion ’ (Fleck, 1993 ) and ‘coupled innovation ’ 
(Salembier et al., 2020 ). Many non-humans in agricultural systems are 
somewhere in between the two ends of the continuum, for example 
crops are both naturally occurring, yet also commonly genetically bred 
by humans. This notion of artificiality of nature in farming was already 
noted in 1969 by Herbert Simon (Simon, 1996 ), who wrote in his 
seminal work ‘The sciences of the artificial ’ that “A forest may be a 
phenomenon of nature; a farm certainly is not. The very species upon 
which we depend for our food our corn and our cattle are artifacts of our 
ingenuity ” (Simon, 1996 : 3). This debate on the boundaries between 
naturalness and artificiality has been given a new twist with reflections 
on the agency of autonomous technologies such as Artificial Intelligence 
and Digital Twins in the sense that they aim to fully mimic the natural 
world and take over agency from the farmer (Geiselmann et al., 2023 ; 
Higgins et al., 2017 ; Pylianidis et al., 2021 ; Ryan, 2023 ; Verdouw et al., 
2021 ). As philosophers have argued, hybrids between humans, natural 
non-humans and technologies, are becoming a new ontological category 
(Blok and Gremmen, 2018 ; Holy-Luczaj and Blok, 2021 ; Forlano, 2017; 
Korenhof et al., 2021 ), and some have empirically studied in the case of 
precision agriculture what they refer to as ‘cyborg animals ’ and ‘cyborg 
farmers ’ (Søraa and Vik, 2021 ; Van der Velden et al., 2024 ).
2.2. Methods
A critical review format was followed to critically analyze the state- 
of-the art in non-human participation in ASD for Section 3. This format 
allows for highlighting strengths and weaknesses in the literature 
without performing an exhaustive review (Par˘e and Kitsiou, 2017 ). To 
move beyond the state-of-the-art and broaden the scope on non-human 
participation in ASD, a narrative review approach was followed for 
Section 4, as we aimed to identify what has been written on non-human 
participation in a variety of disciplines of relevance to, but not yet 
considered to a large degree, in ASD and identify common narratives 
(Par˘e and Kitsiou, 2017 ). Through our narrative review we identified 
emerging themes and assessed the uptake of the concept of non-human 
participation in various critical social science fields such as science and 
technology studies, transition studies, and indigenous scholarship with 
relevance to the field of agriculture and the potential to inform ASD, 
which have also figured in other reviews of non-human participation in 
design (Forlano, 2017 ). See also Appendix A: Supplementary materials, 
in which a deeper elaboration is provided of these different fields.
Google Scholar was used to find a broader range of literature, both 
peer-reviewed and grey literature. For the state-of-the-art (Section 3) the 
following search terms were used, informed by the authors ’ knowledge 
of the field: “design ” OR “co-design ” OR “re-design ” AND “farming ”; “agriculture ”; “agricultural systems ”; “participatory ”; “participation ”; 
“more-than-human ”; “posthumanism ”; “non-humans ”. To identify rele-
vant literature outside of ASD (Section 4) the following search terms 
were used, informed by the authors ’ transdisciplinary knowledge across 
disciplines: “more-than-human ” OR “non-humans ” AND “participa -
tory”; “participation ”; “communication ”; “deliberation ”; “temporality ”; 
“agency ”; “design ”; “ANT ”; “MLP ”; “decolonial ”; “indigenous ”; “care”; 
“feminist ”; “posthumanism ”; “materialism ”; “relational ”; “sustainability 
transitions ”. A snowballing method was also used, finding articles 
through citations in articles that came up in our search and through 
special issues that came up in our search. One complementary interview 
was held with Gabriela de la Rosa, an academic studying trans -
disciplinary participatory research methods, to deepen our under -
standing of a method to include non-humans in human decision-making 
processes. Additionally, works on the topic already known to the 
authorship were included, resulting in a multidisciplinary approach 
with author backgrounds in sustainability transitions, participatory 
design, agronomy, agroecology, feminist posthumanism, sociology, and 
political ecology.
Both peer-reviewed and grey literature were included. Searches were 
performed in English, thus only English-written material was included. 
There was no time range set in the search due to the emergent nature of 
the topic. Abstracts were screened for relevance to the review before 
reading full texts. If non-humans were not addressed in the research 
(directly or indirectly), the text was not included. This review was done 
iteratively; themes were identified through the process of reading and 
analyzing literature, and the continuation of the search was informed by 
the insights found in the review process.
While the selected disciplines have divergent backgrounds and un-
derpinnings, we take a crosscutting approach to examine how different 
perspectives, disciplines, and knowledge traditions interfere with one 
another to generate novel patterns of understanding. Moreover, because 
all authors are from Western backgrounds, we explicitly sought to 
include scholarship from non-Western scholars and build on non- 
Western epistemologies during the review process to counter potential 
Western-oriented biases.
3.Current participation of non-humans in agricultural systems 
design
3.1. The distinction between material and representational participation 
of non-humans
Participatory design approaches have gained traction in ASD to 
foster more democratic, transformative, and societally relevant design, 
as they engage stakeholders in consultation and knowledge co- 
production processes. Since stakeholders tend to diverge in interests, 
participatory processes also encourage negotiations between sectors and 
different stakeholder groups, for example on what issue is at stake, the 
nature of the problem, and the solution directions (Leeuwis, 1999, 
2000 ). In ASD, these include approaches such as participatory design of 
decision support and systems analysis tools (Carberry et al., 2002 ; Cerf 
et al., 2012 ; Martin et al., 2011 ; Ditzler et al., 2018 ; Rose et al., 2016 ), 
agricultural production systems design and re-design (Brun et al., 2021 ; 
Dogliotti et al., 2004 ; Kropff et al., 2001 ; Le Gal et al., 2011 ; Romera 
et al., 2020 ) and design of agri-food system transitions and innovation 
ecosystems (Meynard et al., 2017 ; Steinke et al., 2022 ; Wolfert et al., 
2023 ).
Participatory design approaches generally involve actors such as 
farmers, government officials, and private sector companies, and these 
are believed to enhance applicability and ownership of the proposed 
design, increasing adoption and use, and have also been seen to better 
forecast and anticipate potential social effects of food system changes 
(Berthet et al., 2018 ; Elzen and Bos, 2019 ; Steinke et al., 2022 ). How-
ever, participatory processes are not without conflict and struggle: they 
are inherently political, and can reinforce power imbalances amongst 
 Fig. 1.Natural - human-made non-human continuum.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
3 
participants, not least of all through top-down decisions about who can 
participate and how (Barnaud et al., 2010 ; Tschersich and Kok, 2022 ; 
Turnhout, 2024 ). Such power imbalances jeopardize the democratic 
potential of participation, as these processes tend to exclude issues or 
actors that threaten the goals of the participatory process or those 
leading it (Meesters, 2023 ). This, we believe, also has implications for 
the inclusion of non-humans in participatory design.
In this subsection, we review the ways in which non-humans have 
been considered in participatory agricultural systems design so far. 
Agricultural design frameworks already include non-human consider -
ations when they determine the best conditions to grow crops and ani-
mals to ensure food production or to enhance, streamline, or simplify 
production processes from an agronomist, productivist perspective 
(Gerber and Hiernaux, 2022 ; Grahmann et al., 2024 ; Pelzer et al., 2020 ; 
Reckling et al., 2020 ). The process in which distinct needs are accom -
modated (or not), including those of plants, animals, machinery, and 
soil, can be seen as a material form of participation. Following ideas on 
agency of non-humans (Latour, 2007 ), material objects, plants, in-
frastructures, and animals can be seen to co-shape physical reality in a 
process that can be described as a negotiation between various humans 
and nonhumans (Marres and Lezaun, 2011 ; Barry, 2013; Higgins et al., 
2017, 2023 ), challenging that such negotiation only happens between 
human actors as commonly proposed (Leeuwis, 2000 ). Non-humans 
communicate about their needs in physical ways: through how they 
grow and reproduce, the colors of their leaves, whether they accom -
modate other forms of life, or by becoming rusty or failing to work in the 
case of machinery. Farmers are implicated in this negotiation when they 
attend to the needs of crops, animals, and machinery, and by adjusting 
situations to ensure crops, animals, and machinery thrive in specific 
ways. Such direct, bio-physical participation from non-humans thus 
shapes agricultural systems in the place where the non-humans reside 
and exert influence, a form of participation which we henceforth refer to 
as material participation. This material participation is a continuous and 
always occurring process, currently predominantly shaped by produc -
tivist goals, which limits how non-human participation can unfold.
Besides material participation, ASD increasingly draws on repre -
sentational approaches to broaden the set of actors involved in design 
decisions. Representation most commonly occurs in co-design strategies, 
in which agricultural experts (i.e. farmers, consultants, and scientists), 
public officials, and local stakeholders (Berthet et al., 2016 ) who 
represent the interests and needs of other actor groups who are not 
directly included in the co-design process, including plants, animals, and 
machinery (i.e. veterinarians communicating the needs of a dairy cow 
through their expert knowledge). While representational processes tend 
to enlarge the set of actors and relationships that can influence agri-
cultural system design, and these processes can, at times, lead to 
increased understanding of and interest in each (human) groups’ needs 
(Turnhout et al., 2020 ), we notice that the non-humans in these relations 
are not generally considered as having agency per se, nor that their in-
terests are meaningfully considered as part of the processes. Within 
representational participatory processes, non-humans are often consid -
ered rather passively, either as background conditions or as objects of 
production that can be adjusted at hand to conform to productivist in-
terests (Meesters, 2023 ). Ultimately, they are either rendered as a 
collection of parts that can be optimized and controlled, or as uncon -
trollable conditions like the weather. Therefore, we contend that the 
goal of both the negotiation of interests and the subjectification of non- 
humans matters: most of these processes are geared towards maximized 
production while the interests in non-human flourishing and prosperity 
are not taken into account.
Nevertheless, some notable exceptions exist that work towards 
designing agricultural systems for transformative change and just out-
comes which more actively consider non-humans, which we will discuss 
in the next subsection. We follow the distinction between the earlier 
defined material approaches, which point to physical negotiations be-
tween and amongst humans and non-humans in fields, stables, and forests (Meesters, 2023 ), and representational approaches, which are 
characterized by human or technological representation for non-human 
needs in the design process (e.g. scientist, farmer, or model). Before 
discussing these approaches to non-human inclusion in ASD, it is 
important to stipulate that rather than defining an end goal (e.g. more- 
than-human justice, environmental sustainability), we present various 
approaches that steer towards acknowledging complexity and consid -
ering the interests of non-humans, while they may differ in their 
formulation and conceptualization of goals.
3.2. Examples of material and representational participation of non- 
humans in ASD
Representational approaches are commonly found in the literature 
on non-human participation in ASD, such as case studies using methods 
like the Reflexive Interactive Design approach (RIO) or the Describe 
Explain Explore Design approach (DEED), to represent livestock and 
crops (Moreira et al., 2023 ; Puente-Rodríguez et al., 2019 ; Romera et al., 
2020 ; van Weeghel et al., 2021 ), via various human experts that speak 
on their behalf. Through setting design requirements, some studies have 
incorporated the needs of non-humans in the design process, including 
those of crops (Moreira et al., 2023 ), cows (Romera et al., 2020 ), laying 
hens (van Weeghel et al., 2016 ), and environments more generally 
(Kanter et al., 2016 ; Prost et al., 2018 ; Quinio et al., 2022 ; Romera et al., 
2020 ; van Weeghel et al., 2016 ). Others address non-human interests 
through design objectives, including those of biodiversity (Juventia 
et al., 2022 ; Quinio et al., 2022 ) or water bodies (Murgue et al., 2015 ; 
Quinio et al., 2022 ). Quinio et al. (2022) utilized design-support tools to 
help participants visualize the object of design, for example cards to 
represent mycorrhizal networks that the participants had to keep alive 
and consider how different design choices would affect their mycor -
rhizal network. They also defined design goals with requirements, i.e. 
develop mycorrhizal networks, or a maximum threshold for nitrate 
concentrations. Building on DEED, Juventia et al. (2022) propose a 
framework for spatio-temporal arable field design which incorporates 
farmers’ dreams and objectives alongside mechanical constraints and 
ecological interactions as decision criteria for field designs. They 
explicitly weighed design options to diversify crops based on how well 
they facilitate desirable ecological relations, e.g. pest-natural enemy 
interactions or soil rest vs. disturbance, although the value of these 
ecological outcomes is largely evaluated from an anthropocentric 
perspective (ecosystem services).
We also found material approaches that took it a step further, pre-
senting ways to actively participate with non-humans by fostering more 
complex, horizontal, and affective relations between humans and non- 
humans in agricultural systems. Ditzler and Driessen (2022) explored 
the design of automated tools for agroecological farming systems, asking 
what “might come out when various actors considered automation and 
designed tools specifically for an agroecological paradigm in which 
complexity is embraced, ecological cycles are fostered, and the bound -
aries between binaries such as crop/weed and labor/fulfillment are 
blurred” (p. 25). They engaged with a variety of human actors to explore 
this question, including farmers, technology developers, scientists, and 
designers. While they did not explicitly engage with non-humans as 
actors, they demonstrated that to wholly adopt an agroecological 
perspective (i.e., nature-based, socio-ecologically just) on farming sys-
tems design, entangled relations between humans and non-humans 
(including machines) must be considered as central to the design pro-
cess, as others have also argued looking at design of harvesting robots 
(Legun et al., 2023 ).
Several articles referred to “conversations” or “dialogues” between 
designers and objects of designs. Cerf et al. (2012) argue for the 
importance of considering the ‘use situation’ in the design of decision 
support tools, describing a dialogue between humans, tools, and their 
use situations. Prost et al. (2018) describe an iterative process to the 
implementation of design concepts, citing an ongoing “conversation” T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
4 
between the farm (and the non-humans within it) and the designers (the 
farmers and researchers). When solutions did not result in anticipated 
outcomes, the design was altered accordingly, which they refer to as 
‘adaptive management’. Quinio et al. (2022) identified negotiations 
between the farmer and the farm in the design process, for example 
organizing tilling around when thistle roots are least developed and 
sowing rapeseed earlier in the season so that the crop is strong enough to 
withstand insects in the fall. They reflected on the interaction between 
the designers and the tools and how the tools afforded knowledge 
sharing. They found that visual tools used to represent objects of design 
were useful for allowing designers to better understand the object and 
the consequences of design solutions for the object, resulting in a 
“reflective conversation” with the representation.
Another interesting way of considering non-humans in ASD can be 
found in the studies using the notion of “nature inclusive” design, even if 
it comes with challenges and conflicts. Nature-inclusive design, as a 
concept and policy priority, has generated tools for centering non- 
humans and multi-species approaches in systems design, especially in 
urban design (Gualtieri et al., 2023 ). It has largely focused on the 
incorporation of non-human species habitats in human occupied spaces 
(Sella et al., 2022 ) and advancing a more-than-human approach to 
consider multi-species relations in making design choices. For example, 
some insects may be seen as pests by humans but are essential to the 
vitality of other species who depend on them for food (Gualtieri et al., 
2023 ). In farming, the language of nature-inclusive agriculture has 
gained significant traction, but also leads to challenges and conflicts. 
The title ‘nature-inclusive’ itself implies that nature and agriculture are 
separate entities, potentially perpetuating a binary view of non-humans 
as inferior to humans and human enterprises (Merchant, 2006 ). Its 
resonance with historical bifurcations between production and conser -
vation means habitats for species are cultivated alongside productive 
spaces, and production choices that harm species are discouraged, but a 
more integrated approach remains politically and economically chal-
lenging (Runhaar, 2017 ; Vermunt et al., 2022 ).
Perhaps the most embodied design method in ASD that builds on 
place-based material non-human participation is permaculture design. 
Permaculture is an integrative, systems-thinking framework and method 
for ASD that is based on respecting and integrating the relational and 
intrinsic qualities of plants and animals to stimulate nature-based ap-
proaches to farming (Ferguson and Lovell, 2014 ). Permaculture design 
methods leverage natural ways in which plants relate, for instance by 
working on natural tendencies of plants to cover the soil, use all the 
available sunlight, and make efficient use of water (Ferguson and Lovell, 
2014 ; Roux-Rosier et al., 2018 ). These methods can be called partici -
patory because they work with non-humans’ inclinations to determine 
what systems can work in specific localities (cf. Meijer, 2019 ). In other 
words, permaculture stimulates embodied, material negotiations be-
tween humans and their goals and needs (i.e. food production, aes-
thetics), and non-human needs and preferences (i.e. water, perenniality, 
genetic diversity). This differs from other design approaches because 
permaculture claims to work with non-humans (to a certain degree), by 
giving space to non-human agency, instead of imposing control over 
plants, animals. The main differences in this approach, then, are a 
challenge to the human – nature binary, a different conceptualization of 
agency, and adjusted power relations between humans and non-humans 
(Ferguson and Lovell, 2014 ; Roux-Rosier et al., 2018 ).
To build on previous work on participation in ASD, the following 
section draws on insights from other disciplines that have advanced both 
theoretically and practically in more-than-human inclusion, to critically 
analyze the current state of non-human participation in ASD.
4.Interdisciplinary insights on active participation of non- 
humans
While much has been done to bring participation, including repre -
sentation of non-humans, to ASD, we look to bring insights from the critical social sciences to further the transformative potential of the 
field. The critical social sciences facilitate transformative change in 
sustainability transitions by politicizing and pluralizing debates and 
supporting structural and transformative system change, offering valu-
able insights (Massarella et al., 2021 ). Specifically, we look to disciplines 
that have advanced theoretically and practically on more-than-human 
inclusion. While non-humans are often considered passively in ASD, 
we argue that involving them more actively could lead to more trans -
formative outcomes.
We draw on concepts and approaches that are developed in various 
fields, including work informed by transition studies, Actor Network 
Theory, animal studies, feminist posthumanism, postcolonialism and 
indigenous scholarship.1We do not aim to give a comprehensive over-
view of these fields nor contend that each field is neatly separated or fits 
into one fixed box. Instead, we draw on concepts and conceptual in-
terpretations that we find benefit the scope of this article. We identified 
the themes of agency, temporality, and deliberation as running 
threads in this literature and will follow these threads through the rest of 
the article. For a deeper elaboration on the concepts considered, see the 
Supplementary materials in Appendix A.
To explore the first theme, agency, we engaged with approaches that 
recognize the active role of non-humans in shaping the world, through 
either concepts, theoretical perspectives or methodologies. While con-
ceptualizations and implications differ, this work considers non-humans 
as influential and active participants in social, ecological, and techno -
logical systems, which challenges earlier deterministic and anthropo -
centric approaches. These approaches move, in more or lesser extent, 
away from the idea that non-humans are conditions or material foun-
dations that influence social (i.e. human) processes and change, towards 
an understanding of non-humans as agentic bodies that engage in ac-
tivities and relations. Non-humans including pests, diseases, soils, ani-
mals, waters, plants, and machines are increasingly considered to 
actively co-produce reality with other non-humans as well as with 
human beings (Campbell, 2020 ; Contesse et al., 2021 ; Legun, 2015a,b ; 
Rosin et al., 2017 ). For human-made non-humans such as technology 
and machines, agency is shaped both by the intentions, assumptions, 
and biases of their human creators, reproducing the intentions, as-
sumptions and biases of their human creators and by its societal uptake 
and reproduction (Latour, 1992 ), in which users also exercise agency 
and can greatly exceed or deviate from what the designers originally 
intended (Glover, 2022 ; Jansen and Vellema, 2011 ; Rosin et al., 2017 ).
The second theme we identified as a common thread amongst liter-
ature considering non-humans is temporality. Amongst a wide range of 
theoretical approaches, we identified a common critique of the domi -
nant linear, human-centered, productivist conception of time that pri-
oritizes efficiency and in which conventional design practices are often 
rooted (Bessai et al., 2024 ; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015 ). These varying 
views share a critique of the hegemonic human-centered time scales we 
work in and recognize the imbalances this creates between humans and 
non-humans. Thus, involving non-humans could include involving non- 
1As western raised and trained white scholars and in the context of this 
article, we can neither do justice to the depth and breadth of Indigenous bodies 
of work, nor respectfully place it in the colonial histories of violence and 
displacement in which western and indigenous knowledge are entangled (cf. 
Watts, 2016 ). Nevertheless, we would like to take up Kimmerer’s (2013) sug-
gestion that indigenous scholarship can help to inspire also non-indigenous 
scholars towards ways to build more-than-human societies (p. 9), and that 
engagement is needed to dialogue between epistemic worlds (Sundberg, 2014 ). 
For ethical engagement, we look to the concept of ‘Ethical Space’ by Ermine 
(2007) , which highlights the importance of indigenous self-determination, 
mutual respect between different knowledge systems, and addressing power 
imbalances. In this article, we aspire to learn from and communicate about this 
important scholarship, without reinforcing colonialist appropriation, by 
encouraging scholars to be sensitive to place-based histories, different knowl -
edge systems, and more-than-human presences.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
5 
human timescales, rather than imposing human timescales on non- 
humans. For participatory design, this means re-focusing and re- 
imagining the timescales of design projects can aid in fostering more 
inclusive participatory processes (Pschetz et al., 2024 ).
The third theme we identified was deliberation. Deliberative pro-
cesses traditionally emphasize human participation and the use of logic 
and reason to reach collective decisions.2Such human qualities have 
been recently criticized, leading towards other types of models and 
practices that allow for including non-humans in deliberative processes. 
While many scholars share a recognition of the need to involve non- 
humans in deliberative processes, they differ in their views on the 
extent and methods. Some scholarship focuses on the ways in which 
non-humans already deliberate materially, with humans and other non- 
humans, while others consider how to further involve non-humans in 
discursive, democratic, political processes, mirroring the focus on ma-
terial and representational processes. In our discussion below, we 
include both types of deliberation to showcase a variety of methods that 
may suit a range of ASD applications.
We argue that addressing the themes of agency, temporality, and 
deliberation with an interdisciplinary lens can foster better participation 
by non-humans in design processes. In the next section we elaborate 
further on how to engage with these themes in the context of partici -
patory ASD and conclude with a framework for reflection.
5.A framework for reflection to better include non-humans in 
design processes
In this section we offer practical interventions for better inclusion of 
non-humans in various phases within a design process, considering the 
themes of agency, temporality, and deliberation. Design approaches 
differ in how design phases are defined and organized (Cerf et al., 2012 ; 
Kropff et al., 2001 ; Martin et al., 2013 ; Meynard et al., 2017 ; Prost, 
2021 ), and in ASD scholarship several genealogies of design reasoning 
can be identified (Salembier et al., 2018 ). Here we focus on a general -
ized approach that draws heavily on the RIO methodology (Bos et al., 
2009; Elzen and Bos, 2019 ): problem definition, system analysis, design 
requirements, measurement practices, and design concept. While we 
have organized this section in a linear way, we do not mean to convey 
that design processes should be linear, especially when including non- 
humans. Design processes should be reflexive, iterative, and flexible if 
they wish to involve non-humans as actors, as they require the ability to 
respond to unpredictable or unexpected expressions of agency and 
outcomes of interconnections (Hoppe, 2019 ). Additionally, inherent to 
the literature we have reviewed for this article, these insights are not 
meant to provide ready-to-use tools that can be applied in any context. 
Our understanding of practicality is not about delivering a framework or 
solutions that shift decision-making and ethical considerations away 
from designers. Rather, we seek to support agricultural systems de-
signers in their reflection, making informed, context-sensitive decisions 
by fostering new ways of thinking and relating to non-humans. In this 
section we provide relevant examples of concepts used in practice, per 
highlighted design phase, to guide designers looking to implement these 
concepts. While many of the concepts addressed are versatile and can be 
applied across multiple design phases, we highlight them at the phases 
they are most relevant with practical examples. Table 1presents a 
framework for reflection for researchers and designers that highlights the key findings from this section and offers guiding questions to address 
the themes of agency, temporality, and deliberation at each explored 
design phase. In what follows, we will further explain the framework.
5.1. Problem definition and design objectives
The problem definition and design objectives are foundational to a 
design process and therefore this is a critical phase to reflect on how non- 
humans are considered. Inherent to design objectives are underlying 
problem definitions. For example, imagine a system where weeds are a 
persistent barrier to yield (problem definition). The objective might be 
to improve crop production. Based on the literature we consulted, it is 
important to pause and consider our worldview, words, and concepts 
that form problem definition and objectives. Continuing with our 
example, how has the objective of production been defined in such a 
way that it defines other plants as weeds and barriers to that objective? 
How has a monoculture model of agriculture cultivated weeds, figura -
tively and literally? How does using the term ‘weed ’ color our experi -
ence of a plant, and restrict the potential design solutions to a crop-weed 
conflict? Can we reframe viewing certain species as problems, to 
recognizing their role within an ecosystem?
By pausing and reflecting on questions regarding problem definition 
and design objectives, designers can consider and open up what it means 
to involve both human and non-humans as participants and deliberators 
during this phase of design. This resembles processes in which farmers 
are involved in defining goals for their own wellbeing. In an effort to 
design a farming system with improved animal welfare, van Veen and 
Helvoirt (2024) exemplify how to use a citizen assembly to negotiate or 
deliberate with dairy cows over design choices. In this case they used 
human actors as proxies for the cows; other representational approaches 
such as personas can also be used to include non-human voices in 
deliberative processes when discussing the problem definition, design 
objectives, and in other design phases (Frawley and Dyson, 2014 ; 
Tomitsch et al., 2021 ).
Representational approaches can be complemented by embodiment 
exercises to better imagine non-human struggles and goals (van Bommel 
and Boonman-Berson, 2022 ), and such embodiment exercises have 
already been used in approaches such as role playing games (Dernat 
et al., 2025; Ditzler et al., 2018; Harms et al., 2025 ). Embodiment ex-
ercises for including non-humans have been developed under various 
headers and in various forms, including the Council of Care (De La Rosa 
et al., 2025 ; Ressiore and de la Rosa, 2024 ), De-moo-cracy (van Veen 
and Helvoirt, 2024 ), or personas by human proxies (Frawley and Dyson, 
2014 ). On discussing the Council of Care, de la Rosa describes how 
embodiment helps uncover power hierarchies amongst humans and 
non-humans as well as human – non-human relations (G. de la Rosa, 
personal communication, September 12, 2024). De la Rosa used a 
meditation exercise to have participants embody different non-humans 
before opening a council where humans would speak as if they were 
the non-human they were embodying. While this exercise does not 
include listening to non-human voices directly, it helps participants 
understand their own relationship to non-humans and their biases to-
wards them. They had better results when doing the embodiment ex-
ercise outdoors in the ecosystem of the non-humans they were 
embodying, rather than in an indoor office setting or online (G. de la 
Rosa, personal communication, September 12, 2024).
It’s important to note that the language of ‘problem ’ and ‘solution ’ 
has itself been critiqued as an anthropocentric, scientific way of framing. 
This linear approach, common in design processes, inherently centers 
human needs and objectives and often oversimplifies complex, inter-
woven challenges. In doing so, it risks reproducing the root causes of 
these challenges by failing to address them in meaningful ways 
(Bakırlıo ˚glu and Yetis¸, 2024 ). These framings should be interrogated 
and destabilized to allow for more holistic articulations of intentions for 
change.2Deliberation in this context refers to decision making processes amongst 
participants in participatory design. Deliberation is one model in political 
theory, but not the only approach to democratic decision making. For more- 
than-human decision making, other frameworks may also be useful, such as 
Chantal Mouffe ’s Agonistic Pluralism (Mouffe, 1999 ) which focuses on navi-
gating trade-offs and conflicts, rather than focusing on consensus-building. 
Keeping to the scope of this work, we do not discuss the different democratic 
models of deliberation.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
6 
5.2. System analysis
System analyses are used to map out the elements within a system 
and the inter-relation between system elements, and there are many 
approaches to map, diagnose and assess agricultural systems from 
different angles such as system components, material flows, system 
resilience, and innovation capacity (e.g. Conway, 1985 ; Hengsdijk et al., 
1998 ; Kropff et al., 2001 ; Jones, 2014 ; Schut et al., 2015 ; Meuwissen 
et al., 2019 ). Performing a system analysis helps designers get an 
overview of how the system in question operates and where system 
improvements can be made. Generally, a technical approach is taken 
where, in the case of ASD, natural and mechanical processes are 
described. Taking a relational approach to systems analyses can uncover 
overlooked dynamics between non-humans by viewing these actors as 
intertwined rather than isolated. Key to adopting a relational approach 
is the recognition that farming systems are dynamic: not only do 
farmers ’ own goals and practices evolve, but also relations between non- 
human elements change frequently (e.g. pest and disease cycles), as well 
as markets, technologies, and more (Darnhofer, 2020; West et al., 2020 ). 
Delineations of what constitutes the system to be designed must therefore be conceptualized in a way that accounts for this dynamism; at 
a minimum, this could mean adopting an iterative approach to system 
definition. To include more relational ways of describing non-human 
system elements, actor-network theory (ANT) can be used to broaden 
how designers see agency amongst system elements and how system 
elements influence system dynamics (Yaneva, 2009 ). For example, ANT 
can help highlight how a farmer ’s decision to alter sowing schedules 
based on weather conditions, such as rain, is not solely a human-made 
decision but is shaped through interactions with the environment. 
Building on ANT, assemblage theory can be used to further help de-
signers identify relevant, often overlooked, non-human stakeholders in 
the design process, thus facilitating their inclusion (Higgins et al., 2023; 
Youn and Baek, 2024 ). Assemblage theory brings an awareness of 
temporalities to ANT, by addressing the dynamic and ever-evolving 
nature of relationships amongst system actors.
The concept of affect, which highlights the capacity of entities to 
affect their surroundings, can further strengthen the process of recog -
nizing the interconnectedness between system actors. Affect brings to 
light the inter-subjectivity between humans and non-humans, giving a 
fuller picture of how humans and non-humans influence each other in Table 1 
Framework for reflection, presenting reflective questions for research and design and relevant concepts and methods to support reflection across design phases (phases 
based on a generalized approach that draws heavily on the RIO methodology (Bos et al., 2009 )).
Phase Agency Temporality Deliberation Relevant concepts and methods
Problem 
definition and 
design 
objectivesRegarding the problem definition, 
why is this a problem and for 
whom? 
Whose agency is being fostered and 
whose is hindered in the framing of 
the problem definition and design 
objectives?What time scales are problems and 
objectives defined on and how does that 
influence the outcome of the design 
process?How do other beings perceive the 
problem and how do they act on it? 
Which human and non-human actors 
can shape the problem definition, and 
which cannot?Citizen assembly (van Veen and 
Helvoirt, 2024 ), 
Personas (Frawley and Dyson, 
2014 ; Tomitsch et al., 2021 ), 
Embodiment (van Bommel and 
Boonman-Berson, 2022 )
System analysis Which actors are considered, and 
how does this define what exists 
and therefore can act? 
How has non-human agency been 
considered in the systems analysis? 
How are the identified human and 
non-human actors a product of 
another set of actors? In other 
words, who influences the agency of 
system actors and how?How are the time scales of the identified 
human and non-human actors 
considered? 
What temporality is the system 
boundary based on?How are the identified human and non- 
human actors deliberating or 
negotiating with the system?ANT (Yaneva, 2009 ), 
assemblage theory (Youn and 
Baek, 2024 ), affect (Darnhofer, 
2020 )
Design 
requirements or 
KPIsHow do requirement definitions 
define what non-human agency is 
and is not considered?What timescales are implied or defined 
in the requirements and how does that 
influence the solution space? Do the 
timescales fit all relevant human and 
non-human actors?How are non-humans invited to 
deliberate about their own 
requirements?Personas (Frawley and Dyson, 
2014 ; Tomitsch et al., 2021 ), 
Ethics of Care (EoC; Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015 ; 
Krzywoszynska, 2019 ), 
Citizen assembly (van Veen and 
Helvoirt, 2024 ), 
Need-based analysis (Jolibert 
et al., 2011 )
Measurement 
practicesHow does the measurement define 
the thing you are measuring, and 
what agency does it overlook?Which non-humans are structurally 
measured, and which are excluded from 
measurements? How would adjusting 
measurement timescales influence such 
in- and exclusions?  
Who determines when baseline 
measurements are taken and in what 
ways are baseline measurements 
neutralizing past harms?How does the measuring instrument 
influence the relationship between the 
measurer and the measured (e.g. does it 
dig holes, take plants or animals out of 
the system, establish a more affective 
relation between the observer and the 
observed)?Multi-sensory communication (
Poikolainen Ros˘en et al., 2022 ; 
van Bommel and Boonman- 
Berson, 2022 ), 
Mapping exercise (Meesters, 
2023 ), 
Process-relational agronomy (
Ditzler, 2022 )
Selecting design 
solutionsHow do proposed solutions change 
(better enable or hinder) the agency 
of system actors?How can working with different 
timescales enable non-human 
deliberation in selecting or adjusting 
design solutions?How can designers invite non-humans 
to influence and negotiate over the 
selection of design solutions?Enabling space and voice (
Donaldson, 2020 ), 
Animal deliberation (Driessen, 
2014 ), 
Digital twins (Korenhof et al., 
2021 )
Overall If this problem is solved, who wins and who loses? Is this desirable? Is there another problem definition that will have more 
desirable outcomes? 
What visualization tools are used in the design process and how does that influence our understanding of the non-humans in 
the system? Is that desirable? 
At every design stage: In what ways do our framings and assumptions influence, challenge, or maintain power dynamics 
within the system?T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
7 
what they can do and how they think (Darnhofer, 2020 ; van Bommel 
and Boonman-Berson, 2022 ; Carolan, 2017 ). In the context of systems 
analysis, this can broaden our view of relationships between system 
elements and how they influence, and deliberate with, each other.
Utilizing ANT, assemblages, and affect, system designers can better 
recognize the non-humans within a system and the influences they have, 
thus bringing to light important dynamics and challenging the idea that 
humans have full control over farming systems.
5.3. Design requirements and KPIs
Design requirements and Key Performance Indicators (or KPIs) 
describe the conditions for each stakeholder that a design concept must 
meet to be considered acceptable or successful. Agricultural system 
design processes often include requirements for non-humans, for 
example the nutrient requirements a certain crop needs to thrive or feed 
requirements for livestock (e.g. Moreira et al., 2023 ; Schreefel et al., 
2022 ). Although sustainability and environmental impact assessment 
methods, such as multi-criteria analysis, consider effects on non-humans 
(Cicciù et al., 2022 ; Hebinck et al., 2021 ), these design requirements 
generally remain principally focused on the production of food for 
human consumption. However, the stage in which design requirements 
and KPIs are defined can be critical for including objectives other than 
those focused on production.
Relational approaches can be used to better understand how 
different system elements are intertwined and therefore how setting a 
requirement on one element will influence another element. Relational 
scholars argue that the ‘objective’, logical reasoning often strived for in 
science creates a detachment, resulting in moral distancing that allows 
for the exploitation of non-humans (Coeckelbergh, 2018 ). In the context 
of agricultural systems design, and specifically setting design re-
quirements, one could argue that reducing this moral distance and 
acknowledging the illusion of objectivity may improve the consideration 
of non-humans in design requirements and outcomes, while highlighting 
the cultural, political, and economic choices that can underpin a design 
process (Legun, 2015a ; Legun et al., 2022 ; Marder, 2012 ; Hebinck et al., 
2021 ). Additionally, relational scholars highlight the agency of metrics 
themselves, noting how metrics co-produce realities in how they influ-
ence the actions of farmers and policymakers. Acknowledging the 
agency of metrics can afford designers the opportunity to define metrics 
as co-productive system elements (Rosin et al., 2017 ).
When using relational approaches, less emphasis is put on collecting 
objective and rational data, while emotional, physical, and affective 
experiences are included, for instance by considering a farmer’s 
emotional connection to their land, animals, and machines (Darnhofer, 
2020 ). Design requirements and KPIs are generally described with 
quantitative indicators and it is challenging to represent qualitative in-
dicators in this format. For example, how does one measure farmer 
wellbeing, and can farmer wellbeing be related to, e.g., wellbeing of soil 
organisms? More research is needed on relational ways of measuring the 
success of design concepts (see Ditzler, 2022 ). This is further explored in 
5.4 Measurement practices.
Ethics of Care (EoC) is a relational approach developed by feminist 
theorists which emphasizes meeting the needs of non-humans and 
aligning with the cycles or timelines of non-humans, with attentiveness 
and relationality. Attentiveness is needed to recognize the care needed 
by an entity. By working with the temporal rhythms of non-humans, 
rather than the typically used human-centered temporality, we can be 
more attentive to the needs of non-humans, allowing us to meet those 
needs for mutual care taking and improved sustainability (Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015 ; Krzywoszynska, 2019 ). This framework, focusing on 
care, being attentive, and working on different temporal rhythms, can 
help in defining requirements that revolve around the care needed for 
non-humans.
To enable more deliberation over decisions affecting non-humans, 
one could consider using a citizens’ assembly in which non-humans are represented by human proxies who negotiate on the requirements 
necessary for their wellbeing (van Veen and Helvoirt, 2024 ). This 
method can also be used in later stages of a design process whenever 
design choices are being made. Methods that facilitate the representa -
tion of non-humans in deliberative processes can be helpful in better 
representing their needs and interests. For example, methods from HCI 
(human-computer interaction) and ACI (animal-computer interaction) 
can be used, such as personas that are developed to represent the needs 
and interests of non-humans in the process of setting design re-
quirements (Frawley and Dyson, 2014 ; Tomitsch et al., 2021 ).3Personas 
can be useful in shedding light on our assumptions, beliefs, and expe-
riences of non-humans in a design process.
A need-based analysis can be used to consider the needs of non- 
humans and make compromises when conflicts arise between different 
actors’ needs (Jolibert et al., 2011 ). This method has been found to in-
crease understanding of the different sides of a conflict when there are 
competing interests and including non-humans in this method can shift 
us away from prioritizing human interests in conflict resolution.
By further including non-humans in the requirement setting process, 
designers can ensure that the objectives of a design project are repre -
sented in the design requirements and there is less room for oversight on 
requirements that directly affect non-humans. This lays a good foun-
dation for incorporating non-human interests in the rest of a design 
project.
5.4. Measurement practices
Measurements are a means of producing knowledge about a system. 
They might be used to better understand the state of affairs in a system to 
be designed, or to follow up on design outcomes and ensure KPIs are 
met. Measurement practices, including what researchers choose to 
measure, when, and how they measure it, shape what is uncovered and 
what remains hidden within a system. They are performative and have 
agency since they shape how designs are implemented and evolve 
(Meesters et al., 2023 ). While measurements aim to reveal the unseen, 
they also inherently create exclusions. For example, measures of agro-
biodiversity may only account for certain target species that are 
considered relevant from a particular perspective, e.g. for biological pest 
control or for nature conservation. By excluding certain bodies/objects 
through the process of measuring, you exclude those bodies from 
participating (Gorissen et al., 2025 ; Meesters et al., 2023 ). These prac-
tices not only influence what is known and visible but also serve as tools 
of control and often enable extractivism (Turnhout et al., 2014 ).
To highlight the inclusions and exclusions inherent in measurement 
processes, one can map the effects of the various measurement methods 
employed, their temporal dimension (when and how long does mea-
surements take place) and the material objects they create and exclude. 
This mapping can also be done to see what exclusions are made by the 
selection of indicators used for KPIs or design requirements (5.3 Design 
requirements). For instance, such a mapping exercise could describe 
which time scales are measured, which affects what knowledge is un-
covered and how the measurement methods used are reinforcing power 
dynamics between different actors or enabling productivist agricultural 
models. Measurement campaigns in agricultural systems design exper -
iments are often limited by the constraints of dominant funding schemes 
at the expense of long-term engagement and iterative approaches 
3While personas are a useful tool, it is important to remember that an animal 
persona is a human-made tool that represents a current understanding of that 
animal, rather than being a true representation of the animal itself (Frawley and 
Dyson, 2014 ). Primary data should be emphasized in the development of per-
sonas that is collected through field research as there is a risk of overlooking 
critical issues not yet documented while using secondary data from literature 
(Tomitsch et al., 2021 ). This caution should be applied to all tools and methods 
used to represent or interpret non-human voices or intentions.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
8 
(Ditzler et al., 2021 ).
Further research could explore how measuring techniques, such as 
how soil health is measured, shape research outcomes. Ditzler (2022)
highlights how commonly used soil fertility indicators, such as plant- 
available nitrogen and soil organic matter content, are often measured 
discretely at one or two points in time (e.g. the beginning and/or end of 
an experiment), whereas the processes occurring that affect these in-
dicators are happening on multiple time scales. Additionally, Ditzler 
remarks that in agricultural systems design these indicators are used 
primarily to assess how successful a harvest will be and ignores how 
other beings are affected by soil health. In response, Ditzler proposes 
‘process-relational agronomy ’ in which measuring the success of a farm 
moves away from static indicators and towards holistic and relational 
accounts of success (Ditzler, 2022 ).
To overcome structural exclusions, and enhance more careful 
deliberation, it can be useful to employ a plurality of techniques that 
engage different senses (e.g. sight, sound, smell) to uncover otherwise 
hidden realities (Gorissen et al., 2025 ; Meesters, 2023 ; Poikolainen 
Ros˘en et al., 2022 ; van Bommel and Boonman-Berson, 2022 ). Improving 
measurement techniques might look like using different tools to ‘hear ’ 
non-humans. For example, van Bommel and Boonman-Berson (2022)
describe how multi-sensory communication can be helpful in inter-
preting non-human ways of communication to include non-human 
voices in nature conservation research. Poikolainen Ros˘en et al. 
(2022) describe techniques for ‘noticing ’ non-humans, meaning 
bringing to light the overlooked, with a variety of measurement tech-
niques employing various senses. Gorissen et al. (2025) describe how 
using a plurality of measuring techniques that value both oversight 
(“enabling farmers to optimize the efficiency of production ”) and insight 
(“offering a holistic and long-term understanding of ecological relations 
and how they affect production ”) can foster more diverse un-
derstandings of farm performance.
5.5. Selecting design solutions
Finally, we look to the phase of selecting design solutions. Design 
choices can be made with non-humans if we find ways to involve non- 
humans in decision making processes by making space for them to ex-
press their agency. Involving non-humans in the selection of design 
solutions takes rethinking the temporal dimension of design, contem -
plating and adjusting the time scales we are working in to allow them to 
express their agency and allow time for iteration and deliberation. 
Deliberating with non-humans might look like being perceptive to how 
they interact with a design concept and adjusting it as needed. For 
example, farmers adjusted the settings of milking robots based on how 
cows preferred to use the system (Driessen, 2014 ). In another example, 
farmers used digital fencing to control the grazing territory of their 
goats, resulting in a type of negotiation over what goat farming can look 
like (Søraa and Vik, 2021 ). While such interventions may enhance 
practical negotiations between humans and non-humans in the given 
circumstances, it is important to note that they are unable to challenge 
structural conditions and power dynamics regarding the larger agri-
cultural system. To take it a step further, designers can draw on 
Donaldson ’s (2020) concept of enabling space and voice to actively 
foster the conditions to empower non-humans to express their agency to 
shape their environments.
Others look to novel technologies in digital agriculture, such as 
sensors, digital twins and artificial intelligence, to represent non-human 
entities, such as ecosystems or animals, or anticipate how system inputs 
will affect system outcomes (Pylianidis et al., 2021 ; Verdouw et al., 
2021 ). Beyond representing non-humans, these technologies could also 
be used to give voice to non-humans in novel forms of participatory on- 
farm experimentation (Lacoste et al., 2022, 2025 ). Artificial intelligence 
could be used to interpret plant and animal ‘communication ’, and a 
digital twin could be used to test out design solutions to anticipate the 
effects on non-humans, facilitating design choices in line with non-human objectives (Bakker, 2022 ). This could be a key area in which 
agri-food tech start-ups (Klerkx and Villalobos, 2024 ) could contribute 
to more inclusive future ASD. Generally sensors and digital twins are 
used to control non-humans for improved efficiency and can lead to 
further objectification of non-humans (Bos et al., 2018 ), but they can be 
used for the inclusion of non-human interests in design if used carefully 
(Korenhof et al., 2021 ). It’s important to consider the interaction be-
tween human-made technologies and natural non-human temporalities, 
and how technologies alter our perception of time and the speed of 
decision-making processes.
6.Discussion and conclusion
Tackling contemporary climate and ecological crises requires 
fundamental, systemic changes in food systems. Agricultural systems 
design co-shapes broader food systems and thus has a key role to play in 
food systems transformations. We argue that expanding which actors are 
considered as participants in design processes beyond humans is an 
important pathway to drive transformative change. In this article, we 
have developed ways to engage non-humans as active participants in 
participatory design processes to systematically address broad sustain -
ability goals for more democratic and transformative outcomes. Rather 
than assessing which conceptualization of more-than-human participa -
tion is true or has received the most evidence, this article explored the 
consequences of approaching ASD through different sets of assumptions 
for the possibilities of non-human participation. While the insights 
addressed in this article can be applied to many different cases and bears 
relevance for transition design in other systems (e.g. mobility and urban 
systems) (Ceschin and Gaziulusoy, 2016; Irwin, 2015; Pineda et al., 
2024; Tsatsou et al., 2023 ), we focused on participatory agricultural 
systems design. Agriculture is an interesting case as inherently agricul -
tural systems are human-made systems with the goal to extract a product 
from the system, namely food, fibre, and other biobased materials4. 
However, we try to advocate for an ‘ethics of exclusion ’ (Giraud, 2019 ), 
in which designers are conscious about the inclusions and exclusions 
made.
Such engagements fundamentally transform agricultural systems 
design by: (1) revealing hidden trade-offs between human productivity 
goals and non-humans ’ needs and ecological resilience; (2) expanding 
methodological capacity to detect and interpret signals from soil sys-
tems, plant communities, and animal populations; and (3) elevating 
non-human interests from externalities to essential design parameters. 
This approach creates pathways towards sustainable food systems as 
well as broader bioeconomies by systematically opening up problem and 
solution spaces to consider the stakes, needs, and interests of non- 
humans to meet a broader set of sustainability goals. Including non- 
human needs in agricultural systems have been shown to trigger 
cascading positive effects in holistic and integrated ways (Rehman et al., 
2022 ). We conclude this article with three critical reflections on the 
potential for including non-humans in ASD.
First, possibilities for participation in agricultural systems are not 
distributed equally, and such inequality is tied intimately to knowledge 
hierarchies (Turnhout, 2024 ). Whether actors are cast as active or pas-
sive, atemporal or with their own rhythms, and communicative or mute 
affects how power and responsibilities are distributed across agricultural 
systems. The theoretical approaches that we have consulted operation -
alize non-humans in various ways, which can point ASD scholars in 
various directions. ANT and assemblage theory render non-humans as 
influential in steering agricultural systems through material negotiation, 
simply because they possess particular properties or bodily abilities. 
4In this sense, beyond having importance for food systems transformation, 
agricultural systems design also has importance for transformations of other 
systems such as energy and housing, for example through concepts such as 
bioeconomy.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
9 
This acknowledges non-humans as being relevant in ASD and encour -
ages human agricultural actors to allow non-human courses to take their 
turn and to let go of an ideal of full controllability. Posthumanist and 
animal studies conceptualizations of non-human needs and interests 
more explicitly call for different sets of responsibilities for humans, 
based on values of justice and mutual care. These approaches direct 
designers towards processes that can foster a better distribution of 
agentic possibilities by attuning to non-human temporalities and modes 
of deliberation. Postcolonial and indigenous work powerfully addresses 
both why and how non-humans are key to consult in ASD, because they 
render non-humans as communicative and knowledgeable entities that 
embody lessons about living well together. This implies that it matters 
for ASD, and hence for agricultural realities, which theoretical frame -
works, concepts and methods are invited in ASD processes.
Second, considering these interdisciplinary insights has not only 
implications for design outcomes, but also for design processes. Current 
agricultural systems design processes are human-centered by design, 
and selectively including some non-humans in these processes will not 
enable the fundamental changes to agricultural systems necessary to be 
transformative. This means that design processes in themselves require 
radical adjustment to account for non-human agency, temporality and 
deliberation. The linearity of many design processes contradicts the 
adaptivity needed to engage non-humans and work in more-than-human 
time scales. Therefore, it is urgently needed to assess the extent to which 
our current design processes are fit for meaningful inclusion of non- 
humans. This review demonstrated that a rapidly growing body of 
work from various plumage can lead ASD in improving design methods. 
Mapping exercises to highlight inclusions and exclusions made in the 
design process, embodiment exercises to facilitate participants taking on 
different roles, citizen assemblies to negotiate between actors on design 
choices, and enabling space for non-humans to make choices on how 
they interact with a design are just some of the practical ways designers 
can participate with non-humans in design. However, to do so, design 
processes need to be designed for including non-human voices, for 
instance by creating more inclusive design protocols.
Third, our work articulates that there are various degrees of inter-
vening in power relations, and how this in turn affects the trans -
formative potential of ASD thinking. This not only entails challenging 
incumbent power relations between different human actors and orga-
nizations in agri-food systems (cf. Clapp, 2021 ; Rossi et al., 2019 ), but 
also entails challenging the power relations that reproduce the separa -
tion between humans and non-humans in agri-food systems (cf. 
Tschersich and Kok, 2022 ). For ASD to be inclusive of non-humans, this 
ultimately requires humans to disrupt the dominance of human values, 
temporalities, needs, and interests, so non-humans can take more space 
and enter in negotiation on terms set outside of current agricultural 
production systems (Bastian, 2017 ; Meesters, 2023 ). Disrupting domi -
nant systems leads to shifts in power balances, and it is important to 
consistently and continuously scrutinize who loses and gains influence, 
and whether that is desirable and for whom. Participatory processes 
have been demonstrated to reinforce and even strengthen hierarchies 
when they do not allow for adjusting the rules of the game (Bastian, 
2017 ; Cooke and Kothari, 2001 ; Turnhout et al., 2020 ). Determining 
who wins and who loses is complex, as human and non-human interests 
are often intertwined, and the objectives of sustainability, biodiversity, 
and improved animal welfare frequently serve human interests, such as 
enhancing production and human livelihoods. While representing 
human and non-human interests simultaneously does not have to be 
mutually exclusive, genuine consideration of the interests of non- 
humans is uncommon, requiring a shift in how non-humans are 
considered. This is challenging, as fundamental changes in values and 
power dynamics often run into resistance of status quo actors and or-
ganizations. While working with vested interests (such as large busi-
nesses and governments) can be considered an important avenue to 
realize change, scholars have warned to be wary of collaborating with 
actors that benefit from the exploitation of the natural world, which often results in the watering-down of the, often ambitious, objectives set 
out at the start of projects (Turnhout et al., 2020 ). For instance, studies 
point out that radical agricultural frameworks, such as agroecology and 
regenerative agriculture, have been coopted by the mainstream and 
watered down, due to a lack of consideration of power and equity issues 
(Bless et al., 2023 ; Tittonell et al., 2022 ; Walthall et al., 2024 ), high-
lighting the importance of addressing power and equity for trans -
formational agricultural systems.
In view of these reflections, to advance research on non-human 
participation in ASD, further research could focus on questions such as: 
≡What is the interaction between human and non-human participa -
tion in participatory processes?
≡Which methods for involving non-humans in participatory processes 
are effective, for who, and how, in practice?
≡What is the influence of different methods on the transformative 
potential of design outcomes?
≡How can research and innovation projects support designers to do 
this type of work and create an evolution of what transdisciplinary 
science and innovation entails?
≡What role can new technologies have in creating systems that facil-
itate deliberation between humans and non-humans, and what are 
the risks?
Finally, in this article we have focused on practical applications, 
though these applications in practice will not be without hurdles, given 
current research schemes (e.g. time and budget limitations), knowledge 
gaps (e.g. how to enable non-humans to speak for themselves), and 
power distributions (e.g. how to balance human and non-human needs 
when they are mutually exclusive). This shows that agricultural systems 
design cannot be designed differently in isolation from larger academic 
and societal challenges. Hence, it highlights that, in addition to novel 
research methods, there is a need for incumbent agri-food research and 
innovation systems to tackle these hurdles and provide support for 
projects and initiatives that seek to promote non-human participation in 
ASD. Nevertheless, we believe this article shows that engaging with 
terms, words, and ways of thinking from unexpected places can provide 
practical interventions to take a step in the right direction.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Tatiana Moreira: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original 
draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptual -
ization. Marieke E. Meesters: Writing – review & editing, Writing – 
original draft, Conceptualization. Kristiaan P.W. Kok: Writing – review 
& editing, Visualization, Conceptualization, Writing – original draft. 
Katharine Legun: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, 
Conceptualization. Lenora Ditzler: Writing – review & editing, 
Conceptualization. Laurens Klerkx: Writing – review & editing, Su-
pervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, Writing – original 
draft.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the 
writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used generative AI 
for assistance in shortening and improving readability of text. All orig-
inal text was written by the authors. After using this tool/service, the 
authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full re-
sponsibility for the content of the published article.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors have no interests to declare.T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
10 
Acknowledgements
Tatiana Moreira ’s contribution to the article was funded by the 
Knowledge, Technology and Innovation Group of Wageningen Univer -
sity and the New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and 
Employment (UOAX1810). Laurens Klerkx ’ contribution to the article 
draws on his professorial lecture ‘Towards agricultural innovation sys-
tems 4.0?: Supporting directionality, diversity, distribution and de-
mocracy in food systems transformation ’ which was enabled by 
Wageningen University, and was supported by the Chilean National 
Agency for Research and Development (ANID) through FONDECYT 
Regular Grant No. 1250482 (2025). We thank Gabriela de la Rosa for 
proving her insights on transdisciplinary engagements. We also thank 
the two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier 
drafts of the article, and editor Guillaume Martin for his guidance during 
the review process.
Appendix A.Supplementary data
Supplementary materials to this article can be found online at htt 
ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2025.104512 .
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
References
Bakırlıo ˚glu, Y., Yetis¸, E.O., 2024. Daunted by design: creating tools of slow violence. 
Innov. Europ. J. Soc. Sci. Res. 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13511610.2024.2395268 .
Bakker, K., 2022. The Sounds of Life: How Digital Technology Is Bringing us Closer to the 
Worlds of Animals and Plants. Princeton University Press, New Jersey . 
Barnaud, C., van Paassen, A., Tr˘ebuil, G., Promburom, T., Bousquet, F., 2010. Dealing 
with power games in a companion modelling process: lessons from community water 
management in Thailand highlands. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 16, 55–74. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13892240903533152 .
Barry, A., 2013. Material Politics: Disputes along the Pipeline. John Wiley & Sons.
Bastian, M., 2017. Towards a more-than-human participatory research. In: Franklin, In A. 
(Ed.), The Routledge International Handbook of More-Than-Human Studies, 1st ed. 
Routledge, pp. 404–419. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003262619-29 .
Berthet, E.T., Barnaud, C., Girard, N., Labatut, J., Martin, G., 2016. How to foster 
agroecological innovations? A comparison of participatory design methods. 
J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 59 (2), 280–301. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09640568.2015.1009627 .
Berthet, E.T., Hickey, G.M., Klerkx, L., 2018. Opening design and innovation processes in 
agriculture: insights from design and management sciences and future directions. 
Agric. Syst. 165, 111–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.06.004 .
Bessai, R., Bendor, R., Balkenende, R., 2024. Designing with more-than-human 
temporalities. In: DRS Biennial Conference Series. DRS2024: Boston, Boston, USA. 
https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2024.438 .
Bless, A., Davila, F., Plant, R., 2023. A genealogy of sustainable agriculture narratives: 
implications for the transformative potential of regenerative agriculture. Agric. 
Hum. Values 40 (4), 1379 –1397. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-023-10444-4 .
Blok, V., Gremmen, B., 2018. Agricultural technologies as living machines: toward a 
biomimetic conceptualization of smart farming technologies. Ethics Policy Environ. 
21, 246–263. https://doi.org/10.1080/21550085.2018.1509491 .
Bos, A.P., Grin, J., 2008. “Doing ” reflexive modernization in pig husbandry: the hard 
work of changing the course of a river. Sci. Technol. Hum. Values 33 (4), Article 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243907306697 .
Bos, A.P., Groot Koerkamp, P.W.G., Gosselink, J.M.J., Bokma, S., 2009. Reflexive 
interactive design and its application in a project on sustainable dairy husbandry 
systems. Outlook Agric. 38 (2009), 2. https://doi.org/10.5367/ 
000000009788632386 .
Bos, J.M., Bovenkerk, B., Feindt, P.H., van Dam, Y.K., 2018. The quantified animal: 
precision livestock farming and the ethical implications of objectification. Food 
Ethics 2, 77–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41055-018-00029-x .
Brun, J., Jeuffroy, M.-H., P˘enicaud, C., Cerf, M., Meynard, J.-M., 2021. Designing a 
research agenda for coupled innovation towards sustainable agrifood systems. Agric. 
Syst. 191, 103143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103143 .
Çakmakçı, R., Salık, M.A., Çakmakçı, S., 2023. Assessment and principles of 
environmentally sustainable food and agriculture systems. Agriculture 13 (5), 1073. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13051073 .
Campbell, H., 2020. Farming inside Invisible Worlds: Modernist Agriculture and its 
Consequences. Bloomsbury Academic, p. 224. https://doi.org/10.5040/ 
9781350120570 .Campbell, B.M., Beare, D.J., Bennett, E.M., Hall-Spencer, J.M., Ingram, J.S.I., 
Jaramillo, F., Ortiz, R., Ramankutty, N., Sayer, J.A., Shindell, D., 2017. Agriculture 
production as a major driver of the earth system exceeding planetary boundaries. 
Ecol. Soc. 22 (4). https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-09595-220408 .
Carberry, P.S., Hochman, Z., McCown, R.L., Dalgliesh, N.P., Foale, M.A., Poulton, P.L., 
Hargreaves, J.N.G., Hargreaves, D.M.G., Cawthray, S., Hillcoat, N., Robertson, M.J., 
2002. The FARMSCAPE approach to decision support: farmers ’, advisers ’, 
researchers ’ monitoring, simulation, communication and performance evaluation. 
Agric. Syst. 74, 141–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-521X(02)00025-2 .
Carolan, M., 2017. Agro-digital governance and life itself: food politics at the intersection 
of code and affect. Sociol. Rural. 57, 816–835. https://doi.org/10.1111/soru.12153 .
Caron, P., Ferreroy de Loma-Osorio, G., Nabarro, D., Hainzelin, E., Guillou, M., 
Andersen, I., Verburg, G., 2018. Food systems for sustainable development: 
proposals for a profound four-part transformation. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 38, 1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-018-0519-1 .
Cerf, M., Jeuffroy, M.-H., Prost, L., Meynard, J.-M., 2012. Participatory design of 
agricultural decision support tools: taking account of the use situations. Agron. 
Sustain. Dev. 32 (4), 899–910. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-012-0091-z .
Ceschin, F., Gaziulusoy, I., 2016. Evolution of design for sustainability: From product 
design to design for system innovations and transitions. Design Studies 47, 118–163.
Cicciù, B., Schramm, F., Schramm, V.B., 2022. Multi-criteria decision making/aid 
methods for assessing agricultural sustainability: a literature review. Environ. Sci. 
Pol. 138, 85–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2022.09.020 .
Clapp, J., 2021. The problem with growing corporate concentration and power in the 
global food system. Nat. Food 2 (6), 404–408. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021- 
00297-7 .
Coeckelbergh, M., 2018. What do we mean by a relational ethics? Growing a relational 
approach to the moral standing of plants, robots, and other non-humans. In: Plant 
Ethics. Routledge .
Contesse, M., Duncan, J., Legun, K., Klerkx, L., 2021. Unravelling non-human agency in 
sustainability transitions. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 166, 120634. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.techfore.2021.120634 .
Conway, G.R., 1985. Agroecosystem analysis. Agric. Adm. 20, 31–55. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0309-586X(85)90064-0 .
Cooke, B., Kothari, U., 2001. Participation: The New Tyranny? Zed Books .
Darnhofer, I., 2020. Farming from a process-relational perspective: making openings for 
change visible. Sociol. Rural. 60 (2), 505–528. https://doi.org/10.1111/soru.12294 .
de Bruin, A., de Boer, I.J.M., Faber, N.R., de Jong, G., Termeer, K.J.A.M., de Olde, E.M., 
2024. Easier said than defined? Conceptualising justice in food system transitions. 
Agric. Hum. Values 41 (1), 345–362. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-023-10482-y .
De La Rosa, G., Ludwig, D., Nieves, A., El-Hani, C.N., 2025. Between confluence and 
disenfranchisement: the role of power dynamics in transdisciplinary research. Curr. 
Res. Environ. Sustain. 10, 100300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crsust.2025.100300 .
Dernat, S., Grillot, M., Andreotti, F., Martel, G., 2025. A sustainable game changer? 
Systematic review of serious games used for agriculture and research agenda. Agric. 
Syst. 222, 104178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2024.104178 .
Ditzler, L., 2022. Towards Diversified Industrial Cropping Systems? Doctoral Thesis 
Wageningen University. https://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/wurpubs/603203 .
Ditzler, L., Driessen, C., 2022. Automating agroecology: how to design a farming robot 
without a Monocultural mindset? J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 35 (1), 2. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10806-021-09876-x .
Ditzler, L., Klerkx, L., Chan-Dentoni, J., Posthumus, H., Krupnik, T.J., Ridaura, S.L., 
Andersson, J.A., Baudron, F., Groot, J.C.J., 2018. Affordances of agricultural systems 
analysis tools: a review and framework to enhance tool design and implementation. 
Agric. Syst. 164, 20–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.03.006 .
Ditzler, L., van Apeldoorn, D.F., Pellegrini, F., Antichi, D., Bˇarberi, P., Rossing, W.A.H., 
2021. Current research on the ecosystem service potential of legume inclusive 
cropping systems in Europe. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 41 (2), 26. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s13593-021-00678-z .
Dogliotti, S., Rossing, W.A.H., van Ittersum, M.K., 2004. Systematic design and 
evaluation of crop rotations enhancing soil conservation, soil fertility and farm 
income: a case study for vegetable farms in South Uruguay. Agric. Syst. 80 (3), 
277–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2003.08.001 .
Donaldson, S., 2020. Animal agora: animal citizens and the democratic challenge. Soc. 
Theory Pract. 46 (4), 709–735. https://doi.org/10.5840/soctheorpract202061296 .
Driessen, C., 2014. Animal Deliberation. In: Wissenburg, M., Schlosberg, D. (Eds.), 
Political Animals and Animal Politics. Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 90–104. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-68308-6_7 .
Elzen, B., Bos, B., 2019. The RIO approach: design and anchoring of sustainable animal 
husbandry systems. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 145, 141–152. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.techfore.2016.05.023 .
Ermine, W., 2007. The ethical space of engagement. Ind. Law J. 6 (1), 193.
FAO, F, 2018. The future of food and agriculture: alternative pathways to 2050. In: Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Rome, 60.
Ferguson, R.S., Lovell, S.T., 2014. Permaculture for agroecology: design, movement, 
practice, and worldview. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 34 (2), 251–274. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s13593-013-0181-6 .
Fleck, J., 1993. Innofusion: Feedback in the innovation process. In: Stowell, F.A., 
West, D., Howell, J.G. (Eds.), Systems Science: Addressing Global Issues. Springer, 
US, Boston, MA, pp. 169–174.
Forlano, L., 2017. Posthumanism and Design. She Ji. The Journal of Design, Economics, 
and Innovation 3, 16–29.
Frawley, J.K., Dyson, L.E., 2014. Animal personas: acknowledging non-human 
stakeholders in designing for sustainable food systems. In: Proceedings of the 26th 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference on Designing Futures: The 
Future of Design. https://doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686617 .T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
11 
Geiselmann, R., Tsourgianni, A., Deroy, O., Harris, L.T., 2023. Interacting with agents 
without a mind: the case for artificial agents. Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 51. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2023.101282 .
Gerber, S., Hiernaux, Q., 2022. Plants as machines: history, philosophy and practical 
consequences of an idea. J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 35 (1), 4. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10806-021-09877-w .
Giraud, E.H., 2019. What Comes after Entanglement?: Activism, Anthropocentrism, and 
an Ethics of Exclusion. Duke University Press .
Glover, D., 2022. Affordances and agricultural technology. J. Rural. Stud. 94, 73–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2022.05.007 .
Gorissen, L., Konrad, K., Turnhout, E., 2025. Sensors and sensing practices: shaping 
farming system strategies toward agricultural sustainability. Agric. Hum. Values 
1–19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-024-10686-w .
Grahmann, K., Reckling, M., Hern ˘andez-Ochoa, I., Donat, M., Bellingrath-Kimura, S., 
Ewert, F., 2024. Co-designing a landscape experiment to investigate diversified 
cropping systems. Agric. Syst. 217, 103950. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2024.103950 .
Gualtieri, G., Druta, O., Velzing, E., 2023. Preliminary study of participatory and nature- 
inclusive design approaches. In: De Sainz Molestina, D., Galluzzo, L., Rizzo, F., 
Spallazzo, D. (Eds.), IASDR 2023: Life-Changing Design, 9–13 October, Milan, Italy. 
https://doi.org/10.21606/iasdr.2023.718 .
Harms, P., Joshi, N., Knau ß, S., 2025. Designing multispecies role-playing games: from 
human-nature partnerships towards multispecies justice. NPJ Urban Sustain. 5, 68.
Hebinck, A., Zurek, M., Achterbosch, T., Forkman, B., Kuijsten, A., Kuiper, M., 
Nørrung, B., Veer, P.V.T., Leip, A., 2021. A sustainability compass for policy 
navigation to sustainable food systems. Glob. Food Sec. 29, 100546. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.gfs.2021.100546 .
Hengsdijk, H., van Ittersum, M.K., Rossing, W.A.H., 1998. Quantitative analysis of 
farming systems for policy formulation: development of new tools. Agric. Syst. 58, 
381–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-521X(98)00037-7 .
Higgins, V., Bryant, M., Howell, A., Battersby, J., 2017. Ordering adoption: materiality, 
knowledge and farmer engagement with precision agriculture technologies. J. Rural. 
Stud. 55, 193–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2017.08.011 .
Higgins, V., van der Velden, D., Bechtet, N., Bryant, M., Battersby, J., Belle, M., 
Klerkx, L., 2023. Deliberative assembling: Tinkering and farmer agency in precision 
agriculture implementation. Journal of Rural Studies 100, 103023 .
Holy-Luczaj, M., Blok, V., 2021. Hybrids and the boundaries of moral Considerability or 
revisiting the idea of non-instrumental value. Philos. Technol. 34, 223–242. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s13347-019-00380-9 .
Hoppe, K., 2019. Responding as composing: towards a post-anthropocentric, feminist 
ethics for the Anthropocene. Distinktion J. Soc. Theory 21 (2), 125–142. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/1600910X.2019.1618360 .
Huttunen, S., Turunen, A., Kaljonen, M., 2022. Participation for just governance of food- 
system transition. Sustain Sci Pract Policy 18 (1), 500–514. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/15487733.2022.2088187 .
Irwin, T., 2015. Transition Design: A Proposal for a New Area of Design Practice, Study, 
and Research. Design and Culture 7 (2), 229–246. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17547075.2015.1051829 .
Jansen, K., Vellema, S., 2011. What is technography? NJAS Wageningen J. Life Sci. 57 
(3–4), 169–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.njas.2010.11.003 .
Jolibert, C., Max-Neef, M., Rauschmayer, F., Paavola, J., 2011. Should we care about the 
needs of non-humans? Needs assessment: a tool for environmental conflict resolution 
and sustainable organization of living beings. Environ. Policy Gov. 21 (4), 259–269. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.578 .
Jones, P.H., 2014. Systemic design principles for complex social systems. In: Metcalf, G.S. 
(Ed.), Social Systems and Design Springer Japan, Tokyo, pp. 91–128.
Juventia, S.D., Selin Nor˘en, I.L.M., van Apeldoorn, D.F., Ditzler, L., Rossing, W.A.H., 
2022. Spatio-temporal design of strip cropping systems. Agric. Syst. 201, 103455. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103455 .
Kanter, D.R., Schwoob, M.H., Baethgen, W.E., Bervejillo, J.E., Carriquiry, M., 
Dobermann, A., de Lima, J.M.S., 2016. Translating the sustainable development 
goals into action: a participatory backcasting approach for developing national 
agricultural transformation pathways. Glob. Food Sec. 10, 71–79. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.gfs.2016.08.002 .
Kimmerer, R.W., 2013. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge 
and the Teachings of Plants, 1st ed. (Milkweed Editions) . 
Klerkx, L., Villalobos, P., 2024. Are AgriFoodTech start-ups the new drivers of food 
systems transformation? An overview of the state of the art and a research agenda. 
Glob. Food Sec. 40, 100726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2023.100726 .
Kok, K.P.W., Klerkx, L., 2023. Addressing the politics of mission-oriented agricultural 
innovation systems. Agric. Syst. 211, 103747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2023.103747 .
Korenhof, P., Blok, V., Kloppenburg, S., 2021. Steering representations —towards a 
critical understanding of digital twins. Philos. Technol. 34 (4), 1751 –1773. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s13347-021-00484-1 .
Kothari, A., Demaria, F., Acosta, A., 2014. Buen Vivir, degrowth and ecological Swaraj: 
alternatives to sustainable development and the green economy. Development 57 
(3), 362–375. https://doi.org/10.1057/dev.2015.24 .
Kropff, M.J., Bouma, J., Jones, J.W., 2001. Systems approaches for the design of 
sustainable agro-ecosystems. Agric. Syst. 70, 369–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0308-521X(01)00052-X .
Krzywoszynska, A., 2019. Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: the role of 
attentiveness in more-than-human ethics. Trans. Inst. Br. Geogr. 44 (4), 661–675. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12293 .
Lacoste, M., Bellon-Maurel, V., Piot-Lepetit, I., Cook, S., Tremblay, N., Longchamps, L., 
McNee, M., Taylor, J., Ingram, J., Adolwa, I., Hall, A., 2025. Farmer-centric On-Farm Experimentation: digital tools for a scalable transformative pathway. Agronomy for 
Sustainable Development 45, 18.
Lacoste, M., Cook, S., McNee, M., Gale, D., Ingram, J., Bellon-Maurel, V., MacMillan, T., 
Sylvester-Bradley, R., Kindred, D., Bramley, R., Tremblay, N., Longchamps, L., 
Thompson, L., Ruiz, J., García, F.O., Maxwell, B., Griffin, T., Oberthür, T., 
Huyghe, C., Zhang, W., McNamara, J., Hall, A., 2022. On-Farm Experimentation to 
transform global agriculture. Nature Food 3, 11–18.
Latour, B., 1992. Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mundane 
artifacts. In: Bijker, W.E., Law, J. (Eds.), Shaping Technology/Building Society: 
Studies in Sociotechnical Change. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 225–258.
Latour, B., 2007. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. 
OUP Oxford .
Le Gal, P.-Y., Dugu ˘e, P., Faure, G., Novak, S., 2011. How does research address the design 
of innovative agricultural production systems at the farm level? A review. Agric. 
Syst. 104 (9), 714–728. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2011.07.007 .
Leeuwis, C., 1999. Integral technology design as a process of learning and negotiation. A 
social science perspective on interactive prototyping. In: Leeuwis, C. (Ed.), Integral 
Design: Innovation in Agriculture and Natural Resource Management. Wageningen, 
Mansholt Institute, pp. 123–144.
Leeuwis, C., 2000. Reconceptualizing participation for sustainable rural development: 
towards a negotiation approach. Dev. Chang. 31, 931–959. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/1467-7660.00184 .
Legun, K., 2015a. Club apples: a biology of markets built on the social life of variety. 
Econ. Soc. 44 (2), 293–315. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2015.1013743 .
Legun, K., 2015b. Tiny trees for trendy produce: dwarfing technologies as assemblage 
actors in orchard economies. Geoforum 65, 314–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geoforum.2015.03.009 .
Legun, K., Burch, K.A., Klerkx, L., 2023. Can a robot be an expert? The social meaning of 
skill and its expression through the prospect of autonomous AgTech. Agriculture and 
Human Values 40, 501–517.
Legun, K., Comi, M., Vicol, M., 2022. New aesthetic regimes: the shifting global political 
ecology of aroma hops. Geoforum 128, 148–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geoforum.2021.12.004 .
Marder, M., 2012. Resist like a plant! On the vegetal life of political movements.  Peace 
Stud. J. 5 (1), 24–32.
Marres, N., Lezaun, J., 2011. Materials and devices of the public: an introduction. Econ. 
Soc. 40 (4), 489–509. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2011.602293 .
Martin, G., Felten, B., Duru, M., 2011. Forage rummy: a game to support the 
participatory design of adapted livestock systems. Environ. Model. Softw. 26, 
1442 –1453. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2011.08.013 .
Martin, G., Martin-Clouaire, R., Duru, M., 2013. Farming system design to feed the 
changing world. A review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 33 (1), 131–149. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s13593-011-0075-4 .
Massarella, K., Nygren, A., Fletcher, R., Büscher, B., Kiwango, W.A., Komi, S., 
Percequillo, A.R., 2021. Transformation beyond conservation: how critical social 
science can contribute to a radical new agenda in biodiversity conservation. Curr. 
Opin. Environ. Sustain. 49, 79–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2021.03.005 .
Meesters, M.E., 2023. Posthumanist Participation: Beyond Extractivism in the Dutch 
Wadden Sea Area. Doctoral Thesis. Wageningen University. https://doi.org/ 
10.18174/633108 .
Meesters, M.E., Turnhout, E., Behagel, J.H., 2023. Negotiating salt worlds: causation and 
material participation. Critic. Policy Stud. 17 (2), 297–315. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/19460171.2022.2078731 .
Meijer, E., 2019. When Animals Speak: Toward an Interspecies Democracy, vol. 1. NYU 
Press .
Merchant, C., 2006. The scientific revolution and the death of nature. Isis 97 (3), 
513–533. https://doi.org/10.1086/508090 .
Meuwissen, M.P.M., Feindt, P.H., Spiegel, A., Termeer, C.J.A.M., Mathijs, E., Mey, Y.D., 
Finger, R., Balmann, A., Wauters, E., Urquhart, J., Vigani, M., Zawali ˘nska, K., 
Herrera, H., Nicholas-Davies, P., Hansson, H., Paas, W., Slijper, T., Coopmans, I., 
Vroege, W., Ciechomska, A., Accatino, F., Kopainsky, B., Poortvliet, P.M., Candel, J. 
J.L., Maye, D., Severini, S., Senni, S., Soriano, B., Lagerkvist, C.-J., Peneva, M., 
Gavrilescu, C., Reidsma, P., 2019. A framework to assess the resilience of farming 
systems. Agric. Syst. 176, 102656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2019.102656 .
Meynard, J.-M., Jeuffroy, M.-H., Le Bail, M., Lefˇevre, A., Magrini, M.-B., Michon, C., 
2017. Designing coupled innovations for the sustainability transition of agrifood 
systems. Agric. Syst. 157, 330–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2016.08.002 .
Moreira, T., Groot Koerkamp, P., Janssen, A., Stomph, T.-J., van der Werf, W., 2023. 
Breaking the mould: developing innovative crop protection strategies with reflexive 
interactive design. Agric. Syst. 210, 103727. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2023.103727 .
Mouffe, C., 1999. Deliberative democracy or agonistic pluralism? Soc. Res. 66 (3), 
745–758.
Murgue, C., Therond, O., Leenhardt, D., 2015. Toward integrated water and agricultural 
land management: participatory design of agricultural landscapes. Land Use Policy 
45, 52–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.01.011 .
Nicenboim, I., Lindley, J., Zaga, C., Berger, A., Forlano, L., 2024. More-Than-Human 
Design in Practice. DRS2024: Boston, Boston, USA. https://doi.org/10.21606/ 
drs.2024.114 .
Par˘e, G., Kitsiou, S., 2017. Chapter 9 methods for literature reviews. In: Handbook of 
eHealth Evaluation: An Evidence-Based Approach. University of Victoria .
Pelzer, E., Bonifazi, M., Souli ˘e, M., Guichard, L., Quinio, M., Ballot, R., Jeuffroy, M.-H., 
2020. Participatory design of agronomic scenarios for the reintroduction of legumes 
into a French territory. Agric. Syst. 184, 102893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2020.102893 .T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
12 
Pigford, A.A.E., Hickey, G.M., Klerkx, L., 2018. Beyond agricultural innovation systems? 
Exploring an agricultural innovation ecosystems approach for niche design and 
development in sustainability transitions. Agric. Syst. 164, 116–121. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.04.007 .
Pineda, A.F.V., Elle, M., Iuel-Jensen, J., 2024. The role of design in sustainable 
transitions: The case of mobility in Greater Copenhagen. Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions 50, 100807 .
Plummer, P., Andersson, J., Lennerfors, T.T., 2024. Foraging for development: an 
analysis of the Swedish wild berry innovation system. Agric. Syst. 216. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2024.103901 .
Poikolainen Ros˘en, A., Normark, M., Wiberg, M., 2022. Towards more-than-human- 
centred design: learning from gardening. Int. J. Des. 16 (3), 21–36. https://doi.org/ 
10.57698/v16i3.02 .
Prost, L., 2021. Revitalizing agricultural sciences with design sciences. Agric. Syst. 193, 
103225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103225 .
Prost, L., Reau, R., Paravano, L., Cerf, M., Jeuffroy, M.H., 2018. Designing agricultural 
systems from invention to implementation: the contribution of agronomy. Lessons 
from a case study. Agric. Syst. 164, 122–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2018.04.009 .
Pschetz, L., Koppel, K., Bastian, M., 2024. Design for temporal cohabitation. In: Extended 
Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3644068 .
Puente-Rodríguez, D., Bos, A.P., Groot Koerkamp, P.W.G., 2019. Rethinking livestock 
production systems on the Gal˘apagos Islands: organizing knowledge-practice 
interfaces through reflexive interactive design. Environ. Sci. Pol. 101, 166–174. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2019.08.019 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M., 2015. Making time for soil: technoscientific futurity and the 
pace of care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 45 (5), 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0306312715599851 .
Pylianidis, C., Osinga, S., Athanasiadis, I.N., 2021. Introducing digital twins to 
agriculture. Comput. Electron. Agric. 184.
Quinio, M., Jeuffroy, M.H., Guichard, L., Salazar, P., D˘etienne, F., 2022. Analyzing co- 
design of agroecology-oriented cropping systems: lessons to build design-support 
tools. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 42 (4), 72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-022-00772- 
w.
Reckling, M., Bergkvist, G., Watson, C.A., Stoddard, F.L., Bachinger, J., 2020. Re- 
designing organic grain legume cropping systems using systems agronomy. Eur. J. 
Agron. 112, 125951. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2019.125951 .
Rehman, A., Farooq, M., Lee, D.J., Siddique, K.H., 2022. Sustainable agricultural 
practices for food security and ecosystem services. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 29 (56), 
84076 –84095. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-23635-z .
Ressiore, A., de la Rosa, G., 2024. The Council of Care. Geos Project. https://www.geos-p 
roject.org/projects/the-council-of-care .
Robertson, T., Simonsen, J., 2012. Challenges and opportunities in contemporary 
participatory design. Des. Issues 28 (3), 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1162/DESI_a_ 
00157 .
Rockstr om, J., Edenhofer, O., Gaertner, J., DeClerck, F., 2020. Planet-proofing the global 
food system. Nat. Food 1 (1), 3–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-019-0010-4 .
Romera, A.J., Bos, A.P., Neal, M., Eastwood, C.R., Chapman, D., McWilliam, W., 
Royds, D., O’Connor, C., Brookes, R., Connolly, J., Hall, P., Clinton, P.W., 2020. 
Designing future dairy systems for New Zealand using reflexive interactive design. 
Agric. Syst. 181, 102818. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102818 .
Rose, D.C., Sutherland, W.J., Parker, C., Lobley, M., Winter, M., Morris, C., Twining, S., 
Ffoulkes, C., Amano, T., Dicks, L.V., 2016. Decision support tools for agriculture: 
towards effective design and delivery. Agric. Syst. 149, 165–174. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2016.09.009 .
Rosin, C.J., Legun, K.A., Campbell, H., Sautier, M., 2017. From compliance to co- 
production: emergent forms of agency in sustainable wine production in New 
Zealand. Environ. Plan. A Econ. Space 49 (12), 2780 –2799. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0308518X17733747 .
Rossi, A., Bui, S., Marsden, T., 2019. Redefining power relations in agrifood systems. 
J. Rural. Stud. 68, 147–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2019.01.002 .
Roux-Rosier, A., Azambuja, R., Islam, G., 2018. Alternative visions: permaculture as 
imaginaries of the Anthropocene. Organization 25 (4), 550–572. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/1350508418778647 .
Runhaar, H., 2017. Governing the transformation towards ‘nature-inclusive ’ agriculture: 
insights from the Netherlands. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 15 (4), 340–349. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/14735903.2017.1312096 .
Ryan, M., 2023. The social and ethical impacts of artificial intelligence in agriculture: 
mapping the agricultural AI literature. AI & Soc. 38 (6), 2473 –2485. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s00146-021-01377-9 .
Salembier, C., Segrestin, B., Berthet, E., Weil, B., Meynard, J.-M., 2018. Genealogy of 
design reasoning in agronomy: lessons for supporting the design of agricultural 
systems. Agric. Syst. 164, 277–290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2018.05.005 .
Salembier, C., Segrestin, B., Sinoir, N., Templier, J., Weil, B., Meynard, J.-M., 2020. 
Design of equipment for agroecology: coupled innovation processes led by farmer- 
designers. Agric. Syst. 183, 102856. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102856 .
Schreefel, L., van Zanten, H.H.E., Groot, J.C.J., Timler, C.J., Zwetsloot, M.J., Schrijver, A. 
P., Creamer, R.E., Schulte, R.P.O., de Boer, I.J.M., 2022. Tailor-made solutions for 
regenerative agriculture in the Netherlands. Agric. Syst. 203, 103518. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103518 .
Schut, M., Klerkx, L., Rodenburg, J., Kayeke, J., Hinnou, L.C., Raboanarielina, C.M., 
Adegbola, P.Y., van Ast, A., Bastiaans, L., 2015. RAAIS: rapid appraisal of 
agricultural innovation systems (Part I). A diagnostic tool for integrated analysis of 
complex problems and innovation capacity. Agric. Syst. 132, 1–11. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.agsy.2014.08.009 .Sella, I., Hadary, T., Rella, A.J., Riegl, B., Swack, D., Perkol-Finkel, S., 2022. Design, 
production, and validation of the biological and structural performance of an 
ecologically engineered concrete block mattress: a nature-inclusive design for 
shoreline and offshore construction. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 18 (1), 
148–162. https://doi.org/10.1002/ieam.4523 .
Simon, H.A., 1996. The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd ed. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 
p. 231.
Søraa, R.A., Vik, J., 2021. Boundaryless boundary-objects: digital fencing of the 
CyborGoat in rural Norway. J. Rural. Stud. 87, 23–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jrurstud.2021.08.015 .
Steinke, J., Ortiz-Crespo, B., van Etten, J., Müller, A., 2022. Participatory design of 
digital innovation in agricultural research-for-development: insights from practice. 
Agric. Syst. 195, 103313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103313 .
Sundberg, J., 2014. Decolonizing posthumanist geographies. Cult. Geogr. 21 (1), 33–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1474474013486067 .
Tittonell, P., El Mujtar, V., Felix, G., Kebede, Y., Laborda, L., Luj˘an Soto, R., de Vente, J., 
2022. Regenerative agriculture —agroecology without politics? Front. Sustain. Food 
Syst. 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2022.844261 .
Tomitsch, M., Fredericks, J., Vo, D., Frawley, J., Foth, M., 2021. Non-human personas: 
including nature in the participatory design of smart cities. Interact. Design 
Architect. 50 (50), 102–130. https://doi.org/10.55612/s-5002-050-007 .
Tribaldos, T., Kortetm aki, T., 2022. Just transition principles and criteria for food 
systems and beyond. Environ. Innov. Soc. Trans. 43, 244–256. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.eist.2022.04.005 .
Tsatsou, A., Frantzeskaki, N., Malamis, S., 2023. Nature-based solutions for circular 
urban water systems: A scoping literature review and a proposal for urban design 
and planning. Journal of Cleaner Production 394, 136325 .
Tschersich, J., Kok, K.P.W., 2022. Deepening democracy for the governance toward just 
transitions in agri-food systems. Environ. Innov. Soc. Trans. 43, 358–374. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.eist.2022.04.012 .
Turnhout, E., 2024. A better knowledge is possible: transforming environmental science 
for justice and pluralism. Environ. Sci. Pol. 155, 103729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
envsci.2024.103729 .
Turnhout, E., Neves, K., de Lijster, E., 2014. ‘Measurementality ’ in biodiversity 
governance: knowledge, transparency, and the intergovernmental science-policy 
platform on biodiversity and ecosystem services (IPBES). Environ. Plan. A 46 (3), 
581–597. https://doi.org/10.1068/a4629 .
Turnhout, E., Metze, T., Wyborn, C., Klenk, N., Louder, E., 2020. The politics of co- 
production: participation, power, and transformation. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 
42, 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2019.11.009 .
van Bommel, S., Boonman-Berson, S., 2022. Transforming convivial conservation: 
towards more-than-human participation in research. Conserv. Soc. 20 (2), 136. 
https://doi.org/10.4103/cs.cs_29_21 .
Van der Velden, D., Klerkx, L., Dessein, J., Debruyne, L., 2024. Cyborg farmers: 
embodied understandings of precision agriculture. Sociol. Rural. 64, 3–21. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/soru.12456 .
van Veen, A., Helvoirt, B., 2024. De-Mooo-cracy! A Performative Experiment with a Cow- 
Human Citizen ’s Assembly: Evaluation Report. https://doi.org/10.13140/ 
RG.2.2.35140.44168 .
van Weeghel, H.J.E., Bos, A.P., Spoelstra, S.F., Groot Koerkamp, P.W.G., 2016. Involving 
the animal as a contributor in design to overcome animal welfare related trade-offs: 
the dust bath unit as an example. Biosyst. Eng. 145, 76–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.biosystemseng.2016.02.015 .
van Weeghel, H.J.E., Bos, A.P., Jansen, M.H., Ursinus, W.W., Groot Koerkamp, P.W.G., 
2021. Good animal welfare by design: an approach to incorporate animal capacities 
in engineering design. Agric. Syst. 191, 103154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
agsy.2021.103154 .
Verdouw, C., Tekinerdogan, B., Beulens, A., Wolfert, S., 2021. Digital twins in smart 
farming. Agric. Syst. 189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2020.103046 .
Vermunt, D.A., Negro, S.O., Van Laerhoven, F.S.J., Verweij, P.A., Hekkert, M.P., 2020. 
Sustainability transitions in the agri-food sector: how ecology affects transition 
dynamics. Environ. Innov. Soc. Trans. 36, 236–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eist.2020.06.003 .
Vermunt, D.A., Wojtynia, N., Hekkert, M.P., Van Dijk, J., Verburg, R., Verweij, P.A., 
Wassen, M., Runhaar, H., 2022. Five mechanisms blocking the transition towards 
“nature-inclusive ” agriculture: a systemic analysis of Dutch dairy farming. Agric. 
Syst. 195, 103280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2021.103280 .
Walthall, B., Vicente-Vicente, J.L., Friedrich, J., Piorr, A., L˘opez-García, D., 2024. 
Complementing or co-opting? Applying an integrative framework to assess the 
transformative capacity of approaches that make use of the term agroecology. 
Environ. Sci. Pol. 156, 103748. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2024.103748 .
Watts, V., 2016. Smudge this: assimilation, state-favoured communities and the denial of 
indigenous spiritual lives. Int. J. Child Youth Family Stud. 7 (1). https://doi.org/ 
10.18357/ijcyfs.71201615676 . Article 1. 
West, S., Haider, L.J., Stålhammar, S., Woroniecki, S., 2020. A relational turn for 
sustainability science? Relational thinking, leverage points and transformations. 
Ecosystems and People 16, 304–325.
Wolfert, S., Verdouw, C., van Wassenaer, L., Dolfsma, W., Klerkx, L., 2023. Digital 
innovation ecosystems in Agri-food: design principles and organizational framework. 
Agric. Syst. 204, 103558. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103558 .
Yaneva, A., 2009. Making the social hold: towards an actor-network theory of design. 
Des. Cult. 1 (3), 273–288. https://doi.org/10.2752/174967809X12556950208826 .
Youn, H., Baek, J.S., 2024. Assemblage-based stakeholder analysis in design: a 
conceptual framework through the lenses of post–anthropocentrism. CoDesign 1–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15710882.2024.2358966 .T. Moreira et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agricultural  Systems  231 (2026)  104512  
13 
