DISEÑA │ 24 |
January 2024
ISSN 0718-8447 (print)
 2452-4298 (electronic)
COPYRIGHT: CC BY-SA 4.0 CL
Original Research Article
Reception ☑
March 13 2023
Acceptance ☑
January 08 2024  
🔗 Traducción alespañol aquíDirt Jumps are Matter 
Carefully Placed, 
Maintained, and  
Governed
How to cite this article: Healy, L. (2024). Dirt Jumps are Matter Carefully Placed, Maintained, and Governed. Diseña, (24), Article.6. 
https://doi.org/10.7764/disena.24.Article.6
 Liam Healy 
University of Sheffield24
This article draws on research produced 
with DIY bike trail and dirt jump builders to 
unpack the forms of repair and care that 
they employ in maintaining their spaces. I 
begin by describing the mundane practices 
involved in keeping bike trails running, such 
as shoveling, watering, and compacting, and 
conceptualize these activities as repairing 
the ‘ruins’ of the often squatted spaces that 
they occupy. Second, I draw from literature 
in feminist science and technology studies 
(STS) and commons to argue for a thickening 
of care, finding that these spaces alert me 
to the ways that ‘neglect’ , and exclusion 
from participation-in, and research-on, are 
often a requirement of their subsistence. In 
conclusion, I find that in these spaces forms 
of repair and maintenance are multiple 
and layered―from mundane practices to 
their forms of governance—and in recent 
years, have involved practices to ‘repair’ the 
pervasive and dominating macho, hetero-
normative cultures of these social worlds.
Keywords
DIY design
bike trail building
care
repair
commonsLiam Healy—Lecturer in Design at the University of Sheffield 
School of Architecture. PhD in Design from Goldsmiths, 
University of London. His research interests focus on situated 
critical and speculative design practice and research, DIY  design, 
care, the notion of the Anthropocene, and more-than-human 
entanglements with design. He is currently working on an 
AHRC-funded research project exploring access to woodlands 
with Forestry England; and an ethnography of bike trail builders 
drawing on architecture, participatory design, and inventive 
methods. Some of his recent publications include ‘Everything 
Is a Prototype, but Not At All in the Same Way: Towards an 
Ecology of Prototyping’ (STS Encounters, Vol. 15, Issue 2), 
‘Emergent Participation in DIY  Designed Bike Trails’ (with P. G. 
Krogh; Proceedings of the 17th Participatory Design Conference), 
and ‘Exploring the Temporalities of a Tandem in the Jungle’ 
(Society for Social Studies of Science: 4S Annual Meeting).
AbstrAct
Author
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
3
Dirt Jump s are Matter Carefully  Placed, 
Maintained,  and Governed
Liam Healy 
University of Sheffield
School of Architecture
Sheffield, uK
liam.healy@sheffield.ac.uk
https://orcid.org/0000- 0002- 5713- 0610
Introduct Ion: dIrt, n ot SoIl
Dirt is a term that arises frequently in the worlds of DIY trail builders: a short film 
I later analyze is called Dirt Rules!; a mountain bike publication has adopted Dirt 
as their namesake; another magazine, Dig, the practice of building in dirt; others 
focus on specific kinds of dirt such as Clay Division and The Loam W olf. In these 
worlds, dirt is celebrated, sought out, and categorized (Cherrington & Black, 
2020a). ‘Good dirt’ (such as clay) is used as a final finish on a trail, whereas ‘bad 
dirt’ (such as rocky spoil, landfill, or soil with organic matter) is used as fill, hidden 
under the top surface. Much like a gardener forms an intimate relationship with 
the ground in which they grow flowers or vegetables, trail builders have a highly 
attuned and embodied knowledge of the kinds of dirt that they work with, though 
seeking out very different properties. Without meaning to misrepresent Mary 
Douglas’s (2002) classic and oft-cited quote, I contend that dirt in these worlds 
is matter very carefully placed, shaped, and packed into its final (often sculptural) 
form; closely attended to, maintained, and repaired with care; and highly governed 
in terms of who gains access to it.
In the last thirty or so years, a burgeoning scholarship has 
emerged to examine the social worlds of extreme sports, such as skateboarding, 
climbing, surfing, and BMXing (some of the earliest studies include Midol, 1993; 
Midol & Broyer, 1995), as well as the architectures, designs, and practices that 
surround them. For example, Ian Borden’s work on skateboarding’s relationship 
to architecture and the production of space (2001, 2019), and Holly Thorpe’s work 
exploring snowboarding and product design (2012). However, I have found that 
there are two key differences here to the social worlds of bike trail builders. First, 
that often the equipment and landscapes described are relatively stable—skate -
boarding is most typically associated with concrete infrastructures (O’Connor et 
al., 2023) which, despite sharing a DIY  ethos with trail building, do not require 
the same ongoing maintenance as structures built in dirt.1  Second, scholarship 
in these areas rarely considers the ongoing and uneventful repair practices that 
enable them to continue, often focusing on the creative processes and consump -
tion of objects (Wheaton, 2013) that enable these sports. For example, the mate - 1  Jim Cherrington and Jack 
Black (2020b) have conceptualised 
this process undertaken by trail 
builders as ‘battling’ what they call 
the ‘spectres of nature’—in their 
case by managing water that would 
damage the trails. 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
4
riality of polyurethane wheels is often credited as giving rise to  skateboarding’s 
practices, possibilities, and therefore its popularity. 
In this article, I choose instead to focus on the often unseen 
communities and practices that care for, maintain, and repair DIY-designed bike 
trails and jumps (what I refer to by following vernacular language as ‘spots’) that 
are made of mud and dirt, and are typically designed, hand-built, shaped, and 
maintained by small communities on ‘edgelands’ (Shoard, 2000) using shovels 
and wheelbarrows, that are often squatted or appropriated without permission. 
These spots exist all over the world and are often connected by way of tight-knit 
social networks of (typically male) builders, maintained by traveling to visit one 
another, social media platforms, and printed and online magazines and zines. 
Though I branch out into a wider network of trail building, including some 
commercial operations, most of the spots I discuss in the article were originally 
built in secret, often on private land without prior permission from landowners, 
meaning they can be precarious, fragile, and are regularly evicted and the trails 
removed or bulldozed. 
A Note on Method
It is a little difficult to set out a typical ‘rigorous’, or reproducible methodology for 
this research because I consider myself something of an ‘insider’, having moved 
in and out of different aspects of the research context for more than twenty years, 
since I started building bike trails in a small wood near to where I grew up in the late 
nineties. Of course, when I was 12 years old, I had not completed research meth -
ods training, nor developed a sense of sociological registers to help make sense of 
what I, or the people around me, were doing. I hesitate to describe my involvement 
at this point, but mention it here because it has provided me with a long-term and 
embodied understanding of the shifting and irregular nature of these practices and 
their multiple sites, allowing me to reflect on my involvement over the course of 
more than two decades. Clearly, then, this research was not ‘designed’ or set out in 
advance, but has been an ongoing, messy process of “following the actors” (Latour, 
2005, p. 12) into multiple sites and interests. 
Sociologist John Law has convincingly argued that standard 
methods are “badly adapted to the study of the ephemeral, the indefinite and the 
irregular” (Law, 2004, p. 4), and argues that social scientists should go beyond 
convention and assemble a variety of methodological practices that are config -
ured towards the research at hand.  Law argues that we may need to “rethink our 
ideas about clarity and rigor, and find ways of knowing the indistinct and the 
slippery without trying to grasp and hold them tight” (2004, p. 3). Enacting this 
approach to the research with George Marcus’s notion of multi-sited ethnography, 
I have followed the “chains, paths, threads, conjunctions, or juxtapositions of 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
5
locations” (1998, p. 90) that are tied up with trail building’s multiple practices, 
and in recent years have seen my involvement as not only participating, but as a 
researcher attuned to the relations that make up these worlds. In the intervening 
time between building the first set of trails in the woods, I have become engaged 
in design research and science and technology studies (STS), and have come to 
understand my approach as a method assemblage (Law, 2004) from where to 
deal with the messiness of my entanglement with these settings. I have combined 
participation alongside observation, methods such as semi-structured interviews 
and walk-alongs, photo and video methods, as well as following networks into 
their online and digital worlds. 
This paper also builds on some previous work, where I have 
studied what I called the emergent forms of participation (Healy & Krogh, 2022) 
in these sites, in order to draw out what participatory designers, architects, 
and urban planners, might learn from punk, DIY approach to participation and 
non-participation. I have also written on the maintenance and care of mountain 
bike trails for a sociology of sport and leisure studies audience (Healy, in press), 
which I build on here to bring the ideas discussed into a design research context. 
Methodologically, I see this ongoing relation as a kind of care practice that centers 
and takes seriously what these communities of practice do for different audiences, 
as well as what different scholarly attention and analysis might contribute to 
these worlds: a point that I will revisit in my concluding remarks.
In utilizing these methods, I have been inspired by feminist STS  
scholars’ suggestion that we (which I take to mean designers and researchers) 
should tune into neglected practices and things (Lindström et al., 2019; Puig de 
la Bellacasa, 2011), including practices of care and repair. Accordingly, I start from 
a position of making a shift from studying forms of ‘action’ (Gomart & Hennion, 
1999) towards maintenance (Denis & Pontille, 2014, 2019) and ‘care in practice’ 
(Mol et al., 2015), and in doing so find that trails  spots thicken conceptions of care 
in spaces typically conceptualized in terms of performance, as well as the affective 
experiences and thrills of bike riding itself (Hagen & Boyes, 2016), as opposed to 
the less visible and often mundane practices that keep them functioning, which 
make these experiences possible. In the article, I will provide a series of stories 
based on my observations and experiences, refer to digital resources, describe a 
film I edited as part of the research, and quote from portions of semi-structured 
interviews conducted with trail builders. 
The article is structured along three forms of repair that I encoun -
tered in the field. First, I give an account of the DIY practices involved in building 
and maintaining trails, which I argue are neglected because they rarely feature in 
mainstream accounts or understandings of the sport, or the spaces they take place 
in (though I find are often prominent in vernacular forms of media and documen -
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
6
tation). In tuning into these care-ful practices, I conceptualize the spaces that bike 
trails are built on by following Anna Tsing’s notion of ‘post-capitalist ruins’ (2015), 
finding that they are often built on former spaces of capitalist exploitation such 
as mines and quarries, spaces between major roads, and landfills. I argue that 
the practices that trail builders undertake can be understood as a kind of ‘repair 
work’ of these spaces, whereby new forms, practices, and experiences emerge 
from these ruins. 
Second, I problematize the ongoing temporal concern of caring 
for the trails themselves so that they can remain functional. Referring to Maria 
Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2011) call to tune into ‘neglected things’, I argue that care 
practices are not only unseen but intentionally and often necessarily kept secret 
because spots often exist illegally. This brings about two important problems, 
which I argue thicken and problematize calls for ‘paying attention’ as an act of 
care. (1) The forms of attention they are given must be done carefully, and I reflect 
on when researchers should consider ‘looking away’ from what might appear to 
be something neglected, so that practices and spaces may be kept safe by way of 
them being secret or hidden. (2) A highly contentious issue among trail-building 
communities, where exclusion of those outside the core community is often 
enacted and described as a maintenance practice. 
The final form of repair I describe relates to repairing practices of 
exclusion by way of new opportunities for participation from those who have typi -
cally been outsiders to the core community. I argue that these ‘reparations’ have 
two key features: (1) That there are structured and enforced forms of governance 
and rules required for these places to continue to exist in the margins; (2) several 
 spots have recently started to ‘repair’ these forms of exclusion by developing new 
practices to ensure a spot’s future. These include re-designing the architecture of 
spaces to invite a broader community, and ‘exclude to include’ initiatives designed 
to bring in new participants. In conclusion, I argue that these sites re-emphasize 
that repair and care are not innocent, and that feminist approaches to the politics 
of care highlight who, or what, is excluded, thereby thickening care in terms of 
drawing out the multiple, overlaid, and often contradictory repair practices. 
From Act Ion to mAIntenAnce
I  often have a difficult time describing what I am doing in my research to interloc -
utors, friends, and fellow trail builders. It seems there is something of a void be -
tween these often macho worlds, and the slightly unlikely analytic lens of feminist 
conceptions of care, maintenance, and the commons. Clearly, the more visible or 
obvious aspects of these spaces are associated with action and expression, the 
affective experience of bike riding (Hagen & Boyes, 2016), and performing jumps 
and tricks. Equally, care is more typically employed as a lens in STS (Lindén & Ly -
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
7
dahl, 2021) to examine practices like nursing (Latimer, 2000), the management 
of disease (Mol, 2008), soil (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015), and more recently has 
been taken up in various corners of design scholarship (Lindström et al., 2019; 
Pennington, 2022; Rodgers et al., 2018). The reason I have adopted this position 
is that feminist scholars (Fisher & Tronto, 1990) have convincingly (and for some 
time) argued that attention is asymmetrically paid to the grand gestures of action, 
over the continual, every day, and mundane processes―that Puig de la Bellacasa 
has referred to as ‘doings’ (2017, p. 69)―of looking after people and things (Tronto, 
1993, p. 120). In doing so, I find that the theory helps to understand and problema -
tize the multiple and layered forms of repair and maintenance in these places, as 
well as providing a novel opportunity to reflect on the ways care is understood and 
might be thickened, and also how some of the practices in these spaces might be 
re-thought or re-designed in dialogue with theory. 
Neglected Practices
DIY trails spots are not only to do with riding bikes and performing tricks, but in -
volve many other practices and support networks, including the production and 
repair of the space itself, collecting rubbish, planting trees (Figure 2), preparing 
food (Figure 1), gardening, and cleaning (Figure 3), as well as providing general 
support (e.g., for mental health) within the community. These practices are rare -
ly centered in either mainstream or scholarly accounts of action sports. In an at -
tempt to explore them through other outlets in biking culture, Figure 6 shows a set 
of screenshots from a short video, Dirt Rules!, made by the American BMX bike 
company S&M Bikes. I have re-edited this 42-minute video by following a set of F igure 1: A pizza oven built 
into one of the jumps at a spot 
near London. Photograph by 
the author.

 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
8
rules―a method that I have called a ‘dogma’, following film directors Von Trier 
and Vinterberg (2005)―so that all ‘action’ (jumping, crashing, performing tricks) 
is removed, with only maintenance or care practices left in the video. What is left 
is three minutes of stacking (making piles of dirt); shaping (sculpting the piles 
into the desired forms); packing and compacting the features; sweeping, watering, 
planting, pruning, and covering jumps with tarpaulins when not in use. From the 
original video, I was surprised at how much of the film remained showing only the 
mundane practices of repair. This attests that there is a certain sense of pride in 
these maintenance practices, and while they are largely unseen outside the com -
munity, they are rather explicit and focused within it. This was further confirmed 
when, at a recent fund-raising event (a ‘jam’) for a local dirt-jump spot, users were 
invited to take part in a video competition (Figure 4), in which they could submit a 
video up to three minutes long, which would receive bonus points from the judges 
if it contained evidence of digging or maintenance of jumps.2Fi gure 2: A tree that has been 
newly planted at Bolehills BMX  
track by volunteers inside a 
social space built from rubble 
filtered out of the dirt that  
is used to construct the track. 
Photograph by the author.
2 A ‘jam’ is a non-competitive 
event bringing together different 
communities of riders and 
builders. They are often employed 
by communities to raise money 
to sustain a spot, for example to 
pay for insurance on the land, 
materials, or tools.
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
9
->w Fig ure 3: ‘Trash Rat 2020’ , 
screenshot of a video of former 
World Cup downhill champion 
(now social media influencer) 
Josh Bryceland cleaning his 
local trails.
->e Figu re 4: Screenshot 
showing trail maintenance 
from a video entry to the 
Bolehills Halloween Jam video 
competition.
->d Figur e 5: A small jump spot 
occupying meanwhile space 
in Brooklyn, USA, while a new 
housing development was 
being constructed. Photograph 
by the author.

 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
10
However, maintenance practices are not only the physical actions 
of repairing the space or building new features. I refer to the images in the article 
to provide three examples: Figure 1 is taken at a trail spot in the UK which is on 
squatted (though tolerated) land, where an annual jam is used to raise money to 
pay for insurance the community has taken out on the land, by selling pizzas made 
from an oven built into one of the jumps. Figure 5 shows a spot in a meanwhile 
space in Brooklyn which was supported by several local housing developments, 
and became a space to bring new riders into the sport. I highlight this example 
because it begins to reveal practices that are unpaid and more or less unseen in 
the other places that I have observed. Here, three people were employed to main -
tain the space, collect trash, and empty bins; ensure it was safe; and show newer 
or younger riders how to use it—all practices that are done voluntarily in the other 
spots analyzed here. In recent years, there has also been a more visible mainte -
nance presence among the community, where well-known riders and ‘influencers’ 
(Figure 3) have begun to produce social media content to persuade their followers 
to clean and look after their spots. The non-profit organization Trash Free Trails 
has also had a relatively wide reach in encouraging riders and builders to look after 
the ‘natural’ spaces where trails exist. For example, they have organized litter 
picking at biking events, run workshops with young people to clean up their local 
trails, and developed a citizen science initiative to measure types and quantities 
of pollution (Trash Free Trails, 2020, 2021).F igure  6, this and the next 
page: Screenshots from the 
video Dirt Rules! by S&M Bikes/
Stew Johnson.

 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
11
Puig de la Bellacasa has conceived of the notion of ‘doings’, as 
a “focus o n everydayness, on the uneventful, as a way of noticing care’s ordinary 
doings, the domestic unimpressive ways in which we get through the day, without 
which no event would be possible” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017, p. 117). The notion 
of doings is at odds with the grand event, ‘moment of ecstasy’ (Midol, 1993), or 
grandiose performance of a difficult jump or trick, and instead draws attention to 
the uneventful and ‘ordinary’. The concept suggests slower kinds of practice that 
are without end—an attuning towards constant ongoing practices of maintenance 
and care. I found Bellacasa’s notion of doings was echoed in the fieldwork. For 
example, an interviewee, Brian, from Posh Woods in Pennsylvania, USA, told me:
[At Posh] there isn’t a lot of creative input necessary, I’m like the Caretaker 
(…) in the grand scheme of things, it’s probably like 70 percent caretaking 
and 30 percent riding.
Describing himself as a caretaker over the spot, B rian went on to explain that very 
little of his time is spent riding or using the trails, and that for him, maintenance 
is the dominant practice when he attends the trails. He explained that this is in 
part because this particular spot has been here for around 27 years, meaning it is 
no longer necessary, or indeed possible owing to lack of space, to make new trails 
or features. Instead, now that these trails have achieved a certain amount of per -
manence, the larger proportion of practices center on keeping the jumps running 
and in good shape. Brian also gives a highly asymmetric ratio of riding (which for 
most of those I have talked with, is the end goal of doing this work) to maintenance 
work, showing that far from an aside, these practices are a central, dominant, and 
important aspect of the culture for the community. 

 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
12
Caring for Ruins
Figure 7 : Map of a trails spot 
in  the UK showing how it is 
contained by major roads and 
an industrial estate. The map 
has been blurred to ensure the 
spot’s secrecy.
Many spots are built on squatted land, without permission (at least initially). My 
interlocutors tend to tell similar stories of the genesis of their spot: they usually be -
gin at a small DIY scale, with a group of (normally) young people looking for some -
where to ride their bikes, building new features and jumps that gradually grow in 
size. Many of these spaces can also be characterized as edgelands that exist some -
where between the urban and rural; typically they are unplanned, or ‘spaces left-
over after planning’ (SLOAP ), and what I have come to think of as post-capitalist 
ruins (Tsing, 2015), with the builders re-appropriating them for their own needs. 
For example, they are often sandwiched between major roads (Figure 7), taking up 
the spoil spaces that are left over after roads are built, or in the case of Brian’s spot, 
Posh Woods, in the between space of a disused quarry, suburban housing, and a 
shopping mall car park. Importantly, it is precisely this sense of ‘ruin’ that allows 
them to function and remain—they do not take up prime locations, meaning oth -
ers often do not make claims over the space. Outside the trail community, people 
do not seem to care very much about the land, giving an underground community 
an opportunity to (often temporarily) occupy it.
I have also found that spots are often built on land that has 
previously been exploited, for example from mining. They are always already 
nature-cultures (Latour, 1993)—they of course don’t exist in pristine untouched 
nature, but among existing human transformations. This is where I take the 
notion of ruins from Anna Tsing (2013) to refer to the spaces of post-capitalist 
exploitation where new practices and kinds of life begin to emerge. Importantly, it 
isn’t my intention here to romanticize these practices or their human privileging—
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
13
one could argue that many of these maintenance practices are damaging in them -
selves, and perhaps the land on which we find trails was doing just fine at repairing 
itself before the trail builders arrived. Instead, my argument is that from these 
neglected places, comes a set of playful practices that (though privileging potential 
human experiences) can also be seen as a space of co-becoming between humans 
and non-humans that fosters new affective experiences and relationships. 
In recent years, there has been a renewed interest in compost (e.g., 
Hamilton & Neimanis, 2018), and soil (e.g., Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015) among 
STS circles and fellow travelers. Donna Haraway (2019) has adopted the meta -
phor of compost to describe storytelling and processes of writing-with. It seems 
soil and compost invoke a different reaction to ‘dirt’―they are lively, rich, teeming 
with possibility, and perhaps pleasant, whereas dirt remains… dirty. Often on the 
sites that I have explored, there are things and materials that refuse to compost 
down: the rubble that is left over after mining or quarrying, half-buried fly-tipped 
trash, and the dirt spoil that is left over after road building. Thinking with Tsing 
and her colleagues’ work, I find that in these spaces we can find ‘life built among 
capitalist ruins’, whereby their former functions are re-purposed. But rather than 
an eerie sense of ‘haunted landscape’, these traces left after their previous life give 
shape to the space enabling new performative, often joyous, and affective possi -
bilities for a community. To co-opt (or compost?) a Harawayan phrase from Katie 
King (2019), in these spaces there is perhaps dirt for making kin.
To thicken this further, in what has in recent years been run as 
a commercial mountain bike park built in a former quarry turned commercial 
timber plantation in North Wales, UK, the notion of ruins is ongoing. Here the 
earthworks to the terrain that was left after quarrying and subsequent tree plan -
tation produces conditions that are well suited to building mountain bike trails: 
the trees are planted consistently, protecting the trails from water, and the holes 
left from quarrying become features like drops and jumps. However, this site has 
recently been closed down due to an outbreak of Phytophthora ramorum (Forest 
R esearch, n.d.), a tree disease affecting the Larch in the plantation forest, meaning 
the center has been closed so that the affected trees can be felled and removed 
(Revoluti on Bike Park Announcement, 2022). This causes the trails to be no longer 
useable because the shelter provided by the trees was necessary for them to func -
tion, adding another layer of ruin—the trails built in the ruins of the quarry-be -
come-bike-park are themselves becoming a ruin. 
My point here is that far from a pristine nature, when these spaces 
are explored through the lens of repair and maintenance, they reveal themselves as 
highly complex, involving global networks of actors (e.g., tree diseases, resource 
extraction, and capitalist exploitation), which are ongoing, and involve heteroge -
neous and often competing practices. And of course, once again echoing feminist 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
14
STS scholars’ arguments: they are not neutral and the practices―and ontolog -
ical politics (Mol, 1999)―involved in them will often be at the expense of ‘others’.
To provide one final example to interrogate this concept, Holmen 
Dirt (Figure 8) is a spot tha t emerged from the Anarchist commune Freetown 
Christiania in Denmark in the late 1990s. Here the piles of dirt that make up the 
jumps and features were once Viking age fortifications (a ruin in a far more tradi -
tional, archaeological sense perhaps), and are therefore a site of historical impor -
tance that the municipality has recently decided to make an effort to restore and 
protect, trying to evict the trail builders from the site. Here the site has become 
haunted by its former life as a ruin, which the municipality wants to preserve. Figure 8:   Holmen Dirt in Copenhagen, 
Denmark. Photographer unknown.
neglected t hIngS, And cArIng F or commonS
I am aware that until now I could be accused of taking a somewhat normative posi -
tion towards trails spots by uncritically listing all of the wonderful caring practices 
that take place here. There is of course more trouble. For example, my interlocutors 
have discussed with me a practice of exclusion that can be seen as an act of main -
tenance, or even care. This is based on the finding in my fieldwork that often trails 
spots are not neglected as an ‘uncaring’ act, but are actively kept secret in order to 
protect them. Or put another way, that the local builders might want us to neglect 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
15
them. This suggests two problems for me as a scholar interested in conducting re -
search on these places. The first is to problematize when I might need to look away 
from something or someplace in order to protect it. The second is, to suspend a pre -
vailing feeling, or perhaps normative understanding, that exclusion must be ‘bad’. 
I propose here to stay with the trouble of the ways exclusion has been described to 
me by my interlocutors. 
When to Look Away
I am currently working on a research project with Forestry England exploring the 
ways in which the organization provides access to their woodlands, and how this 
might be done and designed differently. One aspect of the study is to look at how 
mountain bike riders use their forestry sites. Rather fortunately, a short distance 
from where I live is a key hub of mountain biking in the UK built on Forestry En -
gland-managed land. This site could potentially provide a rich case study owing 
to the large network of trails, as well as several active and motivated communities 
involved in their design, building, and maintenance to conduct research with. How -
ever, there is a problem—trails in this woodland are ‘wild’, and while they are some -
what tolerated, they are not ‘legal’ or built with permission. Hence, the network of 
trails is kept secret, with entrances to them often obscured and hidden, and being 
shown to them (and therefore gaining the privilege to ride them) comes with a set 
of rules and principles concerning sharing their locations. For example, the social 
media and fitness tracking app Strava (a divisive topic among the mountain bike 
community) should not be used on these trails because it can help ‘other’ unwel -
come users to discover secret trails, and it is not uncommon to see signs in the area 
discouraging the use of these and other social media platforms.
It is very tempting to begin a study of this area of woodlands and its 
trail network—the research could certainly provide interesting findings, and could 
potentially foster beneficial practices and partnerships between the trail-building 
community and Forestry England. But because of the status of these trails, it is also 
extremely risky, and I am acutely aware that bringing attention to them through 
the project could jeopardize their future. Therefore, I have found that a practice or 
methodology I may need to foster as a researcher is knowing when to ‘look away’, or 
when to neglect something that is enticing as an interesting research subject. These 
spots then begin to problematize when and why scholars start to look for ‘neglected 
things’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011), and suggest that there will be times when those 
neglected things should perhaps remain neglected.
Exclusion as a Maintenance Practice
This brings me to another important problem in these places: that trails and their 
related practices are not just overlooked by accident, but people are actively exclud -
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
16
ed from them. This in turn becomes a condition of the place, and one which (some 
locals would argue) allows them to sustain. For example, when we discussed who 
was involved in Posh Woods historically, Brian told me: 
You didn’t go down there unless you knew somebody, or you got the OK   
from somebody.
Another interlocutor, Carley, was one of those who seemingly did not get the ok 
from somebody: 
I went [to Posh] with my brother... I had no intentions of riding, but I brought 
my bike because we were on a trip and [the locals] all looked at me like, “Why 
is she here?” I was like, “Whoa, Oh. Where do you want me to go? You want 
me to go sit in the car?!” 
The locals from Posh Woods have in the past sought to exclude users from outside 
the core local group. From an outsider’s perspective, they seem like the usual argu -
ments used to keep out people who do not fit with a ‘core’ local scene (Abulhawa, 
2020; McCormack, 2017). However, if we take a different view, and this is lensed 
through a sense of care or maintenance, these practices appear different. For exam -
ple, Carley, who is from my understanding deeply embedded in the scene (yet was 
still previously excluded by these practices as we saw above), offered an internal 
perspective that centers around protection, and maintaining the trails:
when trails get plowed, people’s lives stop for a long time. Something died, 
[they] lost something that [they] invested so much into. People don’t get 
that unless you have a spot plowed. You have no idea what that feels like. 
(…) when people are so protective of trails and people coming in, it’s because 
of that experience of loss.
The problem that Carley describes is that too much of an open spot could bring un -
wanted attention and jeopardize its future. This argument appears to sit along the 
lines of those made for enclosure and exclusion, echoing Garrett Hardin’s famous 
notion of the ‘Tragedy of the Commons’ (1968), where he would assert that the pro -
tection of private property is in the best interests of the ‘population’, arguing for the 
merits of exclusive access to land by a select few (typically land owners). 
Clearly, this practice of exclusion is highly problematic, espe -
cially where it falls along pre-existing intersections of injustice and exclusion in 
sports, such as by gender (Beal, 1996; Massey, 1994; McCormack, 2017; Rinehart, 
2005; Robinson, 2008), race (Harrison, 2013), sexuality, or age. Having said this, 
however, when maintenance is described as a practice of exclusion, it highlights 
when certain kinds of participation can be damaging and means confronting 
restriction as a repair practice. Of course, there are several examples of this in 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
17
other spaces, for example, in order to protect sacred or natural spaces, to re-wild 
damaged land, or to prevent damaging practices related to access (which might 
also include building illegal trails).
commonIng And rep AIrIng
I have found in recent years there has been a move towards initiatives that see to 
exclude to include, for example, women’s and gender non-binary events (e.g., Fig -
ures 9 and 10) have become more common in the field (certainly since my early in -
volvement), where the typical white, male, hetero users of the space are excluded 
in order to invite more diverse participants. The above then suggests some notions 
of governance and rules, which are central to forms of repair both physically, and 
in the ways of undoing the various kinds of historical and ongoing discrimination.
->w Figure 9:   A social media 
post advertising Bole Hills BMX  
track’s Women’s Jam. Author 
unknown.
->d ->e Figure 10 :   Poster advertis-
ing the Catty and P osh Woods 
‘Women’s Weekend’ event 
in 2021. Illustrated by Tasha 
Lindemann.
The Commons Have Always Required Governance
Several scholars (e.g., Linebaugh, 2010; Ostrom, 1990) have argued that Hardin’s 
arguments for enclosure fail to acknowledge that the commons were in fact always 
governed (for example, fines would be issued for grazing too many animals on a 
given plot). Though the commons are technically open, there are always certain 
rules to adhere to so that the land is not overwhelmed. This is also true of DIY trails 
 spots, which are normally accompanied by written and unwritten rules. For exam -
ple, ‘no dig, no ride’ is a common phrase, and perhaps the first ‘rule’ of most spots, 
meaning that there should be a relatively even contribution to a spot’s production, 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
18
In their introduction to the Aesthetics of the Commons , Cornelia 
Sollfrank et al. (2021) describe the structure of commons as ‘relations of care 
rather than ownership’. I find this a useful way of understanding these spaces 
in two key ways. First, there are the more obvious and visible relations of care 
consisting of shoveling, raking, and watering, done to produce the space. Second, 
there are the rules and forms of DIY  governan ce which arguably come to matter 
just as importantly in holding the space together. This is because these spaces 
are very rarely ‘owned’ by the community—they are squatted and held together 
in a fragile network of being just hidden enough, just safe enough, just about 
standing―they are fragile all the way down, requiring relations that carefully 
cobble and hold them together.
Governance, seen in this way is a series of care relations that 
enable the commons to function, for example: the different relations between both 
humans and non-humans are required for the space to be safe, and to continue 
to function. Peter Linebaugh (2008, p. 298) provides the notion of commoning  
(importantly, as a verb), explaining: Figure 11 : A  sign at Bolehills 
BMX track describing the ‘rules’ 
of the spot. Photograph by the 
author, sign illustrated by Beth 
Breeden.
maintenance, and care in order for a user to gain access to it. Spots also tend to have 
basic rules to keep them functioning, such as not climbing on the jumps to prevent 
damage, and more typical safety rules (e.g., to only go in one direction and wear a 
helmet, see Figure 11). Therefore, in order to maintain the spaces as commons, 
certain rules must be adhered to. 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
19
to speak of the commons as if it were a natural resource is misleading at 
best and dangerous at worst—the commons is an activity and, if anything, 
it expresses relationships in society that are inseparable from relations to 
nature. It might be better to keep the word as a verb, an activity, rather than 
as a noun, a substantive. (Linebaugh, 2008, p. 279) 
This helps to understand these places through a lens of care, whereby, they are not 
set out around collective sets of ‘resources’, or forms of exchange, but through an 
entanglement of human communities, and the non-human soil, dirt, water, trees, 
shovels, bikes, animals, and tarpaulins.
Understanding their fragility, many spots I have  researched 
have begun to change their practices of exclusion toward actively inviting new 
communities into them. Importantly, this comes about for two key and overlap -
ping reasons. The first is that for spots to become more open, they need to have 
achieved a certain amount of permanence, often having been granted permission 
to use the land. And second, that the communities involved in their upkeep have 
become smaller, meaning more people need to be recruited to take on the mainte -
nance practices. Arguably then, participation can be said to be in a state of repair, 
and is starting to be cared for and invited.
Material Invitations
In the interviews, I have found that these spots are slowly shifting from what in 
the past have been hyper-masculine, closed-off, and exclusive spaces, and are 
carefully developing ways to be inclusive to a broader range of users. Carley told 
me this is because, 
There’s this fear that there’s going to be a disconnect that when this group 
of legendary trail builders are all done (…) who’s going to come up and take 
over the trails?!
So, the recruitment of new builders also relates to the maintenance of the spot 
and the sport in general. Core locals are getting older, are perhaps retiring from 
the sport, or are injured, and need help to keep things running. Brian also echoed 
this and has been working to actively re-design their spot so that they might be -
come more open to new users. 
I think you’ve got to put the beacon out there, and we’ve been trying to do 
that and been making it more accessible and more inviting to younger peo-
ple, to women, to girls.
Many of the locals have found that they need to involve more members from differ -
ent communities so that their trails can be made sustainable. This is illustrated by 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
20
new specific architectural features designed to invite a broader community into 
the space. For example, Holmen Dirt built a pump track d eliberately positioned 
so it is visible from a path running alongside the trails (Figure 12), in the hope 
that young people, parents, and so on, will see the more accessible track and be 
attracted to join in with the local scene. Behroz, the main digger at Holmen Dirt, 
explained to me that there has been a shift in attitudes among the locals and that 
he wanted to expand the community as much as possible:
From the start, we didn’t want to get picked up by the commune too much... 
But then, you know, if we do it like that, you don’t get to grow, you don’t get 
to get really good facilities.
Anthropologist Jean Lave and educational theorist Etienne Wenger (1991) have 
developed the concept of ‘legitimate peripheral participation’ to describe the ways 
newcomers interact with old-timers and become part of what they describe as “a 
community of practice” (1991, p. 29). The authors focus on a broad understanding 
of ‘apprenticeships’ as processes of situated learning that are not only limited to 
workplaces (their aim, they argue, is to ‘rescue’ apprenticeships). With this concept 
in mind, in the case of Holmen, there is a situated process of learning that first and 
foremost involves a bodily engagement of learning to ride a bike skillfully on a given 
feature, as a ‘user’ of the space. As in Lave and Wenger’s examples, here a person’s 
intentions to learn are configured through the process of becoming a full partici -
Figure 12 : Bu ilding the 
pump track at Holmen Dirt. 
Photographer unknown.
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
21
Figure 13 : Pho tograph of a 
political debate organized by 
the Holmen Dirt locals to dis-
cuss the future of their spot. 
Photograph by the author.
pant in a given spot’s sociocultural practice. To shift from a user to a fully-fledged 
member involves that ‘user’ becoming engaged in repair and maintenance prac -
tices that they shadow and learn from the old-timers. These typically begin with 
basic tasks such as filling wheel-barrows with dirt, or raking leaves, eventually 
graduating to a ‘shaper’—someone who is responsible for the design of a trail and 
final shaping of features like jumps and berms. These processes are—as we might 
expect—informal, DIY, negotiated, debated (often fought over), and highly situat -
ed to a given spot and its social, cultural, and material conditions. 
The large drive to recruit new people into the spot at Holme n 
involved forming a union (similar to a charity or non-profit company), which meant 
that they could rapidly grow and make new resources available (like rental bikes, 
tools, and materials) by applying for resources from the municipality. Here, the 
‘locals’, or core community, begin to develop material interventions in the space 
that are designed and built to bring outsiders, or those on the periphery, into the 
community. However, this drive to open up the spot through these methods was 
not universally accepted among the community, and Behroz described how these 
new practices produced tensions in the original group, meaning that some of the 
original members left because they felt that the punk and DIY roots had become 
replaced with a practice of administration and organization more typical of main -
stream politics. This engagement with traditional forms of politics became very 
clear when I visited Holmen in 2022. In their response to the municipality’s plans 
to remove the trails (because of the aforementioned planned eviction to restore 
the Viking age fortifications), the locals organized a live-streamed political debate 
with five potential candidates for local councilors shortly before a local election 
(Figure 13). This allowed them to set the terms of a political debate on the future 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
22
of their spot, and its  relationship to active travel in front of various local groups in 
a nearby sports ground. Here, the invitation to others outside the core users (poli -
ticians, and other non-users) into the practices of maintaining the trails was very 
savvy, and eventually led them to secure pledges from all of the candidates to stand 
on a platform that would support them. 
concluSIon
In this article I set out to explore the world of DIY-designed b ike trails through a 
lens of maintenance, by drawing on theories related to care and repair. By choosing 
to focus on the everyday doings in these places, I found that trails suggest small but 
important enclaves for observing how communities might build new experiences 
and possibilities in the dirt among the ruins of post-capitalist extraction. I went on 
to argue that it’s important to approach these spaces and communities critically 
and carefully, to consider when to look away from neglected or ‘secret’ things, and 
to pay attention to their exclusive politics. I found that caring for these places also 
involves exclusion practices, whereby secrecy is described as being paramount 
to some spots’ continuation. I proposed to stay with the trouble of this exclusion, 
and to consider what this might mean in the context of repairing, or care-ful prac -
tice. And finally, I sought to attune to the ways rules and governance participate 
in commons, and how these might be re-made, re-designed, and participated with 
otherwise.
The sites and communities I explored re-emphasize that repair 
and care are not innocent, and following feminist approaches highlighted who or 
what does the repair work, and who is excluded by way of care relations. The prac -
tices in these spots thicken  theoretical descriptions of care and become a novel 
site to conceptualize the relationships between the multiple ongoing repair and 
maintenance practices enacted. What I have shown through the empirical work 
is by centering the ‘mundane’ and approaching with a different focus to that of 
‘action’, that multiple, overlapping, often contradictory forms of DIY  repair and 
maintenance of trails are revealed, that we as designers and researchers can learn 
from and become attuned to.
This is important for three key reasons. The first is that as alterna -
tive sports become more mainstream and popular, a focus on them through theo -
retical lenses such as care and repair provides ways to understand, and potentially 
intervene in or re-make some of their (arguably more problematic) practices. Once 
again, I look to skateboarding  as an example, whereby the proliferation of schol -
arship in this field has provided communities with the tools to critically consider, 
as well as legitimize their practices in the face of (often hostile) urban planning 
(Borden, 2015), and by providing more open and inclusive spaces and opportuni -
ties for those deemed as being outside their ‘core’ (Abulhawa, 2017). The second 
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
23
is that as large amounts of scientific work are beginning to show, access to green 
and ‘natural’ spaces provides several human health, well-being, and even creative 
benefits (see, for example, Atchley et al., 2012; Bratman et al., 2015; Grahn et 
al., 2021; Olafsdottir et al., 2018). If trail building, access to natural places, and 
human health can be bound together in processes of mutual care and repair, there 
are opportunities to foster beneficial relations between human and planetary well -
being (and as we have seen, the actors who already do a large amount of care-work 
and labor in these places), towards stewarding the ruins, and more-or-less natural 
places where they practice.
In terms of future research directions, my ongoing research into 
forests is allowing me to further explore the findings that I have outlined above, 
and to branch out into new empirical sites, with different communities and collab -
orators. By doing this I am looking for ways to symmetrize, and bring the theories 
around repair, care relations, and the commons discussed in the article to empirical 
sites, as a way of informing a kind of action-research. It can sometimes feel strange 
or even uncomfortable to bring up feminist STS, or theories around more-than-
human care while I’m stacking up a new landing or cutting in a berm. But, in my 
view, it is important to start stitching these worlds together to explore their future 
possibilities and co-becomings. As this work continues to unfold, I am looking to 
develop the ways in which the communities I engage with might begin to under -
stand their practices through scholarly attention and analysis, and to explore specu -
lative questions around what the benefits and pitfalls of this might be.  _d
REFERENCES
AB ULHA wA, D. (2017). Smoothing Space in Palestine: Building a Skatepark and a Socio-
political Forum with the SkatePal Charity. Journal of Urban Cultural Studies, 4(3), 
417–426. https://doi.org/10. 1386/jucs.4.3.417_1
ABULHA wA, D. (2020). Skateboarding and Femininity: Gender , Space-making and 
Expressive Movement. Routledge.
ATCHLeY , R. A., STRAYeR, D. L., & A TCHLeY , P. (2012). Creativity in the Wild: 
Improving Creative Reasoning through Immersion in Natural Settings. PloS One, 
7(12), e51474. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0051474
BeAL, B. (1996). Alternative Masculinity and Its Effects on Gender Relations in the 
Subculture of Skateboarding. Journal of Sport Behavior , 19 (3), 204–220.
BORDen, I. (2001). Skateboarding, Space and the City: Architecture and the Body (1st ed.). 
Berg.
BORDen, I. (2015). An Interview with Professor Iain Borden on the ‘Long Live Southbank’ 
Campaign and Skatepark Design from the 1970s to the Present. https://www.academia.
edu/14302448/An_Interview_with_Professor_Iain_Borden_on_the_Long_Live_
Southbank_Campaign_and_Skatepark_Design_from_the_1970s_to_the_Present
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
24
BORDen, I. (2019). Skateboarding and the City: A Complete History (2nd ed.). Bloomsbury 
Visual Arts.
BRATMAn, G. n., D AILY, G. C., Lev Y, B. J., & GROSS , J. J. (2015). The Benefits of Nature 
Experience: Improved Affect and Cognition. Landscape and Urban Planning, 138 , 
41–50. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.landurbplan.2015. 02.005
CHeRRIn GTOn, J., & BLACK, J. (2020a). Mountain Bike Trail Building, ‘Dirty’ Work, and 
a New Terrestrial Politics. W orld Futures, 76 (1), 39–61. https://doi.org/10. 1080/026
04027.2019.1698234
CHeRRIn GTOn, J., & BLACK, J. (2020b). Spectres of Nature in the Trail Building 
Assemblage. International Journal of the Sociology of Leisure, 3(1), 71–93. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s41978- 019-00048-w
DenIS, J., & PO nTILLe, D. (2014). Maintenance Work and the Performativity of Urban 
Inscriptions: The Case of Paris Subway Signs. Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space, 32 (3), 404–416. https://doi.org/10. 1068/d13007p
DenIS, J., & PO nTILLe, D. (2019). Why Do Maintenance and Repair Matter? In A. Blok, 
I. Farías, & C. Roberts (Eds.), The Routledge Companion to Actor-Network Theory (1st 
ed., pp. 283–293). Routledge.
DOUGLAS , M. (2002). Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concept of Pollution and Taboo. 
Psychology Press.
FISHeR, B., & T ROnTO, J. (1990). Towards a Feminist Theory of Caring. In E. K. Abel & 
M. K. Nelson (Eds.), Circles of Care: Work and Identity in Women’s Lives (pp. 35-60). 
SUnY Press.
FOReST ReS eARCH. (n.d.). Ramorum Disease (Phytophthora ramorum). https://www.
forestresearch.gov.uk/tools-and-resources/fthr/pest-and-disease-resources/
ramorum-disease-phytophthora-ramorum/
GOMART , e., & HennIO n, A. (1999). A Sociology of Attachment: Music Amateurs, Drug 
Users. The Sociological Review, 47 (S1), 220–247. https://doi.org/10. 1111/j.1467-
954X.1999.tb03490.x
GRAHn, P., O TTOSSO n, J., & UvnäS-M OBeRG, K. (2021). The Oxytocinergic System 
as a Mediator of Anti-stress and Instorative Effects Induced by Nature: The Calm 
and Connection Theory. Frontiers in Psychology , 12 , 617814. https://doi.org/10. 3389/
fpsyg.2021. 617814
HAGen, S., & B OYeS, M. (2016). Affective Ride Experiences on Mountain Bike Terrain. 
Journal of Outdoor Recreation and Tourism, 15 , 89–98. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.
jort.2016. 07.006
HAMILTO n, J. M., & neIMAnIS , A. (2018). Composting Feminisms and Environmental 
Humanities. Environmental Humanities, 10 (2), 501–527. https://doi.
org/10.1215/22011919- 7156859
HARAwAY, D. (2019). It Matters What Stories Tell Stories; It Matters Whose Stories Tell 
Stories. a/b: Auto/Biography Studies, 34 (3), 565–575. https://doi.org/10. 1080/0898
9575.2019.1664163
HARDIn, G. (1968). The Tragedy of the Commons: The Population Problem Has No 
Technical Solution; It Requires a Fundamental Extension in Morality. Science, 
162(3859), 1243–1248.
HARRISO n, A. K. (2013). Black Skiing, Everyday Racism, and the Racial Spatiality 
of Whiteness. Journal of Sport and Social Issues, 37 (4), 315–339. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0193723513498607
HeALY, L. (in press). No Dig, No Ride: Repairing and Caring for DIY -designed Mountain 
Bike and BMX Trails. In J. Cherrington (Ed.), Mountain Biking, Culture and Society. 
Routledge.
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
25
HeALY, L., & KROGH, P. G. (2022). Emergent Participation in DIY  Designed Bike 
Trails. Proceedings of the 17th Participatory Design Conference: Embracing 
Cosmologies: Expanding W orlds of Participatory Design, 2, 76–83. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3537797. 3537814
KInG, K. (2019). Soils for Making Kin: Compost, Saudade, Com-Bios. a/b: Auto/Biography 
Studies, 34 (3), 555–563. https://doi.org/10. 1080/08989575. 2019.1664174
LATIMeR, J. (2000). The Conduct of Care: Understanding Nursing Practice. Wiley–
Blackwell.
LATOUR, B. (1993). We Have Never Been Modern (C. Porter, Trans.). Harvard University 
Press.
LATOUR, B. (2005). Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. 
Oxford University Press.
LAve, J., & w enGeR, e. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation. 
Cambridge University Press.
LAw, J. (2004). After Method: Mess in Social Science Research. Routledge. 
LInDén, L., & L YDAHL, D. (2021). Editorial: Care in STS. Nordic Journal of Science and 
Technology Studies, 9(1), 3–12. https://doi.org/10. 5324/njsts.v9i1.4000
LInDSTR öM, K., & ST åHL, å. (2019). Caring Design Experiments in the Aftermath. 
NORDES  2019: Who Cares?, 8.
LIneBAUGH, P. (2008). The Magna Carta Manifesto: Liberties and Commons for All. 
University of California Press.
 LIneBAUGH, P. (2010). Enclosures from the Bottom Up. Radical History Review, 
2010(108), 11–27. https://doi.org/10. 1215/01636545- 2010-007
MARCUS , G. e. (1998). Ethnography Through Thick and Thin. Princeton University Press.
MASSeY, D. B. (1994). Space, Place, and Gender. University of Minnesota Press.
MCCORMACK, K. M. (2017). Inclusion and Identity in the Mountain Biking Community: 
Can Subcultural Identity and Inclusivity Coexist? Sociology of Sport Journal, 34 (4), 
344–353. https://doi.org/10. 1123/ssj.2016- 0160
MIDOL, n. (1993). Cultural Dissents and Technical Innovations in the ‘Whiz’ 
Sports. International Review for the Sociology of Sport, 28 (1), 23–32. https://doi.
org/10.1177/101269029302800102
MIDOL, n., & BROYeR, G. (1995). Toward an Anthropological Analysis of New Sport 
Cultures: The Case of Whiz Sports in France. Sociology of Sport Journal, 12 (2), 
204–212. https://doi.org/10. 1123/ssj.12.2.204
MOL, A. (1999). Ontological Politics. A Word and Some Questions. The Sociological Review, 
47(S1), 74–89. https://doi.org/10. 1111/j.1467-954X.1999.tb03483.x
MOL, A. (2008). The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice. Routledge.
MOL, A., M OSeR, I., & POLS , J. (2015). Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes 
and Farms. Transcript Verlag.
O’COnnOR, P., eveRS , C., GLenneY , B., & wILLIn G, I. (2023). Skateboarding in the 
Anthropocene: Grey Spaces of Polluted Leisure. Leisure Studies, 42 (6), 897–907. 
https://doi.org/10. 1080/02614367. 2022.2153906
OLAFSDOTTIR, G., C LOKe, P., SCHUL z, A., DYCK, z., eYST eInSSOn, T., 
THORLeIFSDOTTIR, B., & v öGeLe, C. (2018). Health Benefits of Walking 
in Nature: A Randomized Controlled Study Under Conditions of Real-Life 
Stress. Environment and Behavior, 52 (3), 001391651880079. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0013916518800798
OSTROM, e. (1990). Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective 
Action (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press.
 Liam HeaLy Dirt Jumps are matter Carefully plaCeD, maintaineD, anD GoverneDDiseñA 24
jAn  2024
Article.6
26
PennIn GTOn, S. (2022). Care-politics in Design: Towards an Inventive Feminist Research 
Practice [PhD Dissertation, Goldsmiths, University of London]. https://research.
gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/32797/
PUIG De LA BeLLACASA, M. (2011). Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assembling 
Neglected Things. Social Studies of Science, 41 (1), 85–106. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312710380301
PUIG De LA BeLLACASA, M. (2015). Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity 
and the Pace of Care. Social Studies of Science, 45 (5), 691–716. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851
PUIG De LA BeLLACASA, M. (2017). Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than 
Human Worlds (3rd ed.). University of Minnesota Press.
REvOluTiON BikE PaRk aNNOuN cEmENT. (2022). https://www.revolutionbikepark.
co.uk/revolution-bike-park-announcement
RIneHART , R. (2005). “Babes” & Boards: Opportunities in New Millennium 
Sport? Journal of Sport and Social Issues, 29 (3), 232–255. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0193723505277909
ROBInSO n, v. (2008). Everyday Masculinities and Extreme Sport: Male Identity and Rock 
Climbing. Berg.
RODGeRS , P. A., BReMneR, C., & InneLLA, G. (2018). The Lancaster Care Charter. 
Design Issues, 35 (1), 73–77. https://doi.org/10. 1162/desi_a_00522
SHOARD, M. (2000). Edgelands of Promise. Landscapes, 1(2), 74–93. https://doi.
org/10.1179/lan.2000.1.2.74
SOLLFRAnK, C., STALD eR, F., & nIeD eRBeRGeR, S. (Eds.). (2021). Aesthetics of the 
Commons. Diaphanes.
THORPe, H. (2012). Snowboarding: The Ultimate Guide. Greenwood.
TRASH FRee TRAILS. (2020). Impact Report 2020 . https://www.trashfreetrails.org/
research
TRASH FRee TRAILS. (2021). The State of our Trails Report. https://trashfreetrails.org/
TROnTO, J. (1993). Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care. Routledge.
TSInG, A. (2013). More-Than-Human Sociality: A Call for Critical Description. In K. 
Hastrup (Ed.), Anthropology and Nature (pp. 37–52). Routledge.
TSInG, A. L. (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in 
Capitalist Ruins.  Princeton University Press.
vOn TRIeR, L., & vIn TeRBeRG , T. (2005). Dogme 95. In A. Utterson (Ed.), Technology 
and Culture, the Film Reader (pp. 87-88). Psychology Press.
wHeATO n, B. (2013). The Cultural Politics of Lifestyle Sports. Routledge.
