Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Geoforum
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/geoforum
Diverging temporalities of care work on urban farms: Negotiating history,
responsibility, and productivity in Lithuania
Diana Mincytėa,⁎, Aistė Bartkienėb, Renata Bikauskaitėc
aDepartment of Social Science, City University of New York-NYC College of Technology, 300 Jay Street, N-611, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA
bCenter for Health Ethics, Law and History, Vilnius University, M. K. Čiurlionio St. 21/27, Vilnius LT-03101, Lithuania
cDepartment of Philosophy, Vilnius University, Universiteto g. 9, Vilnius LT-01122, Lithuania
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Urban farming
Temporality
Agricultural care
Post-socialismEastern Europe
LithuaniaABSTRACT
While scholars have developed a nuanced understanding of agriculture as a form of care, the temporal orga-
nization of farming practices has received little consideration. Focusing on how farmers organize and experienceagriculture, we track diverging approaches to care work on urban farms in Vilnius, Lithuania. Our ethnographic
fieldwork and interviews show how Lithuanian urban farmers are struggling to reconcile the civic ideals of the
global urban farming movement with their historical understandings of care for specific plants and the land.Whereas the older generation views farming as kinship-based individualized work focusing on particular plantsand garden ecologies, the younger generation approaches it as a way to unwind, mediate, and build a com-
munity. These different perspectives on farming translate into divergent temporalities of care in which pro-
ductivist goals rooted in socialist self-provisioning practices and embodied in orderly landscapes encounter newtrends of agricultural care manifested in the natural aesthetics of the farms. We examine dynamic tensions
between the two farming modalities by linking them to different understandings of moral commitments and
responsibilities for plants and land. Through the lens of temporality, we also show how these divergent caremodes are themselves grounded in gender inequalities reproduced on the farms and enabled by by the welfare
state institutions, including maternity leave and retirement policies.
1. Introduction
A growing number of scholars have begun conceptualizing farming
as a form of care for plants, soil, and ecosystems (Hartigan, 2017; Law,
2010; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017; van Dooren et al., 2016). In this view,
agricultural practices are understood as relational, inter-species activ-
ities that demand from farmers stewardship and moral and emotional
commitments, as well as skills and embodied experiences (Mol et al.,
2010; Singleton, 2010; cf. Ginn, 2014). The care approach has been
particularly productive for understanding farming subjectivities in al-
ternative agro-food economies such as small-scale and subsistence
agriculture, gardening, urban farming, and other areas where ethical,
symbolic, and cultural considerations feature centrally in the farming
experience (Holloway, 2002; Krzywoszynska, 2015; Pitt, 2018).
As nuanced and insightful as this scholarship is, it often overlooks
the role of temporalities in shaping agricultural activities due to sea-
sonal and diurnal rhythms, wildlife and microorganism reproduction
cycles, and worker schedules (cf. Bingham, 2008). Even when scholars
consider temporalities in their analyses of agricultural care, as Puig dela Bellacasa (2015) did in a brilliant analysis of the slow pace of soil
restoration vis à vis scientific models aimed at increasing productivity,
they nevertheless present ahistorical and universalizing accounts of
temporal practices (cf. Richardson-Ngwenya, 2012). Yet agriculture
does not exist in a vacuum: it is shaped by historically situated nor-
mative understandings of what constitutes “good” care for the land and
“correct” ways of farming—and who is expected to perform those ac-
tivities (Sayre, 2011; 2003). Without considering the temporal organi-
zation of care practices and locating them within specific contexts, we
cannot fully understand what constitutes stewardship, skills, or even
care for the plants, soil, and ecosystems.
To address this gap, we apply a temporalities perspective to an
empirical case study of urban farming in Vilnius, the capital of
Lithuania. We study the temporal organization of care on the farms and
how various planned farming and social activities map onto plant
growth cycles and seasons. We also consider the volunteer farmers’
subjective experiences of farming and situate them in the broader his-
torical context and memory of self-provisioning in the region. As in the
rest of Eastern Europe, Lithuania relied on urban and peri-urban self-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2020.06.006
Received 12 April 2019; Received in revised form 31 May 2020; Accepted 3 June 2020⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: dmincyte@citytech.cuny.edu (D. Mincytė).Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
Available online 10 July 2020
0016-7185/ © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
provisioning schemes to enable generations of locals to survive the
tumultuous history of two world wars, transitions into and out of so-
cialism, neoliberal privatization reforms throughout the 1990s, and
entrance into the European Union in the early 2000s (Bellows, 2004;
Borčić et al, 2016; Hormel, 2017; Pungas, 2019; Smith and Jehlička,
2013; Varga, 2017a; Zavisca, 2003). Our analysis reveals how these
historical experiences of caring for the plants and land intersect with
contemporary urban farming work in Lithuania. More specifically, our
analysis yields two insights. First, we show how older and more ex-
perienced farmers approach farming as an individualized caring prac-
tice embedded in kinship relationships, while the younger generation
considers farming as a communal activity that provides a break in their
busy schedules. We suggest that these different approaches translate
into divergent modalities of care, each with its own understandings of
productivity, relationships to nonhuman nature, and landscaping aes-
thetics (cf. Bartkienė et al., 2019: 59). Our second finding underscores
the role of broader political and social institutions in the temporal or-ganization of urban farming in Lithuania: we show how generous ma-
ternity leave and early retirement policies have created a temporal
template for performing gendered agricultural care work, which re-
produces gender inequalities on the farms.
We collected our data in 2017 during seven months of ethnographic
fieldwork in Vilnius. In addition to participant observations and long-
term engagements with volunteers, organizers, and other stakeholders
in the movement, we conducted 19 semi-structured interviews whom
we recruited from primarily one farm using the snowballing method
(Noy, 2008). We interviewed 15 women and 4 men, ranging in age as
follows: 21–30 years old (n = 3); 31–40 years (n = 7); 41–50 years
(n = 5); 51–60 years (n = 2); and 71–80 years (n = 2). The age and
gender disparities in our interviewee pool as well as their belonging to
the middle- and upper-middle social class reflect general trends docu-
mented in the urban farming movement both in Eastern Europe (Borčić
et al., 2016; Spilková and Rypáčková, 2019) and beyond (Jarosz, 2011;Reynolds, 2014; Trauger, 2004). As is common in ethnographic re-
search, we analyzed the data using a recursive approach of rereading
and categorizing interview transcripts to identify patterns and make
conceptual connections across the narratives. We found that historical
memory and concerns with scheduling of tasks, seasonal rhythms, and
growth cycles feature centrally in how the farmers’ approach their
volunteering on urban farms. In this regard, using temporality as an
analytical framework provides us not only with a new vantage point for
understanding the politics and practice of agricultural care, but also an
emic perspective on urban farming.
Afterreviewing therelevantscholarshipinthe followingsection, we
describe the history of urban and peri-urban food self-provisioning in
the Balticregionduringthe socialistandearlypost-socialistperiodsand
introduce the institutional organization of the current urban farming
movement in Lithuania. Next, we show how urban farmers con-
ceptualize their farmworkin termsof responsibility,commitments,and
expertise, and map these views onto the temporal organization of care
work on an urban farm. We conclude with a discussion of political and
social implications of the diverging forms of care, along with how the
coronavirus pandemic may shape them in the future.
2. Temporalities of Nature and Agricultural Work
Temporality has increasingly been employed as an analytical cate-
gory in political ecology, geography, anthropology, and related fields.
In contrast to the 1990s literature that focused on the social and cul-
tural dimensions of temporality, such as time–space compression
(Harvey, 1982) or the rise of modern time consciousness (Thrift, 1981),
recent temporality research is increasingly concerned with the mutual
constitution of the social and biological worlds (Arnall and Kothari,
2015; Duvall, 2011; Srnicek and Williams, 2015). These analyses have
provided new ways of thinking about modern societies in planetary and
geological time scales (Hill, 2015) that were captured in such conceptsas anthropocene (Yusoff, 2013) and capitalocene (Moore, 2015, 2017).They have also enabled us to conceptualize capitalism as a temporal
order which superimposes a particular organization on daily life and
work (Thompson, 1967) that runs counter to biological rhythms
(Fisher, 2016; Hébert, 2015; Li, 2017).
From a temporalities perspective, capitalism, socialism, and post-
socialism all have different templates for everyday life, engagements
with nonhuman nature, and relationships to the past and future poli-
tical imaginaries. Focusing on the socialist experience, scholars often
emphasize the slow pace of everyday life (Bren, 2002; Ilic and Leinarte,
2015).Verdery (1996) argues that because the socialist state kept its
citizens physically suspended in lines waiting to buy basic necessities, itappropriated their personal time, resulting in what she calls the etati-
zation of time. In the agricultural sphere, Lampland (1995) documents
how the efforts of the socialist state to measure work hours in Hungarycommodified agricultural labor on collective farms, turning the work
into slow-paced drudgery. Others have discussed the dynamic and fast-
paced lives of urbanites and farm workers who used every opportunity
to work in the kitchen gardens, allotment plots(dachas), and subsidiary
farms from which they personally benefited (Caldwell, 2011; Mincyte,
2009; Ries, 2009).
Not surprisingly, the end of socialism in the early 1990s scrambled
thematerialandtemporalorganizationofeverydaylife(Gille,2016).In
contrast to the linear, teleological accounts of history under capitalism
and socialism, post-socialism is defined by both its relation to the past
and its rupture from that past (Atanasoski and Vora, 2018; Kaneff,
2004; Pupovac, 2010). A state of transition and liminality with no clear
endpoint, post-socialism is characterized by a disjointed historical
temporality that relies on interruptions, breaks, and digressions in the
progression of time (Blagojević and Timotijević, 2018: 79; Chelcea and
Druţǎ, 2016; Ringel, 2016). These contradictions gave birth to the
unusual social status of the urban peasant, who while being a subject of
the modern state is nevertheless tied into the seasonal rhythms ofgrowth and decline (Mamonova et al., 2013; cf.Clarke et al., 2000).
Conceptually, the temporality perspective draws on two schools of
thought: new materialism and the Marxian approach. New materialism
emphasizes human engagement with the material world through the
dialectical and open-ended interactions with nonhumans (Haraway,
2007; Latour, 1993; Pickering, 1995; cf. Coole and Frost, 2010). By
emphasizing the material dimension of social and economic life (e.g.Desai and Smith, 2018; Tsing, 2015), this view moves beyond the an-
thropocentrism that tends to dominate otherwise insightful analyses of
the social organization of work and interactions with nature. At the
same time, following from Marxian critiques of capitalism, temporality
considers the processes through which capital flows structure in-
dividuals’ work, leisure, and everyday life patterns in distinctly capi-
talist ways. Marxian analysesapproachsocial and economicrelationsas
path-dependent and thus emphasize their embeddedness in history.
They also underscore how popular imaginaries of the past, future, and
present serve as political blueprints that determine who is and is not
valuable and where policies and capital investments should be directed
(Ferry and Limbert, 2008; Weszkalnys, 2014).
How do these complementary temporal insights help us understand
agricultural care? Scholars studying agricultural care understand it as a
choreographed set of practices (Law, 2010) aimed at “maintenance,
continuation, and repair of the farming ‘world’” (Krzywoszynska, 2015:
289, paraphrasing Fisher and Tronto, 1991; Tronto, 1993). Organized
around the logic of care (Mol, 2008), this view considers agricultural
work as a more-than-human ethics: a relational approach thatembraces
interdependencies among species and envisions pathways towards a
more sustainable common future (Hartigan, 2017; van Dooren et al.,
2016; cf. Doody et al., 2014; Power, 2005).
This understanding of agricultural care can be complicated by ap-
plying a temporalities perspective that considers the broader structural
processes and historical contexts in which care is situated. These ap-
proaches echo the work of feminist scholars studying alternative foodD. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
45
networks, who note that self-provisioning is time-intensive and often
adds a third shift to the already demanding schedules of working
women (Castellano 2016; Deutsch 2011). It has also been shown that
agricultural care work is relegated to the margins of the agro-food
system (Sumner and Llewelyn, 2011; Trauger, 2004) and is typecast as
women’s natural calling (Mies, 1986). Ecofeminists have been parti-
cularly critical of the historically rooted cultural processes and in-
stitutional arrangements that devalue and exploit both women’s care
work and the reproductive capacities of nature (see DiNovelli Lang
etal.,2018).Froma temporalitiesperspective, agriculturalcareis time-intensive, feminized work embedded in a long history of gender in-
equality and exploitation but also a subjective experience of slowing
down, self-caring,and unpluggingfromcapitalisttempos(Jarosz, 2011;
Trauger, 2004).
The following sections will consider how these insights can deepen
an understanding of the socialorganization of agricultural carework on
urban farms by considering two divergent ethos of farming in Vilnius
that coexist in both micro arrangements of work practices on the farms
and macro considerations of historical time, capitalist tempos, and
biological cycles.
3. History of Urban and Peri-Urban Agriculture in Lithuania
Urban gardening as aform of agricultural self-provisioning has been
important throughout the history of the Baltic region. While small-scale
producers dominated rural and peri-urban landscapes in Lithuania in
the 1920s and 1930s, the second Soviet occupation in 1944 over-
whelmingly transformed the political and economic organization of
agricultural work by nationalizing and collectivizing agricultural pro-
duction. Often overlooked in the analyses of socialist agriculture, self-
provisioning played a key role in the socialist food supply chains
(Shmelev, 1986; Varga, 2017a). Employees of collective and state farms
were assigned subsidiary farms of 60 ares (approx. 1.5 acres) and were
required to raise pigs, cows, and poultry near their homes (Hedlund,
1989; Žakevičiūtė, 2016). Meanwhile, starting in the mid-1950s most
urban workers were issued individual allotments known as “collective
gardens” (kolektyviniai sodai, or simply sodai), and in Russian as dachas
(Kalinkin, 1981; Khiliuk, 1966). While in name these gardens weredesignated as “collective,” they operated as relatively autonomous in-
dividual units with clearly demarcated boundaries (Šiupšinskas et al.,
2016; Borčić et al., 2016). The regulations in Soviet Lithuania limited
the size of sodaito 6 ares (approx. 0.15 acres) within city limits and 12
ares (approx. 0.3 acres) elsewhere. Located in urban and peri-urban
areas, these plots were generally accessible by public transportation,
but often required considerable traveling time for the gardeners.
Nevertheless, the vast majority of urban households maintained en-
ormously productive sodaias a vital source of food (Galtz, 2000;
Zaviska, 2003). Gardeners grew a wide variety of produce, from stapleroot vegetables to tomatoes and cucumbers (which required handmade
greenhouses); to strawberries, gooseberries, currants, and quince; to
traditional fruits such as apples, pears, plums, and sour cherries. In
addition, all urban residents who had access to even the smallest urban
land plots or had a few square feet of land around their private home
practiced self-provisioning and managed to supply their households
with food for most of the year (Caldwell, 2011; Ries, 2009). Not only
did gardeners use their urban plots to supplement their diets, but these
hard-working cultivators were also celebrated as productive members
of the socialist society. According to Lowell (2003: 165), a man who
managed to produce 2.5 tons of vegetables from his 150-square-meter(0.004-acre) plot was extolled in the media as a socialist hero and ex-
ample for others to follow.
Seeking to produce an extraordinary amount of food on their al-
lotments, gardeners drew on the generations’ old knowledge of how to
tend for plants and the land. Like Krzywoszynska’s (2015) vineyard
workers,whoseexperientialknowledgeiscentraltoperformingcareforthe vines, the socialist gardeners were intimately aware of soil qualityand drainage capacity in different parts of their small sodaiand un-
derstood how to promote soil aeration using earthworms, to control
moles and other pests, and to rotate plants for greater fertility; how
much sunshine (and rain) each variety needed; which vegetables grew
best in what parts of the plot; how to graft and prune trees; and how to
make homemade fertilizers; among many other complex calculi (Galtz,
2000). In this sense, their approach to caring for the land was pro-
ductivist but differed significantly from industrial agricultural para-
digms. Rather than seeking to increase productivity using intensive
technologies and biochemical solutions, as is common in industrial
agriculture, they attended to and aligned themselves with natural
rhythms to maximize the performance of their carefully arranged eco-
logical assemblages.
From the perspective of the socialist state, caring for sodaiwas
considered as “active leisure;” that is, a time dedicated for productive
activities contributing to the well-being of the whole socialist society
(Lowell, 2003: 165; Wegren, 1998). Yet the gardeners saw cultivation
ofsodaias a privateendeavor, even as theylooked for ways tocarve out
time to work on the gardens by manipulating work schedules throughan intricate system of favors from their bosses and coworkers.
In this sense, gardens were important not only for sustenance, but
alsoforidentity-buildingandone’ssenseofstatus.Anumberofscholars
have commented on gardening as a site of cultural consumption,
“where the design, maintenance and conspicuous display of plants and
associated elements can be attributed to one’s pride and status” (Doody
et al., 2014: 124; Chevalier, 1998). Even commercial farmers who os-
tensibly are interested only in the utilitarian value of their farms do in
fact judge other farmers by the appearance and quality of their crops,
not financial gains: “the main difference between a farmer who was
perceived by the community as a ‘good farmer’ and a ‘bad farmer’ was
the quality of the crops and livestock produced as judged by two
principal criteria – the physical appearance or attractiveness of the crop
(or animal) and crop yield per acre/hectare (or weight/quality peranimal)” (Burton, 2004: 201). Burton (2004) then goes on to explain
why the farmers who associate “neat, clean and ordered” (201) land-
scapes with being a good farmer resist yielding their fields to con-
servation projects that are potentially more gainful financially, but
create messy and unruly landscapes (212) (see also Nassauer, 1995).
Researchers writing about Lithuania, too, find that land played a
significant part in how gardeners saw themselves and others; how they
understood care, stewardship, and responsibility for the land; and how
they constructed their relationship with the natural environment
(Šiupšinskas et al., 2016; for parallels in other Baltic states, see
Schwartz, 2006; Pungas, 2019). Similarly as in the above studies of
gardening and farming, socialist gardeners judged each other—and
themselves—by their success as food producers and by how orderly,
weed-free, and well-tended their gardens were. In practice this meant
that gardening involved a careful choreography of planning and
planting, along with long hours of weeding, doing other routine
maintenance, and beautifying their gardens with flowers around the
perimeter. It reveals that gardening was a deeply individualized ex-
perience of interactions with plants and land ecologies as well as a site
for cultivating identities and reproducing social status values. The
continued importance and power of such agricultural aesthetics in post-
socialist Eastern Europe was documented in Varga’s (2019) analysis of
land use patterns in Ukraine where smallholders let other farmers use
theirland for freejusttoprevent neighboring farmersfromencroaching
on their property. In this sense, keeping their land in production—and
well-taken care of—has been an exercise in boundary-making and re-
assertion of one’s identity as a steward.
Not surprisingly, the socialist ideals of a “good gardener” diverge
significantly from the logic of urban farming in Europeanizing
Lithuania’s cities. As part of the restoration of private property rights in
the early 1990s, all gardens were privatized and Lithuania’s gardeners
wereissued landand propertytitles, making themownersof their plots.
Although during the early years of the post-socialist transformations,D. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
46
food self-provisioning continued to play a key role in sustaining both
rural and urban populations (Blumberg, 2015; Swinnen, 1999; Varga,
2017a), Lithuania’s accession to the European Union in 2004 opened
the doors to European agricultural markets as well as new ideas about
land and environmental stewardship. Because of race-to-the-bottom
food politics in the European markets, relatively cheap produce from
Spain flooded Lithuania’s supermarkets, challenging the economic
survivalist logic of self-provisioning (Hormel, 2017; Caldwell, 2019).
Moreover, because of tight labor markets and low pay, many Lithua-
nians sought second jobs, making it more difficult to find time to look
after their gardens (Southworth, 2006). At the same time, popular
cultural ideas of land use introduced a new repertoire of landscaping
practices in which vegetable beds were replaced with manicured lawns
(Klimas and Lideika, 2018). Consequently, while many urbanites, par-
ticularly older ones, continue cultivating sodaiand growing food in
their backyards, food self-provisioning has been tapering off in urban
and peri-urban areas.
It was in this historical moment that a new wave of the urban
agriculture movement has taken root in Vilnius. Rather than being or-
ganized for self-provisioning at the individual household level, as sodai
were, these farms depend on collective work arrangements and harvestsharing. Instead of focusing on specific plants and land plots, they seek
to address global environmental concerns and build communities
(Bartkienė et al., 2019: 59–62). In contrast to earlier generations of
urban gardeners who dedicated themselves to and had intimate
knowledge of farming, volunteers in the new initiatives tend to ap-
proach farming as a civic and sometimes as a leisure activity, and many
have few cultivation skills. In a sense, two urban agriculture models are
currently operating side-by-side. Yet as distinct as these two worlds of
urban agriculture are, they do overlap when younger volunteers buy or
inheritsodaifrom their parents or older farmers joinnew initiatives and
bring their knowledge and ideas about what it means to look afterplants and care for the land. To understand the temporal organizationof agricultural work on the new urban farms, in the following section
we consider the institutional framework that enabled the formation of
these initiatives (Table 1).
4. Urban Farming in Lithuania: Visions and Institutions
The idea of establishing urban farms in Lithuania was spearheaded
in 2011 by members of Žali.Lt (Lith., Green.Lt), a local nongovern-
mental organization affiliated with the global green movement. These
efforts occurred in the context of the broader embrace of sustainability
as a future development project of European cities. In this vision,
Lithuanian cities are reimagined as prosperous and green and their
residents as environmentally conscious Europeans (Dzenovska, 2013).
In an interview with us, Tomas explained his decision to get involved in
urban farming as a way of practicing tactical urbanism, a global
movement aimed at making cities more sustainable and accessible to
average residents:
I have been interested in social innovations, including tactical ur-
banism, that encourages approaching the city from the perspective
of a pedestrian or a cyclist. It invites people to alter local infra-
structures so that they are better suited to meet their needs, use
public spaces in innovative ways, and generate various social ac-
tivities… One of the interesting topics I read about was the idea of
cultivating urban farms on rooftops and in abandoned lots; they
were aimed to spread ideas and educate the public. For example,
there was a garden in London called Pharmacy garden that… fo-
cused on growing medicinal herbs and sold tea from a nearby truck,
but at the time nothing like that was available here [in Lithuania].
(Tomas, 47 yo, 8\31\2017)
1Like many other farmers who either had lived in or frequently vis-
ited other European capitals, Tomas envisioned Vilnius and other
Lithuanian cities as spaces that would generate new public sociality,foster creativity, and enable social entrepreneurship. This view is no-
tably different from that of gardeners who own and cultivate existing
sodai. In this sense, these visions manifest a post-socialist rupture from
the socialist value of gardening as a subsistence activity (cf.
Goszczyński and Wróblewski, 2020).
The vision of creating a sustainable future through urban farms has
not only mobilized a group of forward-looking environmentally con-
scious residents in Vilnius, but also motivated the Ministry of the
Environment to provide seed funding for establishing the farms. In
collaboration with community volunteers and a local cultural center,
Žali.Lt managed to establish four urban agriculture initiatives in Vilnius
over the course of three years. Some other efforts occurred in Kaunas
and Klaipėda.
In comparison to urban farms in the West, Lithuanian “urban farms”
are small-scale gardening projects (approx. 10 ares or 0.25 acres), but
both have a common mission and commitment to addressing environ-
mental and social issues. “Gardens,” or sodai,denotes a private space
used for subsistence cultivation for personal benefit, which is distinctfrom the conception of an “urban farm” as part of the global urban
agriculture movement.
2
While initially successful, all four gardens struggled to attract new
volunteers, and by the summer of 2017 only one urban farm remained
fully operational. (This is the farm from which most of our data comes.)
Oneofthemainattractionsofthisfarmwasalargegreenhousethathad
belonged to a former hospital. From a temporalities perspective, the
greenhouse extends the growing season beyond the warmest summer
months. The longer growing season not only enables the farmers to
produce more food, but also attracts volunteers who are eager to join
the garden in early spring and fall, when school is in session and few
people travel on vacation. The older farmers also emphasize the sense
of privacy that the greenhouse proves by creating a “natural cover”
from passers-by to see who is working on the farm. As gardeners did in
socialist and post-socialist sodai, the urban farmers focus on growingTable 1
Timeline of urban and peri-urban agriculture in Lithuania.
1944 – 1950 Intense Sovietization
Collectivization of farms, private property abolishmentEstablishment of individual subsidiary farms
Civil war, food requisitions, famine
Collective forms of labor on state and collective farms
1950 – 1990 Socialist Era
Establishment of sodai(dachas) based on employment
Intense self-provisioning on sodaiand kitchen gardens
Kinship-based intergenerational agricultural work
Local ecological knowledgeOrderly aesthetics, productivism
1990 – 2004 Post-socialist EraLand property restitution/privatization of sodai
Liberalization, removal of subsidies and price controls,
inflation, unemployment, de-industrialization
Prevalence of smallholder agriculture, self-provisioning
Individual and family-based agricultural work, productivism
2004 – Present EuropeanizationVoluntary formation of urban farms
Civic and environmental valuesFarming as mediation, self-realization, and freedom from
kinship-based intergenerational commitments
Communal work
Organic landscape designs, post-productivism
1All translations by authors.2Because the organizers themselves use “urban farm” when describing their
endeavors to English-speaking audiences on social media, we refer to them as
urban farms (for more classifications of urban agriculture see Ackerman, 2011;
Cohen et al., 2012; McClintock, 2014).D. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
47
tomatoes and cucumbers in the greenhouse. In the adjacent outdoor
plot, they also cultivate various herbs, salad greens, chili peppers as
well as vegetables such as pumpkins, sweet potatoes, carrots, radish,
and kale. There are also various decorative plants and flowers.
Around 20 participants contribute to the urban farm every year.
They meet or use a group e-mail list to decide collectively what to plant
and where, and how to coordinate work tasks and share the produce.
They are also savvy users of social media, particularly Facebook, where
they publicize activities. As is trueof urban farms around the world, the
Lithuanian urban farm often becomes a site for socializing and en-
tertainment, offering a welcome break from daily work pressures
(Jarosz, 2011; cf. Rosol, 2011). The farm calendar is filled with nu-
merouseventssuchasseasonalfoodtastings,picnics,barbeques,seasonopening festivities, and harvest celebrations.
Most of the participants are women, but the composition and
numbers of each cohort fluctuate from year to year due to turnover.
Two distinct groups of women have, however, been consistent volun-
teers: young mothers and retirees. The presence of these groups signals
not only the gendered dimension of agricultural care work, which we
delve deeper into later in the paper, but also the role of universal ma-
ternity leave and relatively early retirement ages in providing time for
volunteering.
Parental leave in Lithuania enables mothers or fathers to receive
100% of their average salary (calculated over the 12 most recent
months) to raise their child for the first year and 40% of the salary for
the second year. Men are just starting to use this benefit (7% of men
take leaveinthefirstyearand 38%inthesecond),butthevastmajority
of new mothers opt to stay at home, at least for the first year (Sodra,
2019). During this period women often look for activities to engage in,
especially ones that enable them to spend time outdoors. Many re-
spondents mentioned that it was the birth of a child that enabled them
to join an urban farm, and mothers with older children can continue
volunteering at the long-lasting urban farm because it is located in alarge park with a nearby playground for the children to play while their
parents work on the farms. Tomas believes that the farm is attractive to
young mothers because it “gives them an opportunity to do something
[creative and productive], but also because they seek to grow [healthy]
vegetables for their young children” (Tomas, 47 yo, 8\31\2017). Si-
milarly, one of the founders of a spin-off urban farm/food workshop
explains her decision to start the initiative thusly: “Right after giving
birthtomysecondchild,Iwantedtobepartofsomething,tocontribute
to the neighborhood; that’s why I collaborated with others to start the
workshop. It’s all about kids and the community. … I recently ran into
another mother who just had her third child and she was also eager to
join us” (Saulė, 40 yo, 9\2\2017).
Similarly, retired women join the garden to be productive and do
something they find meaningful. Lithuanian laws guarantee social se-
curity benefits after 15 years of contributions, but most people opt to
wait until they reach the full retirement age of 62 years, 4 months for
women and 63 years, 8 months for men. At this age, many retirees are
still active and pursue personal interests such as traveling, taking on
part-time jobs, providing childcare for their grandchildren, or joining
clubs and associations, with urban gardening as an attractive option.
Hence, although often overlooked in studies of urban farming, state
welfare policies can be important in making the required volunteers
available. In contrast to the critiques of the welfare state as under-
mining self-reliance and discouraging individual initiative, these ex-
amples strongly suggest that the effects of such policies emanate far
beyond individual benefits. By providing social benefits, these polices
create time for volunteering and engaging in activities that contribute
to the public good.
5. Negotiating Responsibility and Productivity on Urban Gardens
One of the most frequent themes threading through our interviews
connects contemporary urban farming in Lithuania to the longagricultural history in the region. Unlike the disjuncture between
modernlifestylesandtheagrarianpasttypicalofWesternEuropeanand
North American urban farms, all farmers we interviewed in Lithuania
mentioned at least in passing that their families came from the coun-
tryside and that generations of their ancestors survived thanks to
farming:
Lithuania is a farmers’ land, everyone has a connection to farming.
We are very close to the land, either our grandparents or parents
have farms and gardens.… There are only a handful of true urba-
nites in the country, and it is nearly impossible to find anyone who
hasn’t gardened. (Saulė, 40 yo, 9\2\2017)
Another farmer echoes this sentiment: “In the United States and
other Western countries, people are born and spend their entire lives onthe asphalt. It is fascinating that they would be interested in gardening.
… Here in Lithuania it is obvious: we all are from the land” (Aušra, 75
yo, 7\20\2017). In these popular imaginaries, the agrarian past has
persisted through changing political climates: no one mentioned the
major land reforms that repeatedly disrupted rural livelihoods during
Lithuanian independence following World War I, Nazi and Soviet oc-
cupations, crumbling of collective farms at the end of socialism, and
privatization of land in the post-socialist era. Even as they embrace the
Western model of urban farming, these farmers cling to an idealized
agrarian past as one the cornerstones of national identity.
Atthe same time, most of the urban farmers we interviewed note that
these historically rooted experiences of farming pose challenges for the
contemporary urban farming movement in Lithuania. Having had first-
hand experiences of farming, many urbanites are wary of the responsi-
bilities that caring for the plants and land entail. In their view, gardening
onsodaiand farming in the countryside are synonymous with obligatory
hard physical labor. During our interviews many urban farmers de-scribed how as children they had had little patience or appreciation forgardening because their parents and grandparents forced them to work
onsodaiduring summer vacations. One farmer states: “Many people in
Lithuania can’t even look at gardens because they have been required tohelp onsodaiand farms since childhood” (Saulė, 40 yo, 9\2\2017). Even
if some farmers enjoyed gardening as children, they felt obliged to helptheir elders and closely obey their directions, which left little space for
creativity or engaging with the process: “I spent my summers on my
grandmother’s sodai. I was told what to do and I did it, but I didn’t know
why. I didn’t have any sense of what I was doing. … You have to weedhere, prop up the plant there, but it wasn’t clear why. My grandmother
said so [and I was expected to do it] (Lina, 27 yo, 8\24\2017).
Echoing Lina’s story, many farmers and organizers alike cited
childhood gardening memories as the main reason why urban farms in
Lithuaniahave failedtoattractmorevolunteers.Onefarmerwent sofar
as to suggest that these experiences of gardening traumatized the cur-
rent generation of urbanites who are now reluctant to join the farms:
The fact that we are [only] the second generation from the land is
the main obstacle to the urban farming movement in Lithuania. It is
a form of trauma; people remember how as children they were
forced to weed entire potato fields [when spending their summers]
at theirgrandmothers’ or slaved watering vegetableson sodaiduring
the weekends.For the vastmajority ofpeople gardening isnot about
meditation, a healthy lifestyle, or the appreciation for the results of
their work. Rather, it is associated with coercion and forcing one to
carry out work that is dirty, difficult, and never-ending. People do
not understand that communal [urban] farming is not based on
coercion. This kind of urban farming is about freedom where one
can decide how much time and energy they want to devote to it.
(Brigita, 35 yo, 8\28\2017)
HereBrigitareveals howcarefortheplants andlandonurban farms
in Vilnius is inseparable from historically grounded experiences ofD. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
48
gardening. In the old paradigm, farming is drudgery with no reprieve in
sight. Its timescale is both endless and repetitive: each passing year is
defined by family members repeating the same cycle: digging, sowing,
weeding, watering, harvesting, and preparing the land for winter.
Notably, this form of agricultural care is reproduced through kinship
relations and mediated across generations: gardening is an inseparable
part of children’s obligation to help their parents and grandparents.
As Brigita suggests, the new generation of urban farmers is breaking
away from the centuries-old views of farming as centered around the
unconditional and deeply intertwined obligations to one’s family and
hard work. This new vision reconsiders urban farming as a site of
creativity and self-realization. Not only are urban farmers invited to
enjoy farming activities, they are also freed from kinship-based ob-
ligations.
Brigita also suggests that the new urban farming approach is based
on a different experience of time. Instead of defining farming in terms
of an endless timescale organized around seasonal cycles, the new
farming model offers an opportunity to slow down, to be present in the
moment, and to meditate (see also Jarosz, 2011; cf. Guthman, 2008).
The idea of urban farming as a meditative experience was echoed in
other interviews: “The goal of farming for me is meditation with my
hands submerged in the soil and maybe some herbs and vegetables. I
am not concerned if the harvest is not abundant. … After all we are not
an industrial greenhouse but a leisure garden where everybody is free
to realize their visions” (Meda, 35 yo, 9/7/17).
While individualized experiences of reflection and self-care are
crucial for the farmers, the new urban farm is primarily understood as a
communal space. Unlike sodaidominated by individual plots, on
Lithuania’s new urban farms all participants share work responsi-bilities. This is primarily due to the fact that the farmers are juggling
various work- and family-related responsibilities, and sharing work on
the farms makes it possible for them to squeeze volunteering into their
busy schedules (Bartkienė et al., 2019: 56). In addition to providing anopportunity to slow the pace of modern life, communal farming is un-
derstood as an obligation to work together:
At first there were some people who were skeptical about working
collectively; they wanted to be allocated a “square meter” of the
land so that they could work it independently, without consulting or
collaborating with others. However, through a natural attrition
those who did not like the communal work arrangement left the
farm and only those gardeners who were comfortable sharing work
stayed. (Brigita, 35 yo, 8\28\2017)
The commitment to communal work on an urban farm is important
not only because of time constraints; it is also understood as the un-derlying mission of the farm. In the following quotations a woman in
her fifties explains the civic objective of urban farming:
Urban farming has several functions. In my opinion, one of its most
important functions is to build a stronger sense of community in the
city because when people meet on the farm they talk not only about
growing plants, but also about their lives and hobbies, [and] they
start new [environmental] projects. The idea of providing oneself
with vegetables is not as important as the opportunity to change the
landscape, to change daily routines, and to get involved in civic
activities. (Vaida, 54 yo, 9\30\2017)
For Vaida, the vision of urban farming far exceeds the purpose of
growing food (Bartkienė et al., 2019: 61; cf. Ančić et al., 2019;
Spilková, 2017). It is about strengthening communal ties, getting in-
volved in activities, and engaging in civic life. In place of the histori-
cally rooted obligations to one’s family and necessity for backbreaking
agricultural work, there is a forward-looking vision where urbanites
care for each other, their neighborhoods, and the city.
This analysis suggests that, unlike earlier generations of gardenersand farmers whose work revolved around their families and privategardens (reproductive labor), the new farmers approach agricultural
care work as a form of self-realization and civic engagement. A col-
lective approach to care work and duties is both a necessity for busy
farmers seeking ways to accommodate farming in their schedules and
an embodiment of their commitment to building community and pro-
moting the public good. Rather than producing food, they are culti-
vating community. In terms of temporalities, the old farming paradigm
is based on intergenerational obligations within families and cyclical
work rhythms that are repeated endlessly. The new urban farmers, on
the other hand, see urban farming as a break from both their fast-paced
lives and a rupture with the history of hard agricultural labor. Next, we
consider the ecological dimension of these diverging approaches to
agricultural care work and locate these practices in the broader social
context.
6. The Ecological and Gender Dimensions of Agricultural Care
To underscore the difference between the two modalities of caring
for farms—the historically grounded individualized care that relies on
intergenerational obligations versus the community-oriented care that
enables farmers to slow down—it is worth considering the material and
ecological implicationsof the newapproachto gardening.In contrastto
thesodaiaesthetics based on order and neatness (Bartkienė et al., 2019:
58), the new urban farmers practice companion gardening, which in-volves intermixing different plants. This creates a varied botanical ta-
pestry blending different plant species without clear boundaries. While
such an approach to growing vegetables is popular in Western Europe
and North America, it is quite rare in Lithuania. Giedrė comments on
her elderly parents’ surprise at such an unusual method of gardening:
My parents, who live in the countryside, came for a visit, and we all
went to the farm. You should have seen their reaction.… They were
astonished to see … that there were no clearly designated paths
throughout the farm and all the vegetables were mixed together:
potatoes planted next to tomatoes, etc. (Giedrė, 30 yo, 8\28\2017)
Giedrė’sexperiencenotonlyrevealshowcommunalidealsandwork
arrangements translate into different landscaping strategies, but it alsohighlights the normative dimension of agricultural aesthetics. Taking
good care of sodaimeant farmers performed never-ending hard labor in
order to maintain orderly and weed-free plots. Caring for urban farmstoday entails following less structured gardening designs that commu-
nicate the values of creativity, self-realization, meditation, and even
casualness.
While all farmers appreciated the sense of freedom to do what they
liked on the urban farm, embracing this more relaxed approach to
farming was far from easy for the older generation of urban farmers. In
thefollowingquotationoneretireeexpressesherstruggleswiththenew
way of gardening that goes against her understanding of what it means
to care for the plants:
When you plant a seedling you have to treat it like a small
child—you have to take care of it, look after it, pamper it, and water
it. A human being eats three times a day and drinks maybe more
than five times. But here [on the farm] nothing was done to [the
plants] until July! … All the tomatoes were let go without any
pruning—God only knows what fruit they will bear! Those that
manage to grow will grow only because of the warm summer [this
year]andsomeresidualhumiditycomingfromthenearbybushes….
And you, little plant, you have to fend for yourself trying to survive.
You can continue your existence only if somebody will have mercy
on you and decide to water you. (Aušra, 75 yo, 7/20/2017)
In equating care for plants with raising small children, Aušra casts
farming as a responsibility to meet the needs of each particular plantD. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
49
(Bartkienė etal.,2019: 57–58).Justas children needtimelycare, plants
cannot wait to be pruned or watered. Notably, she defines her re-
lationship to the plants in kinship terms—plants are young and vul-
nerable family members who need to be protected, attended to, and
pampered. By expanding the kinship domain to include plants, Aušra’s
approach resonates with the more-than-human ethics that scholars of
agricultural care work have articulated (Krzywoszynska, 2015; Puig de
la Bellacasa, 2015; cf. Ginn, 2013). Plants are not things to be con-
trolled (the typical view in industrial agriculture), but living entities
thatmustbeengagedwiththroughachoreographyofcare(Law,2010).
Rooted in historical ideas and practices of self-provisioning, this ethics
of care is an extension of the farming philosophies employed on sodai
during and after socialism, when farmers organized their own and theirchildren’s lives around plants’ biological cycles in order to harvest as
many vegetables, fruits, and berries as possible. For gardeners who seek
to create neat and orderly landscapes, this is a surprisingly non-an-
thropocentric approach.
The diverging modalities of care work along generational lines are
also linked to the historical identity politics of being proud and caring
farmers: a “good farmer” is also a good and responsible person. It is
therefore not surprising that elderly women explain their approach to
farming using the language of individual responsibility. As Aušra de-
scribed, “When I joined the farm I noticed that only Marija was coming
and working all the time, so I jumped right in to help her” (Aušra, 75
yo, 7/20/2017).
Yet Aušra’s commitment to help her sister farmer cannot be fully
understood outside of the gendered dimension of agricultural care
work.Asthevoluminousscholarshiponthistopicsuggests,farmingand
gardening are key sites where gender inequalities are produced and
reinforced (Sachs, 1996; Wegren et al., 2010). In Eastern Europe these
normsderivefromdivisionsoflaborinsocialisthouseholds(Lakhtikova
et al., 2019). While Lithuanian women and men worked together on
most tasks, men were expected to take care of the soil by applyingcompost, preparing the beds, and watering the plants; they also pruned
and grafted bushes and trees. Most of the men’s time, however, went
into building and maintaining the greenhouse structures and small
houses that were built on the gardens (Hormel, 2017). Women,
meanwhile, did all of the weeding; sowing/planting of seedlings;
tending of vegetables, berries, and flowers; and gathering and proces-
sing of the harvests (Pine, 1993, 1996; cf. Caldwell, 2019). They did all
of this in addition to their dual roles as “worker-mothers” (Ashwin,
2002): working full-time jobs and performing a disproportionate
amount of work as “wives/partners, (lone) mothers, providers of care/
health/education, and participants in public life” (Reiter, 2010: 532).
To be a “good gardener-woman” meant to do it all: to supply one’s
family with food; maintain aesthetically pleasing, weed-free gardens;
andbeagoodcitizen.Inthisrespect,Aušrareliedonher lifelongroleas
a “good woman” to recognize that a lot of work needed to be done on
the farm, and she felt compelled to help Marija do it.
At the same time, the gendering of care work continues to be re-
produced in the organizational structures on urban farms. Women
continue performing the overwhelming majority of tasks, particularly
routine care such as weeding. Not only do they do the bulk of the care
work, but these routine tasks are also understood as their natural
calling. A male participant explained gender roles and agricultural
work divisions thusly:
I am not a farmer and I am not inclined to plant [vegetables], but I
do help with organizing various events or watering the plants. I see
myself more as a gardener and an overseer, not as a weed picker. Of
course, one should not differentiate between male and female work,
but weeding is more a woman’s job because it requires diligence.
There are, of course, men who like this kind of work, but what I
notice on urban farms here is that there are many more women, and
theyare doing muchmorework,while menact as helpers.Thereare
no real male farmers on urban farms [in Vilnius]. Maybe Tomas issuch a farmer, but again, he is more like an organizer [than a
farmer]. (Darius, 35 yo, 9/27/2017)
This quotation shows the not so subtle ways in which gender in-
equalities become interwoven into farming work allocations and time
commitments (cf. Bartkienė et al., 2019: 65–66). It is based on a cir-
cular logic in which women are expected to perform most of the “te-
dious” care work such as weeding because they are ostensibly better at
it. But they are better at it only because they were socialized into these
tasks and learned the skills by doing them throughout their lifetime. In
her analysis of the salmon industry in Alaska, Hébert (2008) documents
a similar misrecognition of socialized gender roles as biologically de-
termined divisions of work. In Hébert’s case, better paid fishing tasks
were seen as men’s work, while women’s smaller hands and “natural”
attention to detail were suited for working in less valued processing
jobs. Similarly, less rewarding and physically more taxing agricultural
work becomes a woman’s destiny on the urban farm.
The unequal distribution of care work on the urban farms is not
surprising: as feminist scholars writing on alternative food provisioning
schemes have showed, gender is a good predictor of who is going to do
most of the work (Deutsch, 2011; Laudan, 2001). What is more notable
in the Lithuanian case is the intersection of gender and age structures
that puts the burden on the older female farmers.
Taking a broad view of these issues, this section has considered the
ecologicaland gendereddimensionsofthe divergingcaretemporalities.
The communal values of urban farmers are embodied in a farm land-
scape where different plants are mixed together in contrast to the
strictly ordered aesthetics of the former sodai. More importantly, the
new aesthetics of farming reveals tensions stemming from differentunderstandings of what constitutes care for the plants and who has to
perform it. The younger generations of farmers approach farming as a
human-centered activity: a communal enterprise and a form of self-
realization and meditation, whereas the older generation follows aplant-centered approach that equates their responsibilities for the
plants to caring for children, which in itself is a gendered role that falls
more on women than men. What is most revealing about this con-
stellation of relationships among farmers, plants, and nonhuman
nature, however,is thatdespitegenerationaldifferences inhow farmers
define care, older women are consistently expected to perform most of
the care work. In other words, even the most forward-looking ideas of
the current Lithuanian urban farming movement continue to reproduce
longstanding gender and age inequalities.
7. Concluding Reflections
Our study of an urban farm in Vilnius shows how the historical
context shapes local experiences of care for the land and plants. For the
older generation of women who draw on their experiences of gardening
undersocialism andthe earlyyears ofpost-socialism, carefor the plants
is an activity imbued with individual responsibility. Describing their
relationship to the plants in terms of kinship, they focus on maximizing
the productivity of plants by attending to the needs of each plant. From
a temporal perspective, the civic-minded younger generation considers
caring for the farm as communal events. This new urban farmers ap-
proach urban farming both as a break from their fast-paced lives and a
rupture with the historically-rooted understandings of hard agricultural
laborperformed withfamilymembersandrepeatedannually.Forthem,
plants grown on urban farms are vehicles for addressing social and
environmental problems while working with fellow community mem-
bers (see also Bartkienė et al., 2019: 59). These two approaches to
agricultural care are embodied in different ecologies: while orderly and
weed-free landscapes were a norm during socialism and post-socialism,
the new urban farming movement has embraced a “natural” landscape
aesthetics where different plants are grown together. In this sense, our
study highlights a paradox: the productivist approach to agricultural
care work that the older generation of farmers practices and thatD. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
50
emphasizesorderand neatnessismoreattunedtothenaturalworldand
its rhythms, whereas the new urban farming approach that creates a
more “organic” landscape and aims to address broader environmental
issues emerges as surprisingly anthropocentric.
To be sure, no generation is homogenous. Whether or not one takes
the individualized and kinship-based careapproachto urban farmingor
embraces community-building ideals depends on one’s individual paths
and experiences. For example, all farmers in their forties and fifties
spent their formative years under socialism, but some engaged in the
plant-centric choreography of care work while others focused on
broader communal concerns. Yet to think about these groups as gen-
erations helps to highlight the temporality of the human experience
without obfuscating identities and unique backgrounds of individual
farmers.
Our study focuses only on a small group of farmers, but a close look
at how members of this community approach and schedule their care
for the farm shows that caring for the plants on urban farms are deeply
shaped by contemporary work/leisure rhythms, along with historically
specific definitions of care and nature. Our analysis also reveals that the
Herculean task of synchronizing capitalist temporalities of urban life
with biological cycles falls on the most economically and socially vul-
nerable group—older women living on fixed incomes. This in turn
points to the importance of safety nets and the welfare state in enabling
the kinds of environmental civics initiatives that urban farming em-
bodies: without retirement benefits and generous maternity leave po-
licies, most Lithuanian women would not have time to be volunteer
farmers, undermining efforts to implement the ideals of the global
urban farming movement in Lithuania.
Thefinal versionofthispaperwaspreparedinthe midstof the2020
coronavirus epidemic, when stay-at-home orders and the attendant
economic decline have challenged foundational assumptions about the
efficacy of the modern agro-food system, particularly in the United
States. As some of the largest US food processors are forced to shutdown due to infections among their workers and commercial farms
must resort to disposing of milk and culling animals, what just months
ago was labeled as an “alternative,” “niche,” or “boutique” food
economy is becoming a major player in local food systems. Consumers
are rushing to establish direct supply lines to local farms; Community
Supported Agriculture schemes are seeing record high enrollments; and
sales of seeds and seedlings are at unprecedented levels, indicating an
interest in and renewed commitment to individual and collective forms
of gardening and farming, both inside and outside cities (e.g. Tatter and
Chakrabarti, 2020).
In Lithuania and Eastern Europe more broadly, where supply chains
are exceptionally short (Blumberg and Mincytė, 2019; Varga, 2017b)and the line separating commercial and alternative agricultural sectors
is not as strongly drawn as it is in the United States and some Northern
European countries, the agro-food system has been resilient and there
have been no reports of interruptions in food supply systems. Yet the
virus has challenged fundamental values and priorities, with a sub-
stantive effect in shaping the visions and possibilities of future pros-
perity and sustainability of self-provisioning agriculture. For older Li-
thuanians, this crisisis another affirmationof their subsistence-oriented
lifestyles (Inytė, 2020). With April being the key month for planting
gardens, officials in Lithuania are working around the clock to dissuade
determined gardeners from taking congested public transportation to
sodai. Consequently, most of our current communications with urban
farmers, neighbors, and family members end with them lamenting the
state of their seedlings, which crowd windowsills and balconies and are
in dire need of being planted in greenhouses and outside—a clear re-
mindertousthattheseasonalclockisticking.Inaddition,theclosingof
national borders that is preventing migrant workers from traveling to
fields in Spain, the Netherlands, France, and the United Kingdom, ev-
eryone expects there will be many more mouths to feed from local re-
sources. In this context, historically tested individual subsistence efforts
that focus on producing as much food as possible and focusing on theneeds of each plant are winning out over ideals of meditation and re-
flexivity.
Atthesametime,inLithuania’spublicdebatesaselsewhere,thereis
alsoa growingrecognitionofinterdependencesand responsibilitiesthat
humans have toward other humans and nonhuman species alike.
Despite strict, months-long social distancing policies that have kept
Lithuanians isolated in their apartments, there has been an increasing
recognition of and concern for collective well-being: for one person to
be healthy, others around them must also be healthy. It is impossible to
know what this new ethos of collective care will bring, but the fact that
it has entered popular debates suggests the emergence of a different
political theory of well-being. The urban farms are also thriving and
even those farms that had been closed for several years are re-opening
and attracting new volunteers. Significantly, this renewed interest in
collective forms of urban farming has not arrived via Western media, as
the global trends of tactical urbanism or community building that
motivatedyoungerurbanfarmersdid.Theyarebeinggeneratedlocally,
making them more authentic and legitimate for the Lithuanian context.
This opens a possibility that urban farmers in Vilnius can articulate a
homegrown vision of sustainable urban publics and communal spaces
(see also Aistara, 2018; Kopczyńska, 2020; Varga, 2017a; Yotova,
2018).
Acknowledgements
This research was made possible through the generous support of
the Research Council of Lithuania, the National Research Program
Welfare Society, grant # GER 17012. We thank Karen Hébert, Guntra
Aistara, members of the Food Production Reading group at New York
University, and two anonymous reviewers for their detailed and
thoughtful feedback on this project. Earlier version of this paper were
presented at the workshop Arts of Coexistence: Care and Survival in the
Sixth Extinction at the Oslo School of Environmental Humanities; theRural Sociological Society annual meeting in Denver, Colorado; and
BALTEHUMS: Baltic Conference on the Environmental Humanities and
Social Sciences at the University of Latvia, Riga. Most importantly, we
are deeply grateful to the urban farmers for their time, generosity, and
care.
References
Ackerman, K., 2011. The Potential for In New York City: Growing Capacity, Food
Security, and Green Infrastructure. Urban Design Lab of Columbia University, New
York, NY.
Aistara, G.A., 2018. Organic Sovereignties: Struggles over Farming in an Age of Free
Trade. University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Ančić, B., Domazet, M., Župarić-Iljić, D., 2019. ‘For my health and for my friends:’
Exploring motivation, sharing, environmentalism, resilience and class structure offood self-provisioning. Geoforum 106, 68–77.
Arnall, A., Kothari, U., 2015. Challenging climate change and migration discourse:
Different understandings of timescale and temporality in the Maldives. Global
Environ. Change 31, 199–206.
Ashwin, S., 2002. A woman is everything: The reproduction of Soviet ideals of woman-
hood in post-communist Russia. In: Rainnie, A., Smith, A., Swain, A. (Eds.), Work,Employment and Transition. Restructuring Livelihoods in Postcommunism,
Routledge, London, pp. 117–133.
Atanasoski, N., Vora, K., 2018. Postsocialist politics and the ends of revolution. Social
Identities 24 (2), 139–154.
Bartkienė, A., Bikauskaitė, R., Mincytė, D., Šaulauskas, M.P., 2019. Rethinking Ecological
Citizenship: The Politics and Practice of Care for the Environment. Vilnius University
Press, Vilnius.
Bellows, A.C., 2004. One hundred years of allotment gardens in Poland. Food and
Foodways 12 (4), 247–276.
Bingham, N.,2008. Slowingthings down: Lessons from theGM controversy.Geoforum 39
(1), 111–122.
Blagojević, J., Timotijević, J., 2018. ‘Failing the metronome:’ Queer reading of the
postsocialist transition. In: Bailyn, J.F., Jelaca, D., Lugaric, D. (Eds.), The Future of
(Post)Socialism: Eastern European Perspectives. State University of New York Press,
Albany.
Blumberg, R., 2015. Geographies of reconnection at the marketplace. J. Baltic Stud. 46
(3), 299–318.
Blumberg, R., Mincytė, D., 2019. Infrastructures of taste: Rethinking local food histories
in Lithuania. Appetite 138, 252–259.D. Mincytė, et al.
Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
51
Borčić, L.S., Cvitanović, M., Lukić, A., 2016. Cultivating alternative spaces—Zagreb’s
community gardens in transition: From socialist to post-socialist perspective.
Geoforum 77, 51–60.
Bren, B.,2002. Weekend getaways: The chata, thetramp, and thepolitics of private life in
post-1968 Czechoslovakia. In: Crowley, D., Reid, S.E. (Eds.), Socialist Spaces. Sites of
Everyday Life in the Eastern Bloc, Berg, Oxford, pp. 123–141.
Burton, Rob J.F., 2004. Seeing through the ‘good farmer’s’ eyes: Towards developing an
understanding of the social symbolic value of ‘productivist’ behaviour. Sociologia
Ruralis 44 (2), 195–215. https://doi.org/10.1111/soru.2004.44.issue-210.1111/j.
1467-9523.2004.00270.x.
Caldwell, M.L., 2019. Dacha labors: Preserving everyday Soviet life. In: Lakhtikova, A.,
Brintlinger, A., Glushchenko, I. (Eds.), Seasoned Socialism: Gender and Food in Late
Soviet Everyday Life. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, pp. 165–192.
Caldwell, M.L., 2011. Dacha Idylls, Living Organically in Russia’s Countryside. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
Castellano, R.L., 2016. Alternative food networks and the labor of food provisioning: A
third shift? Rural Sociol. 81 (3), 445–469.
Chelcea, L., Druţǎ, O., 2016. Zombie socialism and the rise of neoliberalism in post-so-
cialist Central and Eastern Europe. Eurasian Geogr. Econ. 57 (4–5), 521–544.
Chevalier, S., 1998. From woolen carpet to grass carpet: Bridging house and garden in an
English suburb. In: Miller, D. (Ed.), Material Cultures: Why Things Matter. University
College London Press, London, pp. 47–71.
Clarke, S., Varshavskaya, L., Alasheev, S., Karelina, M., 2000. The myth of the urban
peasant. Work Employ Soc. 14 (3), 481–499.
Cohen, N., Reynolds, K., Sanghvi, R., 2012. Five Borough Farm. Seeding the Future of
Urban Agriculture in New York City. Design Trust For Public Space, New York, NY.
Coole, D. and Frost, S. (Eds.), 2010. New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics.
Duke University Press, Durham.
Desai, S., Smith, H., 2018. Kinship across species: Learning to care for nonhuman others.
Feminist Rev. 118 (1), 41–60. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41305-018-0104-0.
Deutsch, T., 2011. Memories of mothers in the kitchen: Local foods, history, and womens
work. Rad. History Rev. 110, 167–177.
DiNovelli-Lang, D., Hébert, K., Gray, S., 2018. The environment and industrial labor. In:
Cox, A.M. (Ed.), Gender: Space. Macmillan Reference, Farmington Hills, pp. 51–66.
Doody, B.J., Perkins, H.C., Sullivan, J.J., Meurk, C.D., Stewart, G.H., 2014. Performing
weeds: Gardening, plant agencies and urban plant conservation. Geoforum 56,124–136.
Duvall, C., 2011. Ferricrete, forests, and temporal scale in the production of colonial
science in Africa. In: Goldman, M.J., Nadasdy, P., Turner, M.D. (Eds.), Knowing
Nature: Conversations at the Intersection of Political Ecology and Science Studies.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 113–127.
Dzenovska, D., 2013. Historical agency and the coloniality of power in postsocialist
Europe. Anthropol. Theory 13 (4), 394–416.
Ferry, E.E., Limbert, M.E., 2008. Timely Assets: The Politics of Resources and Their
Temporalities. School for Advanced Research Press, Santa Fe.
Fisher, D., 2016. Freeze-framing territory: Time and its significance in land governance.
Space Polity 20 (2), 212–225.
Fisher, B., Tronto C., J., 1991. Toward a feminist theory of caring. In: Abel KE., Nelson
K.M. (Eds.), Cricles of Care: Work and Identity in Women’s Lives. State University of
New York Press, Albany, pp. 35–63.
Galtz, N.R., 2000. Space and the Everyday: An Historical Sociology of the Moscow Dacha.
PhD dissertation. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Gille, Z., 2016. Paprika, Foie Gras, and Red Mud: The Politics of Materiality in the
European Union. Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Ginn, F., 2014. Sticky lives: Slugs, detachment and more-than-human ethics in the
garden. Trans. Inst. British Geograph. 39 (4), 532–544.
Goszczyński, W., Wróblewski, M., 2020. Beyond rural idyll? Social imaginaries, motiva-
tions and relations in Polish alternative food networks. Journal of Rural Studies 76,
254–263.
Guthman, J., 2008. Bringing good food to others: Investigating the subjects of alternative
food practice. Cult. Geograph. 15 (4), 431–447.
Hartigan, J., 2017. Care of the Species: Races of Corn and the Science of Plant
Biodiversity. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Haraway, D.J., 2007. When Species Meet. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Harvey, D., 1982. The Limits to Capital. Blackwell, Hoboken.
Hébert, K., 2015. Enduring capitalism: Instability, precariousness, and cycles of change in
an Alaskan salmon fishery. Am. Anthropologist 117 (1), 32–46.
Hedlund, S. 1989. Private Agriculture in the Soviet Union. London: New York.
Hill, A., 2015. Moving from ‘matters of fact’ to ‘matters of concern’ in order to grow
economic food futures in the Anthropocene. Agric. Hum. Values 32, 551–563.
Holloway, L., 2002. Smallholding, hobby-farming, and commercial farming: Ethical
identitiesandtheproductionoffarmingspaces.Environ.Plann.A:EconomySpace34
(11), 2055–2070.
Hormel, L.M., 2017. Food or flowers? Dacha gardening and gendered class relations in
Post-Soviet Ukraine. Rural Sociology 82 (1), 75–100.
Ilic, M., Leinarte, D. (Eds.), 2015. The Soviet Past in the Post-Socialist Present:
Methodology and Ethics in Russian, Baltic and Central European Oral History andMemory Studies. Routledge, London.
Inytė, V., 2020. Kauniečiai atrado vietą, kurioje, tiki, virusas jų nepasieks. Lietuvos Rytas
(April 12). Retrieved from: https://www.lrytas.lt/bustas/mano-erdve/2020/04/12/
news/kaunieciai-atrado-vieta-kurioje-tiki-virusas-ju-nepasieks-14440909/.
Jarosz, L., 2011. Nourishing women: Toward a feminist political ecology of community
supported agriculture in the United States. Gender, Place Cult. 18 (3), 307–326.
Kalinkin, A., et al., 1981. Lichnoe Podsobnoe Khozaistvo: Kollektyvnoe Sadovodstvo I
Ogorodnichestvo. Kolos, Moscow.
Kaneff, D., 2004. Who Owns the Past? The Politics of Time in a ‘Model’ Bulgarian Village.Berghahn Press, New York.
Khiliuk, F., 1966. Lichnoe podsobnoe khoziaistvo naseleniia i ego rol’ v proizdvostve
sel’skohoziaistvennykh produktov. Ekonomika Sovetskoi Ukrainy. 1.
Klimas, E., Lideika, M., 2018. Sustainable development: Greening and urban agriculture
in Lithuania. J. Property, Plann. Environ. Law 10 (3), 240–254.
Kopczyńska, E., 2020. Are there local versions of sustainability? Food Networks in the
semi-periphery. Sustainability 12, 2845.
Krzywoszynska, A., 2015. What farmers know: Experiential knowledge and care in vine
growing. Sociologia Ruralis 56 (2), 289–310.
Lampland, M., 1995. The Object of Labor: Commodification in Socialist Hungary.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Lakhtikova, A., Brintlinger, A., Glushchenko, I. (Eds.), 2019. Seasoned Socialism: Gender
and Food in Late Soviet Everyday Life. Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Latour, B., 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. Harvester Wheatsheaf, New York.Laudan, R., 2001. A plea for culinary modernism: Why we should love new, fast, pro-
cessed food. Gastronomica 1 (1), 36–44.
Law, J., 2010. Care and killing: Tensions in veterinary practice. In: Mol, A., Moser, I.,
Pols, J. (Eds.), Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms.Transcript, Bielefeld, Germany, pp. 57–72.
Li, T.M., 2017. Rendering land investible: Five notes on time. Geoforum 82, 276–278.
Lowell, S., 2003. Summerfolk: A History of the Dacha, 1710–2000. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca.
Mamonova, N., Visser, O., Spoor, M., 2013. The re-emerging peasantry in Russia:
“Peasants-against-their-own-will”, “summertime peasants” and “peasant-farmers.”
Paper presented at the conference Rural Resilience and Vulnerability: The Rural as
Locus of Solidarity and Conflict in Times of Crisis. European Society of Rural
Sociology (ESRS), Florence.
McClintock, N., 2014. Radical, reformist, and garden-variety neoliberal: Coming to terms
with urban agriculture’s contradictions. Local Environ. 19, 147–171.
Mies, M., 1986. Patriarchy and Accumulation On A World Scale: Women in the
International Division of Labour. Zed Books, London.
Mincyte, D., 2009. Everyday environmentalism: The practice, politics, and nature of
subsidiary farming in Stalin’s Lithuania. Slavic Review 68 (1), 31–49.
Mol, A., 2008. The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice. Routledge,
London.
Mol, A., Moser, I., Pols, J., 2010. Care in Practice. On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and
Farms. Transcript Verlag, Bielefeld.
Moore, J.W., 2017. The Capitalocene, part I: On the nature and origins of our ecological
crisis. J. Peasant Stud. 44 (3), 594–630.
Moore, J.W., 2015. Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of
Capital. Verso Books, London.
Nassauer, J.I., 1995. Messy ecosystems, orderly frames. Landscape J. 14 (2), 161–170.
Noy, C., 2008. Sampling knowledge: The hermeneutics of snowball sampling in qualita-
tive research. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 11 (4), 327–344.
Pickering, A., 1995. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Pine, F., 1996. Redefining women's work in rural Poland. In: Abrahams, R. (Ed.), After
Socialism: Land Reform and Social Change in Eastern Europe. Berghahn, New York
and Oxford, pp. 133–156.
Pine, F., 1993. The cows and pigs are his, the eggs are mine:’ women's domestic economy
and entrepreneurial activity in rural Poland. In: Hann, C. (Ed.) Socialism: Ideals,
Ideologies, and Local Practices Routledge, London and New York, pp. 227–242.
Pitt, H., 2018. Questioning care cultivated through connecting with more-than-human
communities. Soc. Cult. Geogr. 19, 253–274.
Power, E.R., 2005. Human–nature relations in suburban gardens. Aust. Geogr. 36 (1),
39–53.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M., 2017. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human
Worlds. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M., 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the
pace of care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 45 (5), 691–716.
Pungas, L., 2019. Food self-provisioning as an answer to the metabolic rift: The case of
‘Dacharesilience’ in Estonia. J. Rural Stud. 68, 75–86.
Pupovac,O., 2010.Present perfect,or thetime ofpost-socialism.Eurozine. https://www.
eurozine.com/present-perfect-or-the-time-of-post-socialism/.
Reiter, H., 2010. ‘In my opinion, work would be in first place and family in second:’
Young women's imagined gender–work relations in post-Soviet Lithuania. J. BalticStud. 41 (4), 531–551.
Reynolds, K., 2014. Disparity despite diversity: Social injustice in New York City’s urban
agriculture system. Antipode 47 (1), 240–259.
Richardson-Ngwenya,P.,2012.Avitalistapproachtosugar-canebreedinginBarbados:in
the context of the European Union sugar reform. Geoforum 43 (6), 1131–1139.
Ries, N., 2009. Potato ontology: Surviving postsocialism in Russia. Cult. Anthropol. 24
(2), 181–212.
Ringel, F., 2016. Beyond temporality: Notes on the anthropology of time from a shrinking
fieldsite. Anthropol. Theory 16 (4), 390–412.
Rosol, M., 2011. Community volunteering as neoliberal strategy? Green space production
in Berlin. Antipode 44 (1), 239–257.
Sachs, C., 1996. Gendered Fields: Rural Women, Agriculture,and Environment. Westview
Press, Boulder.
Sayre, L., 2011. The politics of organic farming: Populists, evangelicals, and the agri-
culture of the middle. Gastronomica 11 (2), 38–47.
Sayre, L., 2003. Farming by the Book: British Georgic in Prose and Practice, 1697–1820.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Princeton University, Princeton.
Schwartz, K., 2006. Globalizing the Ethnoscape: Nature and National Identity after
Communism. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh.
Shmelev, G.I., 1986. Personal Subsidiary Farming under Socialism. Progress Publishers,D. Mincytė, et al.
Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
52
Moscow.
Singleton, V. 2010. Good farming. Control or care? In J. Pools, J. Mol, A., Moser, I., (Eds.)
Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms. Transcript Verlag,
Bielefeld, pp. 235–256.
Smith,J.,Jehlička,P.,2013.Quietsustainability: FertilelessonsfromEurope’sproductive
gardeners. J. Rural Stud. 32, 148–157.
Sodra, 2019. Vyrų ir moterų pajamų skirtumai mažėja, tačiau vis dar kelia socialinių
iššūkių. https://www.sodra.lt/lt/naujienos/vyru-ir-moteru-pajamu-skirtumai-
mazeja-taciau-vis-dar-kelia-socialiniu-issukiu).
Southworth, C., 2006. The dacha debate: Household agriculture and labor markets in
post-socialist Russia. Rural Sociol. 71 (3), 451–478.
Spilková, J., 2017. Producing space, cultivating community: The story of Prague’s new
community gardens. Agric. Hum. Values 34, 887–897.
Spilková, J., Rypáčková, P., 2019. Prague’s community gardening in liquid times:
Challenges in the creation of spaces for social connection. Leisure Stud. 38 (4),
468–479.
Srnicek,N., Williams,A.,2015. Inventing theFuture:Postcapitalism and a WorldWithout
Work. Verso Books, London.
Sumner, J., Llewelyn, S., 2011. Organic solutions? Gender and organic farming in the age
of industrial agriculture. Capitalism Nature Socialism 22 (1), 100–118.
Swinnen, J.F., 1999. The political economy of land reform choices in Central and Eastern
Europe. Econ. Transit. 7 (3), 637–664.
Šiupšinskas, M., Saladžinskaitė, I., Žadeikytė, R., 2016. Kolektyvinio sodo idėja ir jos
materializacija Lietuvoje. Mokslas—Lietuvos Ateitis 8 (1), 102–111.
Tatter, G., Chakrabarti, M., 2020. Farm to table: The coronavirus and America’s food
supply chain. Retrieved from https://www.wbur.org/onpoint/2020/04/15/
coronavirus-food-grocery-supply-chain.
Thompson, E.P., 1967. Time, work-discipline and industrial capitalism. Past and Present
38, 56–97.
Thrift, N., 1981. ‘Owners’ time and own time: The making of a capitalist time con-
sciousness, 1300–1880. In: Pred, A. (Ed.), Space and Time in Geography. Universityof Lund Press, Lund, pp. 56–84.
Trauger, A., 2004. ‘Because they can do the work:’ Women farmers in sustainable agri-
culture in Pennsylvania, USA. Gender, Place & Culture 11 (2), 289–307.
Tronto, J., 1993. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care. Routledge,
New York.
Tsing, A.L., 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in
Capitalist Ruins. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
van Dooren, T., Kirksey, E., Münster, U., 2016. Multispecies studies: Cultivating arts of
attentiveness. Environ. Human. 8, 1–23.
Varga, M., 2019. Subsistence’ readings: World Bank and state approaches to commer-
cialisingagricultureinpost-CommunistEurasia. J.Develop. Stud.55(6),1253–1266.
Varga, M., 2017a. Small farms survival and growth: Making investments despite credit
constraints. Sociologia Ruralis 57, 641–660.
Varga, M., 2017b. Cash rather than contract: The re-emergence of traditional agrifood
chains in post-communist Europe. J. Rural Stud. 53, 58–67.
Verdery, K., 1996. What Was Socialism, and What Comes Next? Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Wegren, S.,1998.Agricultureand theState inSovietand Post-SovietRussia.University of
Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
Wegren, S., Patsiorkovsky, V.V., O’Brien, D.J., 2010. Rural reform and the gender gap in
post-Soviet Russia. Slavic Rev. 69 (1), 65–92.
Weszkalnys, G., 2014. Anticipating oil: The temporal politics of a disaster yet to come.
Sociolog. Rev. 62 (1), 211–235.
Yotova, M., 2018. The ‘goodness’ of homemade yogurt: Self-provisioning as sustainable
food practices in post-socialist Bulgaria. Local Environ. 23 (11), 1063–1074.
Yusoff, K., 2013. Geologic life: Prehistory, climate, futures in the Anthropocene. Environ.
Plann. D: Soc. Space 31 (5), 779–795.
Zavisca, J.R., 2003. Contesting capitalism at the post-Soviet dacha: The meaning of food
cultivation for urban Russians. Slavic Rev. 62 (4), 786–810.
Žakevičiūtė, R., 2016. Socio-economic differentiation in the post-communist rural Baltics:
The case of three kolkhozes. J. Baltic Stud. 47 (3), 349–368.D. Mincytė, et al. Geoforum 115 (2020) 44–53
53
