ARTICLES
Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? Questions Arising
from an Investigation into Whether There are GM
Crops in the Svalbard Global Seed Vault
Fern Wickson1
Accepted: 25 August 2016 / Published online: 12 September 2016
/C211The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The Svalbard Global Seed Vault provides a backup of seed collections
from genebanks around the world. It’s unique character has made it iconic in the
public imagination as a ‘Noah’s Ark’ for crop plants. Its remote location and strict
controls on access have, however, also lent it an air of mystery, swirling with
conspiracy theories. In this paper, I ﬁrst clarify the aims of the Vault, the history of
its development and the policies and practices of its current operation. Given
concerns around its potential links to the biotechnology industry, I go on to ask
whether GM crops are currently stored in the Vault. Presenting several reasons for
why GM crops are formally excluded, while indicating the potential for both change
and unintentional contamination, I am compelled to question whether GM crops
should be excluded. Answering this requires an interrogation of their potential
conservation value as modern contributors to crop biodiversity. In exploring this
issue, I suggest that there has been surprisingly little discussion of the moral status
and conservation value of bio-technological crop plants and indeed, of how we care
for all the techno-lifeforms we are currently engaged in co-creating. I suggest that
these are becoming important issues as biotechnological techniques and applications
begin to rapidly evolve and diversify (e.g. through genome editing and synthetic
biology). Emphasizing the scope for a refreshed interdisciplinary research agenda
exploring the interface between biotechnology and biodiversity conservation, I
conclude the article by proposing new concepts of synbiodiversity and symbiodi-
versity to encourage further debate.
Keywords Biotechnology /C1Biodiversity /C1Conservation value /C1GMO /C1Seed vault /C1
New plant breeding techniques
&Fern Wickson
fern.wickson@genok.no
1Society, Ecology and Ethics Department, GenØk Centre for Biosafety, P.O Box 6418,
9294 Tromsø, Norway
123J Agric Environ Ethics (2016) 29:787–811
DOI 10.1007/s10806-016-9634-7
I stood at the base of a frozen mountain on an island high up in the arctic
archipelago. The wind tore through me in icy shards as snowdrift whippedaround my ankles. Nestling my hands deeper inside my pockets I scanned thelandscape. An airport. A port. A stain of abandoned coal mines. A scattering
of colored houses against a backdrop of steeply rising white mountains and
deeply plunging blue seas. Ocean and Ice. Snow and Stone. Raw ruggednature and doggedly hardy humanity. I had come to the place where polarbears outnumber people and it is dark for months at a time. Here I stood beforea locked metal door, leading deep into the heart of the mountain. ‘‘In there’’ hesaid, ‘‘is the most biodiverse room in the world’’.
Introduction
Conserving the diversity of our important crop plants is crucial for the resilience ofagricultural systems in the face of change. Currently, there are two main approachesto the conservation of crop biodiversity—in situ approaches that seek to conserve(and generate) biodiversity on farms through ongoing cultivation, management anduse in evolving socio-ecological systems, and ex situ approaches in whichgermplasm (typically in the form of seeds but also possibly as cuttings, tissuesamples, DNA samples etc.) are frozen and stored in ‘genebanks’ for future use and
development by researchers and plant breeders. This paper stems from a project
interested in both of these models of crop biodiversity conservation. The workpresented here, however, results from a speciﬁc investigation into the operation ofthe Svalbard Global Seed Vault (hereafter the Vault) as the international apex of exsitu models of crop biodiversity conservation. The Vault contains backupcollections of diverse crop seeds from genebanks all around the world and ismeant to offer them safe keeping in the face of any potential disaster.
The initial question framing the research reported here was simply one of how
the Svalbard Global Seed Vault functioned—its operational policies, procedures and
practices. While conducting this research, however, I posed a question thatinadvertently led me deep into a swamp of interdisciplinary entanglements. Thedeceptively simple question I posed was ‘‘Are there any genetically modiﬁed (GM)seeds in the Vault?’’ This paper documents my attempt to answer that question andtherefore describes not only what I learned about the Vault and its operations, butalso the diverse answers received as to whether GM crops can be found in its icyinterior. Furthermore, it goes on to present and reﬂect upon the important
philosophical and socio-political questions that arose as a result of this investiga-
tion, namely those around the moral status and conservation value of bio-technological organisms and whether and how we care for the rising cacophony of‘synbiodiversity’ we are engaged in co-creating.
Biotechnological interventions into agriculture continue to amplify and diversify,
both beyond transgenic crops to include agricultural insects and ﬁsh, and throughthe introduction of new techniques for gene silencing, genome editing (such as themuch-touted CRISPR/Cas9), and epigenetic DNA methylation. Much of the current
debate around this diversiﬁcation is focused on the extent to which the new788 F. Wickson
123
techniques and organisms are covered by existing regulatory regimes (Kuzma and
Kokotovich 2011 ; Lusser and Davies 2013 ), or how they may be developed
‘responsibly’ to minimize risks and take social and ethical concerns about their
impacts into account (National Academy of Sciences 2015 ). While these are
important issues, through this paper I demonstrate that there are also a host ofunaddressed issues relating to the moral status and conservation value ofbiotechnological organisms that urgently require more sustained attention as thetechniques of manipulation continue to diversify. Furthermore, I propose that fordiscussions on these issues to advance, it is crucial that we seek out new concepts tohelp capture, conceptualise and consider what is going on within a broaderperspective. To this end, the paper proposes the notions of synbiodiversity and
symbiodiversity as heuristic concepts to encapsulate the burgeoning diversity of
techniques and organisms and help us consider how to approach our entangled inter-being. Finally, through the introduction of these new terms, the paper encourages usto consider whether and how we care for the synbiodiversity of techno-life forms weare currently engaged in co-creating. The aim of the paper is thereby not only toclarify the operations of the Svalbard Global Seed Vault but also to reinvigoratecritical scholarship on agricultural biotechnologies and to stimulate further researchon important underlying and as yet unresolved philosophical and socio-political
issues in the GMO debate. These issues include: the legitimacy of the basis for legal,
socio-economic and moral distinctions between traditional breeding and modernbiotechnologies; the moral status, conservation value and responsibility we have forbio-technological hybrids; the role a concept of naturalness plays in ordering ourthinking; and ﬁnally, how we might not only advance responsible purposes andprocesses for research and innovation (Stilgoe et al. 2013 ) but also take
responsibility for all the mutants and monsters we are co-creating through ourpractices (Latour 2012 ; Haraway 1991 ).
Method
The research described in this paper was conducted using mixed qualitative
methods. This included: (a) review of academic and popular literature (ﬁrst on thefunctioning of the Vault and extending out into interdisciplinary areas ofconservation biology, environmental philosophy, international law and regulatorypolitics as this became appropriate); (b) a week long site visit to the Vault in
Svalbard (conducted during the arrival of a new shipment of seeds) and associated
ethnographic observations; (c) interviews with all key institutional partners involvedin the management of the Vault and; (d) philosophical reﬂection around questions ofconservation value, techno-biological relations and matters of care. This mixedmethods approach is reﬂected in the presentation of the research results, whichincludes a collection of factual descriptions, ethnographic ﬁeld notes and photos,interview quotes, analytical discussion and philosophical reﬂection. The weaving ofthese various elements into the telling of this story has been necessary to try and
capture not just the facts of the case, but also the feelings of the place and the
interdisciplinary questions that they both raise.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 789
123
The Svalbard Global Seed Vault
The Svalbard Global Seed Vault is the global ﬁgurehead of ex situ approaches to
agricultural crop biodiversity conservation (or conservation of genetic resources for
food and agriculture as it is increasingly referred to). The Vault provides a location
for genebanks1around the world to store duplicate, back-up, copies of their
collections. The aim of the Vault is therefore to offer safe-keeping and someinsurance for the ex situ collections of crop biodiversity held in genebanks in theface of the various potential threats they are vulnerable to. These threats include
technical failures (e.g. power outages and freezer facility failures), natural disasters
(e.g. ﬁre and ﬂoods) and socio-political unrest (e.g. conﬂict and war). The Vaultopened for operation in 2008 and now houses over 860,000 different samples ofmore than 5000 species originating from more than 230 countries and deposited byover 60 institutes from around the world (Svalbard Global Seed Vault 2016 ). In
October 2015, the ﬁrst withdrawal was made from the Vault when ICARDA, theInternational Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas based in war-tornAleppo, requested that some of the seeds it had previously deposited in the Vault be
sent to Morocco and Lebanon so that Syrian researchers could continue their work
(Sifferlin 2015 ).
The Vault is located on the arctic archipelago of Svalbard (also formerly known
as Spitsbergen), not far from the township of Longyearbyen. The only externallyvisible component of the Vault is the huge concrete housing surrounding theentrance door, and the striking light installation (‘‘perpetual repercussion’’ byDyveke Sanne) on the fac ¸ade and roof of the entrance portal commissioned to make
the Vault visible from a distance in both darkness and daylight (see Fig. 1). Behind
this entrance door, is a 120 m long tunnel that descends into Plata ˚fjell mountain,
leading to three large storage caverns excavated in the permafrost (although onlyone of these caverns is currently required and in use). Each of these caverns orstorage halls is around 27 m long by 9.5 m wide. Although the permafrost of themountain keeps them below freezing temperature all year round, the caverncurrently in use lies behind huge ice covered double doors and is activelyrefrigerated to -18/C176(the current international standard for long-term storage in gene
banks) (see Fig. 2). The storage hall is ﬁtted with ﬁve long corridors of metal
shelving and these hold the sealed boxes of seeds deposited by genebanks from
around the world (see Figs. 3,4). The Vault also contains a small insulated ofﬁce
space off the main tunnel.
Svalbard was chosen as a location for the Global Seed Vault for several reasons.
In the ﬁrst instance, the Nordic Genetic Resource Center had a history of using anold mine shaft on Svalbard to store its safety duplicates and this served as an earlymodel for the Vault (Qvenild 2008 ). The location was also supported for practical
reasons, such as the way in which it is uniquely both remote and accessible, i.e. it is
situated on an island close to the North Pole but still serviced by an airport and close
1The terms ’seedbank’ and ’genebank’ are often used interchangeably although it can certainly be
argued that the difference between a focus on conserving seeds and conserving genes is highly signiﬁcantand worthy of another paper (van Dooren 2009 ).790 F. Wickson
123
to a village. Importantly, the permafrost of Svalbard could also provide a backup
should the refrigeration system within the Vault fail. Furthermore, Norway was seento be a politically stabile country with a signiﬁcant level of support and trust fromboth industrialised and non-industrialised countries for its international work and
Fig. 1 The entrance to the Svalbard Global Seed Vault
Fig. 2 Ice covered doors at the
entrance to the storage hallDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 791
123
commitment to agricultural biodiversity conservation (Statsbygg 2008 ). Svalbard
has also had a history of international collaboration through the Spitsbergen Treaty(Spitsbergen Treaty 1920 ), which was ratiﬁed in the 1920s and effectively made
Svalbard a part of Norway’s sovereign territory but subject to unique rules allowingcitizens and companies from other nations the right to ﬁsh, hunt and conductindustrial commercial activities there.
Norway originally offered to create a repository for the world’s genebanks in
1989. However, the international community did not accept the offer at the time due
to ongoing debates about access to and control of plant genetic resources and thelack of an international legal framework governing the matter (Qvenild 2008 ). After
years of tough negotiations, in 2004 the International Treaty on Plant Genetic
Fig. 3 Storage hall within the Vault
Fig. 4 Black boxed seed deposits from genebanks around the world792 F. Wickson
123
Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) (Treaty 2004 ) entered into force,
establishing a multilateral system of access and beneﬁt sharing for the geneticresources of 64 of the most important crop plants.
2While the Treaty was a keystone
legal agreement enabling the Vault to receive international support, a range of other
international agreements have also arguably been crucial. These include: (1) theagreement in 1994 to place the genebank collections of the Consultative Group onInternational Agricultural Research (CGIAR) under the auspices of the FAO (FAOand CGIAR 1994 ); (2) an agreement on international standards for genebanks
(originally published in 1994 by the FAO and the International Plant GeneticResources Institute (now Bioversity) and revised in 2014) (FAO 2014 ); and (3) the
development of a standard material transfer agreement (SMTA) with rules for the
exchange of genetic resources among parties to the Treaty (including requirements
such as that access for research and breeding is provided free of charge, intellectualproperty rights limiting access to the material as received cannot be claimed, andwhere commercial products develop as a result of research on the material, paymentshould be made into a beneﬁt sharing fund) (ITPGRFA 2006 ).
While the Norwegian government covered the costs associated with building the
Vault, its operation is currently managed through a collaborative agreementbetween the Norwegian government, the international organization The Crop Trust
(formerly the Global Crop Biodiversity Trust) and the Nordic Genetic Resource
Center (NordGen). In general terms, the Norwegian Ministry of Agriculture andFood has the overarching responsibility for the Vault, NordGen provides practicalmanagement and coordinates activities with the international depositors, and TheCrop Trust is central in raising and dispersing supporting funding for the Vault’songoing operation. Since no employees of these organisations actually work fulltime on site at the Vault in Svalbard, responsibility for its daily oversight is alsoperformed by Statsbygg (a Norwegian public sector enterprise dealing with
construction and property issues), although their role is limited to ensuring that
things like the lights and freezers continue to function. The Vault is not open tomembers of the public and remains locked at all times except when managementstaff arrive to receive and store new deposits of seeds.
While genebanks actively distribute the material from their collections to
researchers and plant breeders, and regenerate their material regularly so as to retainhigh quality collections of viable seed, the Vault does none of these things. It simplyserves as a backup location for accessions that are already held by other genebanks.
As such, it does not take seeds from actors other than genebanks, it does not perform
any analysis or research on the seeds deposited, nor does it distribute or regeneratethe seeds it receives. In fact, the Vault operates as a ‘black box system’, meaningthat no one responsible for the Vault or its management is allowed to open the boxesof seeds they receive, or do anything with the material they contain (except underexpress permission and instruction from the depositor). The Vault is only allowed totransfer the material back to the depositor upon request and cannot distribute it to
2Some of the important exemptions from the crops covered by the Treaty include soya, sugar cane, and
oil palm. These crops were excluded to appease challenges made during the negotiations by nations wherethese crops have their centres of origin and/or diversity.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 793
123
any other actors or entities. Furthermore, no property rights are transferred with the
deposit and neither Norway nor the Vault’s managers have any claim to ownershipover the material deposited there.
This means that although there has been some degree of concern that the Vault
enables certain actors to gain access to the world’s genetic resources for food andagriculture, in fact, signiﬁcant work has been done to establish the Vault as a systemin which depositors retain full rights and sole access to the materials sent there forsafekeeping. Indeed, this has been a crucial feature allowing it to gain internationalsupport and use. It is also worth noting that although the media has dubbed it the‘Doomsday Vault’, the management views this name as a misrepresentation of theVault’s role, which they describe as not to provide a safety net for the world’s
agricultural systems, but rather, more simply to provide a backup of the genetic
resources held in genebank collections.
The door is locked. The boxes are sealed. Nobody gets in. Nobody works here.
Sealed shipments are collected at the airport and transferred to the shelves.
There they can sit for all eternity. Frozen. There is no testing, no checking, noreal work being done. There is no hum of workers, no practice to observe. Thehallway is empty and still, bound by concrete and ice. There is no smell of thesoil, touch of the sun or sound of the rain. Sealed boxes of seeds sitting onshelves in a freezer. That’s it. The cavern echos in silence. Can this really bethe most biodiverse room in the world?
Are There GM Crops in the Svalbard Global Seed Vault?
During the course of my research to understand the operation of the Vault, I askedthe question of whether it contained any GM crops, and if not, might they be storedthere in the future. In other words, whether the Vault provided backup for theconservation of biotechnological forms of agricultural crop biodiversity. Initially, Ireceived diverging answers to this question from the different institutes engaged inthe collaborative management of the Vault, from a ﬁrm ‘no’, to an uncertain ‘not
that I know of’, to a cautious ‘perhaps’, and even an open ‘sure, why not?’ This
initial diversity encouraged me to investigate the matter further and as I pressed on,the answers began to converge around no, there were no GM crops in the Vault.However, several different reasons were given for why GM crops were excluded.
The Vault is Not a GM Certiﬁed FacilityThe ofﬁcial response provided by the Norwegian Ministry for Agriculture and Food
is that there are no GM crops in the Vault because it is not a certiﬁed facility for the
storage of GM seeds. Under European law (which also applies in Norway), workwith GM crops can only take place in certiﬁed facilities and receiving thiscertiﬁcation necessitates meeting particular requirements in regards to buildingspeciﬁcations, materials and infrastructure. This can include things such as havingsealed joins and netted windows to avoid insect intrusions, use of non-porous794 F. Wickson
123
building materials, having appropriate waste facilities and the possibility to
decontaminate the area via gassing (Ministry of Health and Care Services 2001 ).
While the speciﬁc requirements vary with the extent to which the plants in use have
an ability to be easily spread, all the requirements across the different levels are
effectively tailored towards containing the GM material within the facility.
Given the unique nature and location of the Vault’s construction, the current
facility may not meet all of the requirements across the various containment levelsfor different types of GMOs. However, when interviewed, a Senior Advisor at theNorwegian Ministry of Agriculture and Food stated that although she did not thinkthe Vault could pass all the certiﬁcation requirements to be a GM storage facility, itcould be possible to receive a waiver and gain certiﬁcation because of the way in
which the Vault’s operations are already oriented towards strict containment of the
deposited materials and there are facilities for seed destruction on site within theVault. So although GM crops are currently excluded from the Vault by a lack offormal legal certiﬁcation to store them, this could be changed in the future if themotivation was there. When asked about the possibility of a future waiver, theMinistry representative stated ‘‘There might be possibilities to ﬁnd a way if that wassomething Norway wanted to do, but so far we have not really looked into thatquestion because we have not got any requests yet and politically there has been
some reluctance to do so.’’ This leads us to the second reason that GM crops are
excluded from the Vault.
There is No Political Will to Include GMOsWhile the lack of legal certiﬁcation is given as the ofﬁcial reason for GM exclusion
from the Vault, lack of political will is why no change in this certiﬁcation status hasever been sought. While unable to ﬁnd any clear policy statement on the Vault’s
position regarding GMOs, a former coordinator for its operation and management
stated during an interview ‘‘I remember when we looked at this in 2007, before theVault opened, everyone knew that if GM seeds were stored there, this would be a pointof criticism …there was a concern with public communication. Everyone knows that
this is so contentious that it is probably good not to work with them.’’ Lack of politicalwill to include GM crops in the Vault from its very inception was also conﬁrmed by theministry representative. As the former Vault manger elaborated, ‘‘So instead of goinginto all those difﬁcult considerations of whether one should out of scientiﬁc interest
store GM seeds, it was decided that simply on the grounds of this Norwegian
certiﬁcation policy and law, we are not going to have GM seeds up there.’’ This meansthat when the Vault was established in 2008, there was no desire by either the advisoryboard or the management to become (any further) entangled in the socio-politicalcontroversy surrounding GMOs and the lack of legal certiﬁcation for the Vault as astorage facility served as a convenient way to avoid the issue.
I say any further entangled in the GM controversy because the proﬁt oriented
industry of biotechnology and its claims to strong intellectual property rights over
plant genetic resources have been a source of signiﬁcant tension with the ﬁeld of
crop biodiversity conservation for years, including in the negotiations leading up tothe ITPGRFA and during the establishment of the Vault. Given the Vault’s relianceDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 795
123
on the ITPGRFA and its multilateral system for access and beneﬁt sharing to
establish international trust and support, lack of political will to include GM cropsduring its establishment is perhaps understandable.
Even today though, one of the most common and persistent misunderstandings
and sources of criticism that the managers of the Vault say they face is theperception that Monsanto (one of the major players in the agricultural biotechnologycontroversy) either funds the Vault or has access to its materials. The well-established black box system gives no reason to believe that any organization hasaccess to material placed in the Vault by other depositors. However, largeorganisations with a history of positive engagement with biotechnology develop-ment, such as the Rockefeller foundation, the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation,
DuPont/Pioneer Hi-bred, CropLife International and Syngenta, have all made
donations to The Crop Trust, which ﬁnances the functioning of the Vault (CropTrust 2016 ). Since conspiracies continue to swirl around what inﬂuence such
donations allow (Engdahl 2016 ; Anderson 2015 ), a political desire to minimize
misunderstandings and possible public outcries by speciﬁcally excluding GM cropsfrom the Vault on the (neither scientiﬁc nor emotional) basis of a lack of legalcertiﬁcation may persist for some time to come. However, political will can change,not only with the party in power, but also through shifts in popular opinion or the
desires of the depositing institutes, and should such a shift occur, GM certiﬁcation
for the Vault remains a possibility.
GM Crops Do Not Meet the Requirements for Multilateral AccessEven if there was political will to gain certiﬁcation status so the Vault could store
GM seeds in the future, they would arguably still be unwelcome if they did not meetthe requirements for multilateral access. Although intellectual property law varies
between nations, in most countries, crop plants developed through traditional
breeding practices are typically protected by plant breeders’ rights (or plant varietyrights), which give the creator of a new variety exclusive marketing rights.However, under the scheme of plant breeders rights (PBRs) farmers are stillpermitted to save and plant the seeds of that variety in following seasons, and aresearch exemption means that other breeders can freely experiment with thematerial to develop new varieties of their own (UPOV Convention 1978 ). GM
crops, however, are commonly awarded intellectual property protection in the more
broadly applicable and restrictive form of utility patents rather than PBRs (or indeed
plant patents).
3This effectively gives them a different ontological status and
represents a signiﬁcant reordering of human-nature relations (Hettinger 1995 ). No
longer simply a new plant variety for which limited rights can be claimed, GM
3It is worth noting that the US is somewhat unique in that it has a Plant Patent Act (in addition to a Plant
Variety Protection Act) that allows for traditionally bred varieties of asexually reproduced plants to bepatented. These plant patents are restricted though in that they allow for experimental research andlicensees can sexually reproduce the plants indeﬁnitely as long as the seeds are not given or sold to othersfor planting. The ability to achieve the broader type of utility patents for biotechnologies advancedsigniﬁcantly after the landmark case of Diamond vsChakrabarty in which the US Supreme court (in a
contested decision) ultimately ruled that living organisms could be patented as inventions (Rimmer 2008 ).796 F. Wickson
123
plants have been legally sanctioned as human inventions, as devices that we have
created and that can be legitimately subject to monopoly ownership and control. Aspatented inventions, GM crops are not freely available to other researchers and plant
breeders and cannot be saved and replanted by farmers.
As mentioned above, when the Vault was ﬁrst proposed, tensions and concerns
around trends towards bioprospecting, biopiracy, and the privatization of geneticresources through intellectual property rights meant that it was not widely acceptedinternationally. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (CBD 1992 )
established national sovereignty over biodiversity (and protocols for bilateral beneﬁtsharing), although the US refused to sign due to its perceived inadequacies inrecognizing biotechnology patents and royalties (Hettinger 1995 ) and remains one
of only four nations not a party to the treaty. Questions also still existed at the time
concerning the materials held in international genebanks, and especially thosecollected prior to the implementation of the CBD. When the CGIAR agreed to placetheir genebank collections under the auspices of the FAO in 1994, the cropbiodiversity they contained was effectively placed in trust for the world communityas part of humankind’s common heritage . This sense of the common heritage of crop
biodiversity (or genetic resources for food and agriculture) was further supportedwhen the ITPGRFA established its multilateral system of access and beneﬁt sharing
(although the narrow interpretation of ‘beneﬁt’ in the economic terms of industrial
agriculture has been a point of critique). The common practice of granting of patentsto GM crops, however, effectively removes their genetic resources from thecommon heritage of humanity and makes them the private property of the patentholder.
Patented GM crops do not fulﬁll the requirements of the multilateral scheme for
access and beneﬁt sharing established under the ITPGRFA. They neither allow forfree and open access to the genetic material, nor are their commercial sales currently
contributing to the Treaty’s beneﬁt sharing fund. There is a clear expectation that all
organisations making deposits to the Vault follow the ITPGRFA, and therefore itmay be assumed that GM crops would be ﬁrmly excluded on that basis. While noone involved in the management of the Vault directly raised this issue during myinterviews, all conﬁrmed the lack of mutual access and beneﬁt sharing for GM cropsas a limiting factor when I brought the issue forward. However, it is important tonote that the language of the standard deposit agreement (Svalbard Global SeedVault 2013 ) does allow for exceptions. Section 3.1 1c of the depositor agreement
states that depositors shall only deposit materials that ‘‘Are available to other natural
or legal persons in a manner that facilitates access for conservation and sustainableuse in compliance with national laws and applicable international treaties’’.However, Section 3.1 2 states that any or all of the requirements ‘‘may be waived’’.Both the ministry and former and current operations managers of the Vault are notaware of any waivers made on the basis of access requirements and therefore GMcrops as patented inventions are also arguably excluded from the Vault on thisground. However, just as for the other reasons for their current exclusion, this has
the potential to change in the future—either by patented GM crops being granted
speciﬁc waivers for inclusion (perhaps unlikely) or through a request for storage ofDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 797
123
unpatented GM crops developed by public research institutes (such as the famous
‘Golden Rice’ being developed by the International Rice Research Institute).
Having described three good reasons for why GM crops are not currently found
in the Vault, it would be remiss of me not to reveal why, despite these good reasons
and the assurances of the Vault’s management, GM crops may in fact be housedwithin its walls. Due to the black box system, there are no scientiﬁc facilities and noone has the right to check the genetic make up of the material received by the Vault.There are also no requirements from the Vault for depositors to test for GMcontamination in their collections and document any results before submission.There is therefore the possibility that some of the seeds have been unintentionallycontaminated with GM material through either seed mixtures or, more likely, gene
ﬂow.
The possibility for unintentional presence of transgenes in genebank accessions
has been recognized by the CGIAR and principles for the development of policieson the matter are available (Genetic Resources Policy Committee 2005 ). Building
on these principles, some CGIAR centres have developed more concrete proceduresfor avoiding GM contamination and even carried out some monitoring (Mezzalamaet al. 2010 ). However, such guidelines and practices do not seem widespread and it
is certainly unlikely that all deposits within the Vault have been thoroughly
screened for potential GM contamination. Futhermore, even the CGIAR centres
recognize that no level of testing could provide an absolute guarantee (CGIAR2005 ):
It is recognized that available technical means do not permit the complete
exclusion of unintentional presence of exotic genes, including transgenes, ingenebank accessions. It is also recognized that available testing techniques donot provide an absolute guarantee, without testing every single seed or plantthat any given accession is free of transgenes.
While the signiﬁcance of having unintentional GM contamination within the
Vault may be considered marginal, unmonitored GM contamination in genebankaccessions has the potential to spread—either through gene ﬂow during regenerationor contaminated collections in areas with commercial or experimental GMcultivation. To minimize such contamination requires dedicated detection work,monitoring systems and systemic vigilance. The costs associated with a vigilantmonitoring program and the challenges associated with accurately detecting the
presence of transgenes in landraces and wild relatives should not, however, be
underestimated (Cleveland et al. 2005 ).
Should There be GM Crops in the Vault? Do GMOs Have Conservation
Value?
Until now, the focus of this paper has been on nature of the Vault and the question
of whether it contains GMOs. What is arguably a more interesting question though,
is whether the Vault should contain GMOs. If we are committed to conserving
agricultural biodiversity as a safety net for dealing with an uncertain future, on what798 F. Wickson
123
grounds should GM crops be excluded from that? Biotechnology is regularly
claimed to have a crucial role to play in securing future food security andagricultural adaptability and resilience in the face of change. Biotechnological
organisms also already dominate a number of important cropping systems (such as
the maize, soya, cotton and canola) in several countries (including the US,Argentina, Brazil, India, Canada, and Australia) and promise to be only morewidespread in the future. Even the CGIAR publicly endorses modern biotechnologyas a crucial part of its investment in the future of agricultural research (Okusu 2009 ).
So if biotechnology has such an apparently valuable role in our agricultural future,why should GM crops not be valued as an important part of agricultural biodiversityand included in our global conservation safety net? What are the arguments for and
against the conservation value of GMOs? Answers to these questions entangle
science, philosophy and politics and have received limited attention to date. Sincethese issues promise to only become more complex and pressing as biotechnologicaltechniques and organisms continue to diversify, in what follows I outline severallines of discussion that these questions lead into and point to areas where furtherresearch would be highly beneﬁcial.
GM Crops Have Conservation Value in Principle, but are Conserved
Differently in Practice
For people concerned with crop biodiversity conservation, there is a general
consensus that all crop biodiversity has conservation value because we do not knowwhat may be useful in the future. There is, however, a recognized limit to what canbe conserved ex situ in genebanks due to resource constraints. With thousands ofdifferent breeding lines in motion, it is simply not possible to conserve examples ofeach and every one ex situ. Therefore, choices are often made to try and conserve
the broadest genetic base possible. As a former Vault manager states: ‘‘In principle,
all plant genetic resources have conservation value, but it is obvious that modernvarieties have less conservation value than a land race or wild relative with abroader genetic base …the aim is to conserve as much as possible of the gene pool of
these crops.’’ When the focus is on conserving genes rather than on whole seeds orvarieties, protecting the older breeding lines from which modern cultivars andhybrids have emerged is seen to protect the diversity of available genes, which thensubstitutes the need to conserve all the varieties possible from different combina-
tions of these genes. Under this line of thinking, GM crops may be seen to have
conservation value, but this is limited to the genes that constitute their componentparts and these may be conserved through the protection of older varieties fromwhich they have been derived.
The way we currently approach the conservation of GM crops is, however,
arguably not actually primarily through ex situ gene banking. Genebanks havehistorically had a focus on giving plant breeders and researchers improved access toa diverse range of genetic resources, something that the patent protection awarded
GM crops speciﬁcally seeks to minimize. What we see then, is that the conservation
of GM crops is actually being performed through an encouragement of their in situuptake across ever more farming systems. While in situ conservation has typicallyDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 799
123
been perceived and emphasised as important for maintaining native crop diversity
and local landraces, and imagined as taking place through traditional small scalefarming (Brush 2000 ; Altieri and Merrick 1987 ), in industrialized economies it is
actually GM crops that are increasingly coming to dominate in situ settings. Unlike
traditional varieties though, GM crops cannot be managed by farmers in a way thatcontinues to not just conserve but also to actively generate biodiversity throughongoing selection, cross-breeding and evolution. As patented inventions, thegeneration of GM crop diversity is therefore restricted to scientiﬁc actors indistanced laboratories and cannot occur through ongoing interrelations with theimmediate socio-ecological system of the farm. This means that the legal and socio-economic conditions surrounding GM crops effectively remove the possibility for
farmers to pursue their adaptation and co-evolution with in situ conditions.
Indeed, we are arguably entering a signiﬁcant period of shift in which native and
traditional varieties are increasingly disappearing from cultivation and thereforebeing prioritized for ex situ conservation in genebanks, while modern varieties areemerging from ex situ settings to dominate in situ landscapes. This has the potentialto signiﬁcantly affect agricultural biodiversity as a creative commons. Both the slidetowards seeing genes as the ultimate unit of biodiversity conservation value ratherthan the historic focus on species and ecosystems (Martin et al. 2016 ) and the shift
towards freezing our dynamic common heritage of crop biodiversity ex situ while
increasing the use of privately owned patented inventions that cannot be adapted byfarmers in situ, call for enhanced philosophical reﬂection and socio-politicalanalysis and action.
GM Crops Add to Biodiversity, but Their Conservation Value May No
Longer be as Plant Genetic Resources
As described above, one response to the question of whether GM crops have
conservation value will be that as modern cultivars they have a narrow genetic baseand therefore less conservation value than wild relatives, land races or traditionalvarieties. However, a reply to this claim could well be that GM crops resulting fromrecombinant DNA technology (the majority of GM crops under commercialcultivation today) contain transgenes that could not have been acquired bytraditional breeding and therefore represent a radical new form of crop biodiversity.In this case, GM crops may be seen as adding biodiversity to our pool of important
crop plants and may be conservation worthy on this ground. Interestingly though,
while many people want to recognize, honour the value of, and actively conservethe crop biodiversity created through the human-nature inter-actions of farmers overthousands of generations, the same people often hesitate to extend this embrace toGMOs and the modern human-nature inter-actions of scientists. Justiﬁcations forwhy traditionally bred forms of crop biodiversity are embraced as valuable whileradical new forms of diversity offered by GM crops is not, is neither widely debatednor well elaborated and would beneﬁt from more sustained attention from
environmental philosophy, conservation biology and social psychology.
Given the transgenic nature of commercial GM crops, one glib reason for their
exclusion from the Vault could be that they are no longer ‘‘plant genetic resources’’800 F. Wickson
123
and therefore fall outside the scope of its mandate. Since they contain unique
combinations of bacterial, viral and plant DNA, it could be argued that transgeniccrops are no longer plants in a traditional sense. Any such argument would need to
address horizontal gene ﬂow more generally though and the way viral DNA, for
example, can be found integrated into the genomes of many different organisms(including ourselves) that we maintain have conservation value. If there issomething about the transgenic identity or the commodiﬁcation culture from whichthey emerge that leads to a loss of their value as a plant genetic resource, more workacross genetics, philosophy and law would arguably be necessary to establishlegitimate grounds for how a human-directed crossing of species boundaries or aprivate property status, can alter an organism’s conservation value. Furthermore,
any such argument would need to speciﬁcally address why such transgenic
inventions fall outside biodiversity as an otherwise all embracing environmentalvalue.
GM Crops Have Conservation Value for Instrumental Purposes but Their
Intrinsic or Integrity Value is Questionable
To argue that certain species, or even genes, are not worthy of conservation runs
against both beliefs in the intrinsic value of biodiversity today for its own sake and
the instrumental view that it may be potentially useful for us tomorrow. Despite this,the conservation value of GMOs is rarely proclaimed and the question of the moralstatus of bio-technological organisms (especially in relation to crop plants), hasreceived surprisingly little detailed discussion (Baertschi 2012 ). Critics of GM crops
may counter that conservation value is granted to those things that we cherish andwant to protect, and that this simply does not extend to GMOs. However thejustiﬁcation for such an exclusion can be muddied.
As indicated above, agricultural biodiversity is typically conserved for its
instrumental value, or in other words, its value for human purposes either now or inthe future. Critics may challenge the instrumental value of the GM crops availabletoday, believing they do more harm than good. However questions could be raisedabout whether this would necessarily or categorically hold for all GM crops of thefuture. Certainly proponents advocate GMOs as holding enormous instrumentalvalue both today (demonstrated by their widespread and increasing use) and for theability of agricultural systems to adapt and persist in the future. This assertion of
their current or potential use value need not rely on them being completely
necessary or the only solution for agricultural challenges. If GM crops are acceptedto have instrumental value though, then they should certainly be seen as protectionworthy by adherents of the ‘new conservation science’ (Doak et al. 2014 ), and the
question of how we conserve and care for them (e.g. as part of our common heritage
vs as privately owned patented inventions) would then stand central as requiringfurther attention.
It could of course also be contended that GMOs lack conservation value because
they somehow lack the type of intrinsic value awarded to other living organisms and
systems. However, what would be the basis for this? Since a GM crop is distinguishedfrom other plant varieties on the basis of the technique used the create it, arguments areDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 801
123
required for how the use of a particular technique creates a morally relevant difference
(Baertschi 2012 ). Or indeed, how different biotechnological techniques may create
organisms with different degrees of moral signiﬁcance (Attﬁeld 2012 ). Again,
signiﬁcant work remains to be done by philosophers and willing interdisciplinary
scholars if legitimate grounds are to be established for why GMOs may lack or havevarying degrees of intrinsic value. One argument could be that a loss of intrinsic valuestems from the way in which GM crops are (legally) perceived as human inventionsrather than living organisms. While living organisms may have natural value and begranted intrinsic or inherent worth on the basis of having their own ends/telos (Taylor1986 ; Sandler 2012 ), human inventions, machines and bio-artefacts may not
(Nicholson 2013 ). Furthermore, if the telos of an organism is seen to be encoded in
its genes as some have suggested (Rolston III 1991 ), then the moral status of a GMO
could also be brought into question (Attﬁeld 2012 ). Indeed the question of the impact
different forms of genetic modiﬁcation have on the telos of a GMO and its potentialplace in an environmental ethic, seem to be areas ripe for further philosophicalexploration, especially since the work on this to date has largely been limited totransgenic animals (Verhoog 1992 ; Thompson 1997 ) or the extreme case of synthetic
biology (Sandler 2012 ; Preston 2008 ).
It has been argued that synthetic biology represents a clear ‘‘line in the sand’’ for
intrinsic value because the loss of a causal connection to historical evolutionary
processes has ontological and moral signiﬁcance (Preston 2008 ). This claim has
been contested by those proposing that even artefactual organisms can have inherentworth and intrinsic value, with the process of their creation having no moralsigniﬁcance (Sandler 2012 ; Baertschi 2012 ). If a line in conservation value is to be
justiﬁed on the basis of the technique used to create an organism, it is crucial toconsider not just the extreme case of synthetic biology but also existing transgeniccrops and the range of new gene editing techniques coming into play. More work is
arguably required to articulate exactly what makes for a morally relevant difference
here and speciﬁcally, how the use of certain techniques (but not others) may createan entity lacking intrinsic and/or conservation value. This argument will need to bedeveloped by those with knowledge of environmental philosophy, molecularbiology, and with plant breeding more broadly.
While the moral status and conservation value of GMOs might be rarely
explicitly discussed and debated within conservation biology, the concept of‘genetic integrity’ and the rights and duties it implies is more common (e.g. see
Rohwer and Marris 2016 ; Timmerman 2016 ; Welchman 2016 ). While the use of a
concept of genetic integrity in environmental ethics typically focuses on wildanimal populations and implications for their conservation, the notion of geneticintegrity is also given signiﬁcant weight within genebanking and the conservation ofcrop varieties. For example, in the available guiding principles and policies tominimize transgene ﬂow into seed collections, speciﬁc emphasis is placed on theimportance of preserving a crop’s genetic ‘identity’, ‘integrity’ and ‘structure’(CIMMYT 2005 ; Mezzalama et al. 2010 ; CGIAR 2005 ). The value given to
maintaining genetic integrity in this setting and how it speciﬁcally relates to the
ethics of GMO creation and conservation (in which genetic integrity is arguablyintentionally violated) are also areas relevant for further investigation. Although the802 F. Wickson
123
signiﬁcance and validity of the concept of genetic integrity for questions concerning
both the intrinsic and conservation value of GMOs seems ripe for further research,any work in this area is bound to hit up against the challenge of drawing clear
boundaries of distinction within the history of crop breeding.
It is Not Clear How or Where to Draw the Boundaries of Distinction
for Crop Conservation Value
A typical approach to conserving wild biodiversity has been to barrier off certain
places as protected areas and to restrict human impact and interaction. When itcomes to agricultural biodiversity, however, this idea makes little sense because
what has value cannot be decided on the basis of a concept of ‘naturalness’ as
something free from human inﬂuence. All agricultural biodiversity has a ﬂuidcharacter and is a direct result of human interaction with the natural world; it is ourcommon co-creation and we value it as such. Since we value agriculturalbiodiversity, which has always clearly been a human-nature co-creation, it cannot bethe fact of human intervention alone that would cause a GMO to lose its intrinsic orconservation value. All current crop plants are the result of human inter-being withnature, with a sliding scale on forms and scope of genomic interaction, and therefore
no clear line can be drawn between a ‘natural’ diversity developed through
traditional breeding and ‘unnatural’ diversity developed through the application ofbiotechnological techniques.
Interestingly, when we look at the Vault, it is not only GM crops that are
excluded. The Crop Trust, which plays a key role in funding the Vault’s operationsand deposits, also explicitly excludes another category of organisms from itssupport. In its ﬁnancial strategy and work plans for funding, The Crop Trust makesit clear that the International Mutant Germplasm Repository is not included in its
work and mission. Indeed it is given as the ‘‘singular exception’’ for collections
under Article 15 of the ITPGRFA whose work is ‘‘not of interest’’ and will not besupported by The Crop Trust (Global Crop Diversity Trust 2014 ). The Crop Trust’s
mission is stated as being ‘‘to ensure conservation and availability of crop diversityfor food security worldwide’’ so why should mutant varieties (varieties arrived atthrough the use of radiation to generate genetic mutations) be explicitly excluded asthe singular exception?
Neither the current nor former managers of the Vault, or the ministry
representative I interviewed, were actually aware of The Crop Trust’s decision to
explicitly exclude materials from the mutant germplasm repository nor did theyhave reasons for why it was so. When asked about the explicit and singularexclusion of the mutant germplasm repository, a representative from The Crop Trustreplied that ‘‘It is not a priority for the Crop Trust at the moment because it seems tobe pretty safe already’’. This position, however, was not echoed by the InternationalAtomic Energy Agency, which manages the mutant repository. Although initiallyunaware of the repository’s exclusion, upon further investigation a representative of
the IAEA suggested that it was perhaps because the implementation of the
repository had been discontinued. This means that rather than being ‘‘pretty safe’’ asthe Crop Trust indicated, it is in fact, no longer receiving any form of support.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 803
123
This raises the question of whether irradiated mutant crop varieties also fall
through the cracks of an otherwise all embracing biodiversity value. Similar toGMOs, it seems mutant varieties are not perceived as having the same kind of
conservation value as the rest of agricultural biodiversity. This is despite mutants,
unlike GMOs, being subject to the same type of intellectual property protection astraditionally bred varieties and the exchange of mutant germplasm being regulatedby the same kind of standard material transfer agreements. Why then should thevalue of irradiated mutants be seen as any different to conventionally bred crops?Here there seems to be an implicit concept of naturalness in play. This is despite thefact that the use of a concept of naturalness for understanding the conservation valueof agricultural crop biodiversity (in which human intervention and interbeing is
always present) has little academic justiﬁcation. Indeed most of the work on
‘naturalness’ within both environmental philosophy (see Noer Lie 2016 ) and
conservation biology, has remained focused on it in speciﬁc contrast to ideas of thewild and the pristine, rather than to directly interrogating it’s use in the clearlysocio-ecological context of agriculture where nature/culture, organism/artifactboundaries have always been porous.
The history of human-nature interbeing and co-creation of agricultural
biodiversity makes it near impossible to border control the value of different
organisms/systems on the basis of a naturalness framed by the classic criterion of
the degree of human interference/interaction. Despite this, an implicit concept ofnaturalness seems to often be performing important ordering work in this ﬁeld.While drawing any clear boundary in the history of crop breeding is difﬁcult, withbiotechnology a clear demarcation was in fact made, enacted and enforced by lawon the basis of technique. This includes laws awarding GM crops property rights inthe form of utility patents as already discussed, but also laws recognizing GMOs asunique kinds of organisms for the purposes of regulation. This legal demarcation of
GMOs as a different kind of entity, granted them a different ontological status and
this has had ﬂow on implications not only in the demand for new border controlpractices (Lezaun 2006 ) but also apparently for their perceived moral status.
One of the most pressing questions within agricultural biotechnology now
though, is the explosion of a new range of techniques and the matter of whether ornot these techniques also generate what is labeled and regulated as a GMO (Caplanet al. 2015 ) (especially if methods for their detection remain lacking and no foreign
DNA is present in the ﬁnal product). The rapid development of genome editing
techniques is giving rise to what has been referred to as the ‘‘CRISPR zoo’’
(Reardon 2016 ), with the promise of a wide array of manipulated organisms coming
into being. Because ‘GMO’ is a category term used to separate on the basis oftechnique (modern biotechnology is as modern biotechnology does), the uptake of arange of new biotechnological techniques raises serious questions about the identity,moral and regulatory status, and conservation value, of all the organisms that will begenerated through them. While it could be said that if organisms resulting fromemerging techniques are deemed to be GMOs for intellectual property purposes,
then they should also be considered GMOs for regulatory purposes, questions of
their moral status and conservation value remain wide open for debate. Theexplosive development of new biotechnological tehniques (re)emphasises the804 F. Wickson
123
importance of questions around the moral and conservation value of GM crops and
really calls for new concepts to help us understand, categorise and consider thecacophony of techno-life forms now on the horizon.
Synbiodiversity and Symbiodiversity
While different deﬁnitions exist (Husby 2007 ), it is common that a GMO is deﬁned
by the use of certain biotechnological techniques. Within international law, theCartagena protocol on biosafety uses the term living modiﬁed organism
4and deﬁnes
it as: any living organism that possesses a novel combination of genetic material
obtained through the use of modern biotechnology; in which modern biotechnology
is deﬁned as the application of:
1. In vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or
2. Fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, that overcome natural physio-
logical reproductive or recombination barriers and that are not techniques usedin traditional breeding and selection;
However, since biotechnological techniques are evolving and emerging all the
time, both our legal deﬁnitions and our popular understandings need to try and keep
pace. For example, while the majority of what we refer to as GM crops today stem
from recombinant DNA transgenesis, the advance of other approaches such ascisgenics (Schouten et al. 2006 ), gene editing (Doudna and Charpentier 2014 ) and
synthetic biology (Khalil and Collins 2010 ) mean that this is likely to change.
Indeed, biotechnology is already a very diverse ﬁeld of practice, utilizing a host ofdifferent molecular tools and methods. As techniques continue to develop anddiversify, we therefore need to ask not only whether and on what grounds the use ofbiotechnology as a whole creates (signiﬁcantly) different types of organisms and
what implications this has for their moral status and conservation value, but also
whether different techniques create different types of organisms and whether alltypes of techno-lifeforms are equal in the eyes of the law, risk assessment, ethicsand public opinion. For this, we arguably require (in scientiﬁc, policy and publicdiscourse), new terms able to hold the full range of bio/technological hybrids thatare emerging without being bound to the preexisting ideas and practices currentlylinked to the term GMO. The debate needs a new category term that captures thediversity of biotechnological organisms being created while at the same time
allowing for and encouraging more nuanced recognition of differences across
techniques.
4The use of the term ‘living modiﬁed organism’ rather than the more common ‘genetically modiﬁed
organism’ in the Cartagena Protocol is a result of a compromise made to deal with restrictions USdelegates had for working with the issue of GMOs. It is also worth noting that work is ongoing within thescope of the protocol to consider the place and impact of new plant breeding techniques and syntheticbiology.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 805
123
If synthetic biology is a term used to refer to the adoption of an engineering
approach to biology and the design and construction of biological parts and systemsfor useful purposes, then perhaps what we are talking about here is a kind of
synthetic biodiversity: s ynbiodiversity . Although it would no doubt beneﬁt from
further debate, synbiodiversity might be deﬁned as biological diversity arising frompurposeful human attempts to engineer organisms to express desirable traits throughdirected manipulations of genetic code. The transgenic GM crops that we arefamiliar with now would then become just one example of this synbiodiversity morebroadly conceived.
However, one problem with both the term synthetic biology and synbiodiversity
is the emphasis placed on the role of the human and the ‘synthetic’, overshadowing
the role of the biological and failing to open for a normative discussion about the
relationship between the two. We may therefore also want to consider a concept ofsymbiodiversity . Symbiodiversity would draw on the concept of symbiosis in which
organisms are engaged in a mutually beneﬁcial relationship. Symbiodiversity wouldthen refer to all the diverse forms of life that are intimately woven together withhuman beings in their emergence and ongoing existence, and for which there is amutually beneﬁcial relationship involved. Symbiodiversity as a term could thenpotentially cover not only certain biotechnological forms of life but also arguably
existing crop plants, including both traditionally bred and irradiated mutants. In
doing so, it would offer a category term in which these different types of cropbiodiversity could be captured and coexist. It would also compel us to consider andevaluate the nature of the relationship at stake, and particularly the extent to which itwas mutually beneﬁcial and supportive of common ﬂourishing. Playing with thesetwo heuristic concepts of synbiodiversity and symbiodiversity would allow us toreimagine certain established boundaries of distinction and open up for newquestions in the space between biotechnology development and biodiversity
conservation.
Since our social, legal and economic systems have already categorized GMOs as
a distinct class of organisms requiring special treatment, reframing GMOs as part ofa broader category of synbiodiversity opens for discussing them directly in relationto various other forms of bio-technological lifeforms emerging through the use ofnew techniques. Collecting them within a broader category of symbiodiversity alsoopens for discussing them directly in relation to traditionally bred crop varieties. Inredrawing the lines of distinction in the discussion, both terms can arguably
encourage us to further explore the question of the moral status and conservation
value of the bio-technological lifeforms we are engaged in co-creating. Since it isclear that we value biodiversity intrinsically and/or instrumentally, as the lifetechnosciences continue to expand, we urgently need enhanced academic, policyand public attention on the question of whether and how we value synbiodiversityand the extent to which it represents a genuine form of mutually beneﬁcialsymbiodiversity.
How we relate to syn- and symbiodiversity is particularly important in this
burgeoning era of the bioeconomy and ecomodernism. Recent movements in (post)
environmental thinking (Nordhaus and Shellenberger 2007 ; Shellenberger and
Nordhaus 2011 ) have come out in strong support of the use of emerging806 F. Wickson
123
technologies, such as GMOs in agricultural production, as important tools to
advance environmental objectives. To date though, they have said very little aboutthe moral status or conservation value of new forms of life created through
biotechnosciences. While the conservation of biodiversity is the closest thing we
have to a universally acknowledged environmental value, what exactly we areseeking to conserve, for what reason, how, and why are all deeply contested issuesin need of further attention. As ever more diverse forms of life are being createdthrough diversifying technological applications, environmental philosophers, legalscholars, political scientists and conservation biologists (as well as governmentalauthorities, international bodies and environmental NGOs) arguably all need tobegin seriously interrogating questions of their moral value and how we intend to
care for them.
From Synbiodiversity Conservation to CareTechnologies (or techno-organisms) that blur the cultural boundaries and categories
we use to understand and orient ourselves in the world have been referred to as‘monsters’ (Smits 2006 ) and Bruno Latour has recently called for us to love our
monsters and care for them as our own children (Latour 2012 ). While love may be a
particularly strong request, we clearly need to take responsibility for our creations
(Attﬁeld 2012 ; Baertschi 2012 ). Caring for synbiodiversity as symbiodiversity will
require us to marry reason with emotion and be particularly attentive torelationships, dependencies, and vulnerabilities, as well as to context, speciﬁcityand story (Preston and Wickson 2016 ). To advance this agenda, this article
effectively serves as a plea for engaging in a deeper interrogation of how weconceptualise and consider the moral status and conservation value of all themutants and monsters we are engaged in producing, as well as how we take
responsibility and care for them as our co-creations in practice.
For the range of new biotechnological techniques now emerging, signiﬁcant
noise is being made in academic and policy discourse about the need for‘‘responsible research and innovation’’ (RRI) (Stilgoe et al. 2013 ; Owen et al. 2012 ).
This is usefully placing attention on responsibility in the processes and purposes ofresearch and innovation, however it has said little to date on how to care for theproducts of innovation as living organisms. The notion of responsibility as care isreceiving some discussion within RRI (Groves 2015 ; Davies and Horst 2015 ) and
indeed, within Science and Technology Studies generally there has also been a call
to direct our attention towards ‘matters of care’ (de la Bellacasa 2011 ) and an
increasing exploration of the potential value and challenges associated withemploying care ethics and politics in technoscience governance (Martin et al. 2015 ;
Viseu 2015 ; Bellacasa 2015 ; Mol et al. 2010 ). However, this recent work has not yet
speciﬁcally focused on biotechnologies and very little attention has been directedtowards the question of how we care for the organisms and ecologies we arecreating and what our moral responsibilities towards them are. It is therefore my
assertion that we need to dedicate further effort to interrogating not only the moral
status and conservation value of our monsters and mutants but also whether and howwe engage in practices of care for them. This represents a research agenda that mustDo We Care About Synbiodiversity? 807
123
be coupled to the current explosive growth of new biotechnological techniques if we
are to have truly responsible research and innovation.
Conclusion
In this article, I began by explaining the operation and management of the SvalbardGlobal Seed Vault and answered the question of whether GM seeds can be foundthere—arguing that although there are good reasons to believe GM crops areexplicitly excluded (on legal and political grounds), unintentional contaminationremains a possibility. Understanding whether GM crops have a place in the SvalbardGlobal Seed Vault inadvertently lead me into questions around the moral status and
conservation value of GMOs, which I have argued require more sustained academic
attention. Suggesting that this issue is becoming increasingly pressing as bio-technological techniques and lifeforms continue to diversify and challenge ourexisting legal and conceptual categorisations, I used the ﬁnal part of the paper topropose the notions of synbiodiversity and symbiodiversity as conceptual heuristicsto help (re)arrange our thinking, debate and further work in this interdisciplinaryswamp. Finally, I conclude that not only is further work needed on the questions ofhow we conceptualise and categorise bio-technological forms of biodiversity, and
how we argue for their moral status and conservation value, but also that exploring
how we care about and for them is also an important new area for research. Since Iam unfortunately unable to follow all the interesting questions and lines ofinvestigation raised during my research here, it is my hope that this paper may atleast serve to stimulate new areas of conversation and debate regarding the interfacebetween biotechnology development and biodiversity conservation, and ultimatelylead to more thoughtful practices of care for all the mutants and monsters we areengaged in co-creating and with whom we now share a future on this earth with.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway (Grant Number
236840). The author would particularly like to thank Profs. Brian Wynne, Christopher Preston, andAssoc. Prof. Svein Anders Noe Lie, as well as the Pluralism, Democracy, and Justice Research Group atUiT the Arctic University of Norway for discussions that helped to develop the work in this article.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the originalauthor(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes weremade.
References
Altieri, M. A., & Merrick, L. C. (1987). In situ conservation of crop genetic resources through
maintenance of traditional farming system. Economic Botany, 41 (1), 86–96.
Anderson, J. (2015). Why are Bill Gates and Monsanto funding a ‘‘Doomsday’’ seed vault? Activist post,
June 23 .808 F. Wickson
123
Attﬁeld, R. (2012). Biocentrism and artiﬁcial life. Environmental Values, 21 (1), 83–94.
Baertschi, B. (2012). The moral status of artiﬁcial life. Environmental Values, 21 (1), 5–18.
Brush, S. B. (Ed.). (2000). Genes in the ﬁeld: on-farm conservation of crop diversity . Boca Raton: Lewis
Publishers.
Caplan, A. L., Parent, B., Shen, M., & Plunkett, C. (2015). No time to waste—the ethical challenges
created by CRISPR. EMBO Reports, 16 , 1421–1426.
CBD. (1992). Convention on biological diversity. https://www.cbd.int .
CGIAR. (2005). Guiding principles for the development of future harvest centres’ policies to address the
possibility of unintentional presence of transgenes in ex situ collections. http://library.cgiar.org/
handle/10947/3881 .
CIMMYT. (2005). Practices and procedures to avoid the unintentional presence of transgenes in maize
germplasm accessions at the Wellhausen-Anderson Plant Genetic Resources Center. http://
cropgenebank.sgrp.cgiar.org/images/ﬁle/management/transgenes/cimmyt_maize.pdf . Accessed 30
July 2015.
Cleveland, D. A., Soleri, D., Aragon Cuevas, F., Crossa, J., & Gepts, P. (2005). Detecting (trans)gene
ﬂow to landraces in centers of crop origin: Lessons from the case of maize in Mexico.Environmental Biosafety Research, 4 , 197–208.
Davies, S. R., & Horst, M. (2015). Crafting the group: Care in research management. Social Studies of
Science, 45 (3), 371–393.
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social
Studies of Science, 41 (1), 85–106.
de la Bellacasa, M. P. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientiﬁc futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science, 45 (5), 691–716.
Doak, D. F., Bakker, V. J., Goldstein, B. E., & Hale, B. (2014). What is the future of conservation?
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 29 (2), 77–81.
Doudna, J. A., & Charpentier, E. (2014). The new frontier of genome engineering with CRISPR-Cas9.
Science, 346 (6213), 1258096.
Engdahl, F. W. (2016). ‘Doomsday Seed Vault’ in the Arctic. Global Research, January 28 .http://www.
globalresearch.ca/doomsday-seed-vault-in-the-arctic-2/23503 .
FAO. (2014). Genbank standards for plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. http://www.fao.org/
3/a-i3704e.pdf . Accessed 23 Mar 2016.
FAO, & CGIAR. (1994). Joint statement of FAO and the CGIAR centers on the agreement placing
CGIAR germplasm collections under the auspices of the FAO. https://library.cgiar.org/handle/
10947/697 . Accessed 23 Mar 2016.
Genetic Resources Policy Committee. (2005). Guiding principles for the development of Future Harvest
Centre’s policies to address the possibility of unintentional presence of transgenes in ex situcollections. https://www.seedquest.com/News/releases/2005/april/11989.htm . Accessed 23 Mar
2016.
Global Crop Diversity Trust. (2014). Fundraising Strategy 2014–2018 . Bonn: Global Crop Biodiversity
Trust.
Groves, C. R. (2015). Logic of choice or logic of care? Uncertainty, technological mediation and
responsible innovation. NanoEthics, 9 (3), 321–333.
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs and women: The reinvention of nature . New York: Routledge.
Hettinger, N. (1995). Patenting life: Biotechnology, intellectual property, and environmental ethics. BC
Environmental Affairs Law Review, 22 , 267–305.
Husby, J. (2007). Deﬁnitions of GMO/LMO and modern biotechnology. In T. Traavik & L. C. Lim
(Eds.), Biosafety ﬁrst . Trondheim: Tapir Academic Publishers.
ITPGRFA. (2006). Standard material transfer agreement. ftp://ftp.fao.org/ag/agp/planttreaty/agreements/
smta/SMTAe.pdf. Accessed 23 Mar 2016. http://www.planttreaty.org/content/what-standard-
material-transfer-agreement-smta .
Khalil, A. S., & Collins, J. J. (2010). Synthetic biology: Applications come of age. Nature Reviews
Genetics, 11 , 367–379.
Kuzma, J., & Kokotovich, A. (2011). Renegotiating GM crop regulation: Targeted gene-modiﬁcation
technology raises new issues for the oversight of genetically modiﬁed crops. EMBO Reports, 12 ,
883–888.
Latour, B. (2012). Love you Monsters: Why we must care for our technologies as we do our children .
Winter: Breakthrough Journal.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 809
123
Lezaun, J. (2006). Creating a new object of government: Making genetically modiﬁed organisms
traceable. Social Studies of Science, 36 (4), 499–531.
Lusser, M., & Davies, H. V. (2013). Comparative regulatory approaches for groups of new plant breeding
techniques. New Biotechnology, 30 (5), 437–446. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2013.02.004 .
Martin, J. -L., Maris, V., & Simerloff, D. S. (2016). The need to respect nature and its limits challenges
society and conservation science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Early edition ,
113(22), 6105–6112.
Martin, A., Myers, N., & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies of
Science, 45 (5), 625–641.
Mezzalama, M., Crouch, J. H., & Ortiz, R. (2010). Monitoring the threat of unintentional transgene ﬂow
into maize gene banks and breeding materials. Plant Biotechnology, 13 (2), 1–6.
Ministry of Health and Care Services. (2001). Forskrift om innesluttet bruk av genmodiﬁserte planter.
https://lovdata.no/dokument/SF/forskrift/2001-12-21-1603 .
Mol, A., Moser, I., & Pols, J. (2010). Care in practice: On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms
(perspectives from empirical science studies) . Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag.
National Academy of Sciences. (2015). Gene drive research in non-human organisms: Recommendations
for Responsible Conduct. https://www8.nationalacademies.org/cp/projectview.aspx?key=49717 .
Accessed 23 Mar 2016.
Nicholson, D. J. (2013). Organisms =Machines. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C:
Studies in History and Philosophty of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 44 (4), 669–678.
Noer Lie, S. A. (2016). Philosophy of nature: rethinking naturalness (Routledge explorations in
environmental studies) . Oxon: Routledge.
Nordhaus, T., & Shellenberger, M. (2007). Break through: From the death of environmentalism to the
politics of possibility . New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Company.
Okusu, H. (2009). Biotechnology research in the CGIAR: An overview. AgBioForum, 12 (1), 70–77.
Owen, R., Macnaghten, P., & Stilgoe, J. (2012). Responsible research and innovation: From science in
society to science for society, with society. Science and Public Policy, 39 (6), 751–760.
Preston, C. J. (2008). Synthetic biology: Drawing a line in Darwin’s sand. Environmental Values, 17 (1),
23–39.
Preston, C. J., & Wickson, F. (2016). Broadening the lens for the governance of emerging technologies:
Care ethics and agricultural biotechnology. Technology in Society, 45 , 48–57.
Qvenild, M. (2008). Svalbard global seed vault: A ‘Noah’s Ark’ for the world’s seeds. Development in
Practice, 18 (1), 110–116.
Reardon, S. (2016). Welcome to the CRISPR zoo. Nature, 531 , 160–163.
Rimmer, M. (2008). Intellectual property and biotechnology: Biological inventions . Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar.
Rohwer, Y., & Marris, E. (2016). Is there a prima facie duty to preserve genetic integrity in conservation
biology. Ethics, Policy and Environment, 18 (3), 233–247.
Rolston, H., III. (1991). Environmental ethics: Values in and duties to the natural world. In F.
H. Bormann & S. R. Kellert (Eds.), Ecology, economics and ethics: The broken circle (pp. 73–96).
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Sandler, R. L. (2012). The value of artefactual organisms. Environmental Values, 21 (1), 43–61.
Schouten, H. J., Krens, F. A., & Jacobsen, E. (2006). Cisgenic plants are similar to traditionally bred
plants. EMBO Reports, 7 , 750–753.
Shellenberger, M., & Nordhaus, T. (Eds.). (2011). Love your monsters: Postenvironmentalism and the
Anthropocene . Oakland: The Breakthrough Institute.
Sifferlin, A. (2015). Syrian seeds ﬁrst to be withdrawn from Arctic ‘Doomsday Vault’. TIME .http://time.
com/4078310/seeds-doomsday-vault/ .
Smits, M. (2006). Taming monsters: The cultural domestication of new technology. Technology in
Society, 28 , 489–504.
Spitsbergen Treaty. (1920). Treaty Concerning the Archipeligo of Spitsbergen. http://www.jus.uio.no/
english/services/library/treaties/01/1-11/svalbard-treaty.xml .
Statsbygg. (2008). Svalbard global seed vault: New Construction. (Vol. Project number 11098). Oslo:
Statsbygg.
Stilgoe, J., Owen, R., & Macnaghten, P. (2013). Developing a framework for responsible innovation.
Research Policy, 42 (9), 1568–1580.
Svalbard Global Seed Vault. (2013). Standard deposit agreement. http://www.nordgen.org/sgsv/scope/
sgsv/ﬁles/SGSV_Deposit_Agreement_until150101.pdf . Accessed 23 Mar 2016.810 F. Wickson
123
Svalbard Global Seed Vault. (2016). Seed Portal. http://www.nordgen.org/sgsv/ . Accessed 22 Mar 2016.
Taylor, P. W. (1986). Respect for nature: A theory of environmental ethics . Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Thompson, P. B. (1997). Food biotechnology in ethical perspective . London: Blackie Academic &
Professional.
Timmerman, C. (2016). Addressing a duty to preserve biodiversity, not genetic integrity. Ethics, Policy
and Environment, 18 (3), 262–264.
Treaty. (2004). International Treaty on plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. http://www.
planttreaty.org/content/texts-treaty-ofﬁcial-versions .
Trust, T. C. (2016). Donors. https://www.croptrust.org/about-crop-trust/donors/ . Accessed March 22nd
2016.
UPOV Convention. (1978). International convention for the protection of new varieties of plants. http://
www.upov.int/upovlex/en/upov_convention.html .
van Dooren, T. (2009). Banking seed: Use and value in the conservation of agricultural diversity. Science
as Culture, 18 (4), 373–395.
Verhoog, H. (1992). The concept of intrinsic value and transgenic animals. Journal of Agricultural and
Environmental Ethics, 5 (2), 147–160.
Viseu, A. (2015). Caring for nanotechnology? Being an integrated social scientist. Social Studies of
Science, 45 (5), 642–664.
Welchman, J. (2016). Attack of the hybrid Swarm? Ethics, Policy and Environment, 18 (3), 252–255.Do We Care About Synbiodiversity? 811
123
