Theme issue articlePolitics and Space
Emplaced care and
atmospheric politics
in unbreathable worlds
Alison Kenner
Center for Science, T echnology, and Society, Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Abstract
This paper contributes to emerging theories of unbreathable space by showing how breathers
with asthma engage environments and atmospheres as the substrate of their everyday lives.
Drawing on in-depth interviews with more than 80 asthma sufferers living in the UnitedStates, I show how nonpharmaceutical care practices are used to breathe in place. First, I
argue that attunement operates as a labor of care that engages with and creates the substrate
of everyday life. Next, I describe a range of emplacement tactics that breathers use to navigateatmospheres and environments that are potentially risky, or that immediately produce asthma
symptoms. Emplaced care involves situating oneself in ways that protect the breathing body
within the sociomaterial spaces of everyday life. Finally, people with asthma are orientated dif-ferently than other breathers who may share the same atmosphere, but are not pathologically
sensitized to it. These narratives of asthma care lend insight into emergent atmospheric politics
by showing how differently attuned breathers care through environments by isolating, distancing,and barricading themselves from the world and others.
Keywords
Asthma, care, sensory politics, emplacement, atmospheres, attunement
*****
Close your eyes. I want you to imagine that you are with a friend, and you are going to a
friend of your friend’s house. You don’t know the once removed friend, but when you arrive
Corresponding author:
Alison Kenner, Center for Science, T echnology, and Society, Drexel University, 3250 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, PA
19104-2816, USA.
Email: ali.kenner@gmail.comEPC: Politics and Space
2021, Vol. 39(6) 1113–1128
!The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/2399654419851347
journals.sagepub.com/home/epc

and come inside from the wooden porch – a sweeping porch that wraps an old Victorian home
that has been broken into a multi-unit living space – everything inside is warm and cozy.
There are maybe a dozen people between the entry way, the living room, the dining room, and
hallway extending back towards the kitchen. There is talking and drinking and eating.
The scene is relaxed, but playful.
You sit down on a couch with your friend, who introduces you to two people. One of
them is quite attractive, and you are very happy you decided to come out with your friend
this evening. A minute or two passes as you listen to your friend and new acquaintances talk
about a band that’s playing later. That’s when it starts. You feel it creep from deep within
your chest, starting from the center and moving out. It’s a heaviness that weighs on your
lungs. You know this feeling all too well.
You look down at the couch, then to the ﬂoor, and onto the coffee table in front of you.
You see nothing. The lighting is dim in the lamp lit room—hair could be missed depending
on the animal—but you don’t need to see it to know it’s there: you can feel it in your lungs.
You open your mouth to take a breath and before the air hits the tip of your tongue you
feel that your throat has narrowed, just slightly, as you try to pull in a breath. It’s not yet
audible enough for the person next to you to hear your wheezing. Your friend is, of course,
oblivious to your situation. They are very preoccupied by what appears to be a mutual
attraction. They are not going to leave the party without a serious intervention, you tell
yourself. You need to ﬁnd a window to buy yourself some time. There is one behind you.You push it open, trying to act nonchalant so as to not attract too much attention. You sit
back down, a bit closer to the window now. Your friend turns and asks you an inaudible
question. You’re distracted, listening to your wheeze and feeling the tightness in your chest,
which is getting progressively worse. You can’t remember the last time an asthma attack hit
you so fast, with this much instant force.
You do not have your rescue inhaler with you. It’s in your bag, at your friend’s apart-
ment, a 10-minute drive from here. You rarely need it these days. Packing it is more habit
than intention. You need it now though. This is not an attack, not a situation, that you can
just breathe through. You’re going to need medication.
You still can’t tell if it’s a cat or a dog that’s triggered the attack. You continue to look
around for signs, as your wheeze becomes audible. You would have seen a dog, unless your
friend’s friend put it outside, but that would be strange in the middle of winter. There aren’t
any overwhelming smells either. No perfumes, or chemicals. It doesn’t smell moldy or dusty.
It must be an animal.
The room is getting crowded as more people show up. It’s becoming quite the party. You
lean into your friend and tell them you need to get out of here. They look at you as if you’re
crazy. “Seriously?” they ask, “We just got here.” You tell them you’re having an asthma
attack and its bad. “Relax. Just give me a half hour.”
You get up and walk towards the door. Five minutes, you tell yourself, looking at your
phone. Five minutes on the porch and if you still can’t breathe, you’re yanking your friend
out of here. That’s when you see it. It hops in short, rhythmic strides, out from the dining
room table coming towards you in the middle of the living room: A large white rabbit.
*****
By the time Greg and his friend left the party, Greg was unsure if he should have his
friend drive him to his inhaler or the hospital. The decision was made to drive to the inhaler
and everything worked out in the end, but it could have been otherwise. Greg had not visited
the emergency department for asthma since childhood, but for many Americans, hospitals
are a mainstay of asthma care. In 2013, for example, more than 1.7 million people used U.S.1114 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
emergency departments to control an asthma attack and nearly 440,000 were hospitalized
because of the disease (Centers for Disease Control, 2015). Children and low-income asthma
sufferers disproportionately use the emergency department to treat attacks, a dynamic that
public health researchers attribute to poor access to preventative care and asthma medica-
tion (Meng et al., 2006), as well as greater exposure to environmental triggers (Brown et al.,
2003; Wright, 2006). Sometimes an attack is misjudged, or the breather does not make it tomedication or the emergency department in enough time. Asthma attacks still kill people at
a rate of more than 3000 Americans a year (Murphy et al., 2017). Oddly, public health
statistics such as these can easily obscure the low-level, mundane experiences of disorderedbreathing that happen each day, normalized to some extent by tacit care practices (Kenner,
2018; Mol, 2008). This is part of what makes asthma so terrifying: symptoms of disordered
breathing that may normally be manageable can quickly escalate into an inabilityto breathe.
As Greg described in the above scene, which was conveyed to me during our interview,
his sense of place shifted to focus on a different set of material details and social conditionsonce he felt that familiar heaviness in his chest; a heaviness that would “progress”—a term
used by a number of those interviewed to describe an unfolding asthma attack—into wheez-
ing. Greg’s embodied sense of disordered breathing became a barometer for sensing andsurveying the house party: peering through a dimly lit room looking for signs of animal
presence; attempting to smell perfumes, mold, and dust in the air; and listening to his own
breath to gauge the severity of his asthma attack. I describe this kind of sensorial survey asasthmatic attunement , a mode of care whereby a person with asthma feels the breathing body
in relation to the conditions of the surrounding environment. (See also Sara Ahmed’s work
onorientation , 2006.)
A number of scholars have written about attunement as a mode of knowing the envi-
ronment through its affects, emphasizing an embodied episteme based in sensation that
makes one aware of being in the world (Ahmann, 2018; Anderson, 2009; Berlant, 2011;Calvillo, 2018; Shapiro, 2015; Sloterdijk, 2009; Stewart, 2011). Asthmatic attunement builds
on this work and describes how such sense stems from past symptom experiences to respond
to the present atmospheres. A key difference is that, where attunement has sometimes beenused to describe an awareness of the qualities of shared atmosphere or collective conditions
(Choy and Zee, 2015; Degen et al., 2017; Shapiro, 2015; Simmons, 2017), many of the
asthmatics I interviewed conveyed a sense of isolation as they attune to the qualities andsurfaces that disorder their breathing. They may be in the company of others, but marked by
their differential response to place (Ahmed, 2006). What does it mean to share atmosphere,
then, if people are differentially affected by it (Choy, 2011)?
When I interviewed Greg, he was 27 years old, a white working class male from
New England who had lived in the region his entire life. He was one of a handful of subjects
who told me they had been born with asthma. Greg has allergic asthma, the most commonvariant of the disease—about 50–60% of asthmatics have allergic asthma. This is also the
asthma phenotype that has been most extensively studied by biomedical researchers
(Wenzel, 2012). People with allergic asthma are triggered by allergens, which the immunesystem identiﬁes as harmful antigens; human and nonhuman molecules intra-acting at a
cellular level. Immunologists tell us that human immune systems respond to allergens by
releasing immunoglobulin E, a powerful inﬂammatory antibody that has, historically, beendescribed as a defender of the body (Cohen, 2009; Haraway, 1999; Martin, 1994). The
inﬂammatory mechanism of Immunoglobulin E is what causes allergic reactions, including
asthma symptoms such as narrowed airways, chest tightness, wheezing, and coughing. Thus,tropes of bodily defense from environmental threats have long been built into medical andKenner 1115
scientiﬁc understanding of this form of disordered breathing, allergic asthma (Rackemann,
1928). These tropes extend to asthma sufferers own narratives of body-environment inter-
actions, which I will describe in detail.
Cats and some dogs trigger Greg’s asthma. And rabbits, apparently—Greg’s list of
asthma triggers was one line longer following the described house party. He’s also triggered
by mold, cold air, viruses, and exercise. Allergens, in other words, are not the only materialsthat trigger Greg’s asthma. Greg is pathologically sensitized to an array of atmospheres and
places. Typically, a person in Greg’s position—someone who suffers from allergies, has a
long list of triggers, and experiences symptoms several times a month, which suggests thedisease is not well managed according to today’s clinical standards (GINA, 2018)—would
use a daily controller medication to prevent symptoms. But Greg did not use medication
regularly. In fact, Greg tried to avoid using medication completely, except if he was in areally bad state—such as during the described house party or if he was getting over the ﬂu.
In lieu of taking a daily controller medication to manage airway inﬂammation, or using a
rescue inhaler to quell symptoms as they emerged, Greg had developed a repertoire of carepractices designed to keep a lid on symptoms across a range of situations. Greg used breath
control techniques, conducted a “breath check” (as he called it) at timed intervals during
attacks, and used avoidance techniques everyday. Sometimes he drank coffee when symp-toms emerged, and if things were really “progressing” as he told me, he would ask around
for an inhaler. Greg had even ended a relationship because of his allergic asthma—his
girlfriend had a cat that he was highly allergic to, and this was a “dealbreaker” for theirrelationship.
This is another important piece of the story: not all people with asthma use medication.
The list of reasons people give for not using drugs to care for asthma is long. In interviews,sometimes the breather conveyed to me that they did not believe daily medication was
necessary. Their symptoms were intermittent or predictable, and could be controlled
using other modes of care. In other cases, however, the breather framed daily medicationuse in economic terms. Asthma drugs, especially daily controller medications, are expensive
(Rosenthal, 2013), an expense that could not always be met at the present time, nor poten-
tially in the future. It was safer, in the minds of some interviewed, to be able to manageasthma without drugs; to not become pharmaceutically dependent. This speaks as much to
the realities of healthcare access and costs as it does attitudes towards pharmaceuticals.
So while Greg’s life would have likely been much simpler and less restricted if he used a dailycontroller medication (as his doctor advised), he told me that he managed his disordered
breathing just ﬁne without a pharmaceutical regimen. He was far from alone in his effort to
develop practices and cultivate space to breathe, in an (increasingly) unbreathable world.
In this paper, I show how some people with asthma rely on emplaced care tactics to stay
in unbreathable worlds with as little distress as possible. Emplaced care both includes and
supplements medication use, and is anchored by asthmatic attunement. Emplaced care is aresponse to the body’s orientation to the world at the moment (Ahmed, 2006)—“I have
enough time to get to my inhaler”; “I can control this attack if I just stay calm”; “I’ll open
the window, or step out onto the porch or leave the party”; “I’ll use my rescue inhaleragain”; “I’ll have my coworker drive me to the hospital.” There is a temporal element to
emplaced care; the breather must sense how much time they have in the immediate situation,
as well as what might be around the corner. Emplacement is a mode of care—a spatiotem-poral negotiations between breath and place—that relies on asthmatic attunement, which
draws on past experiences of disordered breathing in place, ﬂeshy memories that form the
bodily reasoning of care responses (see Latour, 2004 and Shapiro, 2015 on bodily reason-ing). The visceral connection between breath and life is pulled to the forefront of1116 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
consciousness each time air gets suspended, truncated, or narrowed for the breather with
asthma. Asthmatic attunement, then, informs an orientation to the world: emplacement; itanchors world-making practices that protect the breather from harmful environmental
exposures (Chen, 2012).
In this article, I draw on more than 80 interviews with people who live with asthma,
repeating their narratives of attunement and care to highlight a mode of living in unbreath-
able worlds characterized by emplacement , a defense of the breathing body in the face of
death. These interviews were conducted between 2011 and 2016 with subjects aged 18–65.Most were living in the U.S. Northeast, but some further south, in places such as
Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and Washington, DC. The majority of interview subjects
were white, working or middle class, and had been diagnosed with asthma after the U.S.epidemic began in 1985 (Jackson, 2009; Mitman, 2007). Some had mild or intermittentasthma, and did not consider their disease a prominent ﬁgure in their daily lives. Others
had moderate asthma, where symptoms bothered them more at certain times of year or in
speciﬁc circumstances. Still others had severe asthma, which needed to be cared for dailywith several types of medications and behavioral tactics. The theme of defense came up overand over, even with the wide range of asthmatic experiences, the different circumstances
under which the breath was threatened, and the various degrees and types of care.
In the next section, I use two narratives to show how asthmatic attunement works as a
labor of care that some people rely on to navigate through and make their daily lives
breathable. If we understand atmosphere as a substrate for living, caring for breathing
space becomes a necessary labor for asthma sufferers. In the following section, I showhow this labor of care becomes a form of emplacement when the asthma sufferer engages
in tactics to make their atmosphere breathable. The next section explains that, some times,
asthma sufferers ﬁnd themselves trapped in atmospheric-substrates that are unbreathable;
these situated experiences are what make emplaced care tactics necessary. I conclude byasking what we need from theories of “unbreathable spaces” and what kinds of collectivecare might respond to the threat of death in ordinary everyday environments, a threat not
evenly recognized, let alone felt.
Attuning the breathing body
Most people, because from the minute they are born they are able to take a breath, they don’t
think about it. It’s just automatic. I know that since having that ﬁrst attack and knowing that I –and then having that period of a month where I was really struggling, has made me very awareof the smell of the air, where I am, how when I get up in the morning and take a breath, the air
feels heavy. It’s hard to describe except that it’s not this – [takes a deep breath] feeling, like this
feels good. Like days like this that are clear and crisp and nice. I can tell when I get up, when theair is heavy, it affects how I move because I just take it easy. I’m aware, when I get up in themorning, I take the deep breath and I always feel good, I always think, the air smells good or
the air doesn’t smell good today or whatever. And a lot of times I will go over – the ﬁrst thing,
I will go over to the back door and I will look out and this time of year, I will open the back doorand I look – the ﬁrst thing I always do is I look at the sky and the trees, so that I can see howsharp the contrast is, and that will tell me what the air is like. Now, part of that is getting to be
older. You are enjoying the fact that you can still look out and see something, but it also tells me
what the day is going to be like and how much energy I’m going to have and whether I’m goingto actually get down and scrub the baseboards like I want to. Or if I’m going to be able to go outand take that walk. So since I have had that, even though I know I have it under control, I am
aware of what the environment is like. I think it’s affected everything I do.Kenner 1117
Cynthia is a white middle-class woman in her mid-60s. She does not have allergies and did
not grow-up with asthma, which is typically the case for people with asthma, my interview
cohort included. Childhood is when most people are diagnosed with the disease, and usually
alongside allergies. Yet increasingly, people are diagnosed with asthma later in life, without
allergies. This was the case for Cynthia, who had her ﬁrst asthma attack in her early 40s
when she was out walking with her cousin one September afternoon. Her doctor told herthat, given the timing, Cynthia’s ﬁrst asthma attack was likely triggered by an air inversion.
Indeed, over the course of our interview it became clear that Cynthia is mostly triggered by
air quality changes and atmospheric conditions such as temperature, humidity, and pollu-tion. She described the thickness of air, such as on a humid day; the granularity of atmo-
sphere, how it felt on her skin; and the look of air, how it could dull the scenery when she
looked out her window ﬁrst thing in the morning. In the above excerpt, Cynthia conveyswell how asthmatic attunement directs a breather’s engagement with the world from day to
day. Each morning, Cynthia ritualizes asthmatic attunement by starting her day with point-
ed body-environment engagement using her senses. This is more than awareness. AsKathleen Stewart (2011) writes, attunement is a labor that allows a person to dwell in the
world in relation to atmosphere,
The senses sharpen on the surfaces of things taking form. They pick up texture and density as
they move through bodies and spaces, rhythms and tempi, possibilities likely or not. They
establish trajectories that shroud and punctuate the signiﬁcance of sounds, textures, and move-ments ...Every attunement is a tuning up to something, a labor that arrives already weighted
with what it’s living through. The intimacy with a world is every bit about that world’s imper-
ative; its atmospheres are always already abuzz with something pressing ...What affects us–the
sentience of a situation–is also a dwelling, a worlding born from an atmospheric attune-
ment. (448)
Cynthia’s sensorial morning ritual not only gives her a sense of her lungs, and how her body
feels in the day’s air, but this practice is a labor of care that directs her activities. It is, as
Maria Puig de la Bellacasa might put it, “a concrete work of maintenance” that allowsCynthia to live in the world (2017; see also, Tronto, 1993).
Feminist scholars have long described and theorized care work and its labor politics
(Kittay, 1999; Murphy, 2011; Tronto, 1993). Care labor can be emotional, tactile, andbased in knowledge accrued through experiences that get rendered invisible by the informal,
unpaid contexts in which care is performed. In some cases, care labor compensates and
covers for failings and limitations in social, cultural, and political institutions. Some haveargued that care labor should be thought of as a practice (Held, 2006; Isserles, 2010; Sennett,
2008), particularly when it becomes habituated and effective for making daily lives possible.
Joan Tronto (1993) has famously argued that care is a practice “aimed at maintaining,continuing, and repairing the world” (104). Thinking through Joan Tronto’s work, Maria
Puig de la Bellacasa has suggested that care work engages and creates a substrate for “living
to be possible” (2017). The move from informal labor to knowledge-based practice to main-tenance and then substrate is the genealogy that shapes my thinking about how attunement
anchors care in these stories, allowing breathers with asthma to live in the world.
Attunement as a form of care labor extends to breathers’ movement through and between
places as well. Cynthia described to me, for example, how atmospheres on the coast of
Massachusetts, in the Colorado rockies, and the classroom where she taught English to
eighth graders felt different to her, and triggered labored breathing, shortness of breath, anduncontrolled coughing. In each place, the air seemed to affect her airways differently,1118 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
I was told. And in these places, Cynthia relied on her rescue inhaler more since she was
unable to modify her activity level, or protect herself from air pollution.
Travel between places was a theme that came up repeatedly in interviews, an activity that
allowed for embodied comparison of environmental difference. Janet, a 54-year-old white
woman from New England, described how the work she conducted several times a year on
the U.S.–Mexico border helped her attune, as she put it, to the impacts of air quality.
For many years, we worked in a part of the border where the city is Matamoros which is near
the Gulf of Mexico and in Brownsville, which is the Texas town. We always brought – I wouldbeg, borrow and steal the little vials of Albuterol for nebulizers because the health clinic that we
visited had the machines, but they didn’t have access to the medication. And we would just go to
the clinic and then ream after ream of little kids would get nebulized. So that is a really bad area.And often – I mean, always when I traveled there, I brought the Albuterol and I often had to use
it myself. In those areas, I would – before we opened the door of the van, I was pufﬁng. I would
write in my instructions to people before our trip, if you have asthma, bring your stuff and whenwe went to these places, I was always very clear about, if you have any trouble, get back in the
van, it’s air conditioned, doors are closed. And I would feel it instantly in those areas. It was
doing the border work that made me more aware of air quality as a health issue for the peoplewho lived there. I didn’t really become attuned to it until then. Much more of a – wow, I feel
this, I smell this, I am deﬁnitely noticing this. But lucky me, I get to go back to an air condi-
tioned space, back to the Northeast where air quality is better. So I don’t know, but here I amnot so conscious of thinking about air quality.
The contours of Janet’s illness narrative were similar to Cynthia’s: she developed asthma in
her early 40s and did not have allergies. Her asthma, she told me, seemed to be triggered by
air pollution, like Cynthia, but also cigarette smoke. Janet’s original and primary trigger,
however, was the common cold. Viruses did a number on her lungs, causing breathlessnessand coughing that required a rescue inhaler. This was part of the reason Janet failed to sense
the connection between atmosphere and asthma, until she began working in Matamoros.
Asthma might be a disease of disordered breathing, but not all people with asthma experi-ence symptoms under the same environmental conditions. Indeed, for some, it takes a
change of place to see how atmospheres work the breathing body. Kevin, a 39-year-old
white man who grew up with allergic asthma, highlighted how attunement enables under-standing of the relationship between place and illness, “I don’t think we realize how sensitive
we are to that stuff until we remove ourselves from those environments and go back into
them and realize exactly how intense they can be.” Movement between places enables asth-matic attunement.
When describing a sense for atmosphere, and its effects on breathers, one can easily slip
into characterizations that are ﬂeeting, mutable, and hard to pin down, like air itself(Adey, 2015; Irigaray, 1999). Breathing, however, is actually quite consistent and concrete;
a physiologic activity that is (typically) rhythmic and self-regulating. As Cynthia states
above, respiration is largely an automatic procession that runs in the background, silentto everyday awareness. Only upon disruption, a suspension or narrowing, does breathing
become something sensed by the breather (Choy and Zee, 2015). (Unless through pointed
awareness such as meditation or breathing exercises.) I want to argue, then, that atmosphereand breathing are substrates for human beings. Following Choy (2011) and others (Shapiro,
2015; Simmons, 2017; Sloterdijk, 2009; Zee, 2017), I want to emphasize how air becomes
substantiated through breathers; how atmospheric effects and affects accrue in places,bodies, and also care practices. These are anything but ﬂeeting or hard to pin down.Kenner 1119
This is a labor of attunement. Cynthia’s description of her morning practice of attunement
captures well this kind of substantiation, a mode of care that both engages with and createsa substrate for her everyday living. Substrates by their very nature, of course, can be difﬁcult
to sense without some kind of disruption or disorder.
Emplacing asthma care
I’m not going to be around, I know that these cats and these dogs are bad and I’m not going to
put myself in harm’s way, but I’m also gonna not not go to my friend’s house because there is acat there and that might give me an asthma attack. You can go there, but don’t pet the cat.Look and make sure when you are sitting down that there isn’t a bunch of dander and hair on
the couch. If there is, go to the kitchen table, or get something that they can – you can wipe it
off with.
Max was in his early 30s at the time of our interview, an allergic asthma sufferer who had
lived in Upstate New York his entire life. Max was an IT consultant who worked short-term
contracts; he had not had health insurance for several years. He was healthy, he told me, anddidn’t lead a risky life. There was less need for health insurance at this point in time,he reasoned. Max had lived with allergies since elementary school, but did not develop
asthma until his middle school years. In his early 20s, he stopped taking medication for
his allergic asthma after several years of living mostly symptom free, except for the occa-sional attack brought on by unanticipated exposures—smoke at a friend’s house, a reaction
to household cleaning products, and while out on a run at the height of summer when air
quality was pretty poor, he explained. When I asked Max to tell me how he managed hisdisease without drugs, he began by describing environmental control practices, which are amedically recommended pillar of care in asthma management regimens (GINA, 2018).
In the above excerpt, Max narrates avoidance (“not being around”), limiting behaviors
(not petting cats), and cleaning as strategies he uses to keep himself out of harm’s way, i.e.
distanced from triggers he may be exposed to at his friend’s house. Before the development
of quick relief and controller medications, environmental control practices such as avoid-ance and lifestyle changes were staples of asthma management. Even today, although con-
troller medications can reduce inﬂammatory response in allergic asthma patients, avoidance
of triggers is often recommended as well. Interview subjects recalled clinical appointmentswhere they discussed their triggers with a doctor, who then provided suggestions for man-aging exposure—dust covers for beds in the case of dust mite allergies; staying off the grass
and bathing after outdoor play in the case of pollen and grass allergies; avoiding contact
with animals; and keeping pets out of bedrooms in the case of dander triggers. Some tookthese recommendations very seriously—Savannah moved out of a warehouse apartment,which had a lot of mold problems; Devon wore a respirator while mowing the lawn; and
Cynthia kept her windows closed year round. These were not fail-safe practices, however.
Environmental control strategies work well when exposures can be known in advance.
Max could anticipate exposure to cats at his friend’s house, for example. Indeed, exposure to
animals is familiar and ordinary for many people, and allergic asthma sufferers often havestrategies that allow them to navigate spaces inhabited by companion species. Knowing that
animals inhabit a home environment, Max can position himself socially and materially:
He can opt out of the visit, or while in the space he can enact care tactics to reduce contactwith dander, such as wiping off the table or not sitting on a couch, sitting on a wood orplastic chair instead. These are things Max needs to do for himself of course, as he indicates
at the end of the quote—his friend will not wipe off the couch, he needs to do that.1120 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
To care for others, one must understand and have a sense for the needs of others.
That asthma often gets rendered invisible, coupled with the fact that environmental expo-
sures are not evenly felt, it becomes difﬁcult know how to care for someone with asthma
based on atmosphere alone. Without allergies or asthma, many people are unaware of how
conﬁned spaces, common activities, or environmental qualities can impinge on the breathing
body. In Max’s case, the organization and materiality of his friend’s home did not supporthis breath. To visit his friend’s house then, Max engaged in a balancing act based on
strategic analysis of the sociomaterial contours of place. Max was not going to put himself
“in harm’s way” but he wasn’t going to necessarily restrict his life either—he will continuegoing to his friend’s house even though there is harm there. It’s not his space, however, so he
can’t control the animals or their dander. He is left to his defenses—strategic emplacement
and cleaning.
French in its origins, emplacement refers to how a material thing sits or is sited. It’s a
chosen location, a place occupied, to be in place. In geology, the term signals how organic
matter, such as igneous rock, becomes embedded within older rock formations and other-wise layered within rich ecological matter. Emplacement can also refer to an action to set
something up. In military contexts, for example, emplacement describes how weapons are
positioned in landscapes, often as part of a defensive strategy. Anthropologists have usedthe term to describe how communities position themselves or are positioned by military
conﬂict (Lofving, 2009), environmental hazards (Reno, 2011), and global economic relations
(Englund, 2002). Others have shown how, in the context of home care, people living withchronic disease conditions emplace medications and other treatment products in strategic
locations throughout their home (Hodgetts et al., 2010; Langstrup, 2013). Emplaced care, in
this context, reﬂects relationships between illness, identity, sociomaterial living conditions,such as support from family members (or a lack thereof), the details of built environment,
and even temporal patterns (Bell, 2018; Bowlby, 2012; Milligan and Wiles, 2010;
Williams, 2002).
In conversation with literatures that theorize care in illness contexts (Chudakova, 2017;
Guell, 2012; Mol, 2008; Saillant, 2008; Trnka, 2017), emplacement shifts the focus from the
contained self performed in relation to neoliberal dynamics—which might be characterizedas striving for a future life better than the current one, for example – to a more-than-self
performing defensive or protective care in the immediate, sensorial environment. This is
different from landscapes of care or carescapes, which also emphasize the relational aspectsof care, but do not hone in on the defensive, preservation-oriented qualities of care that
breathers with asthma (necessarily) enact. And while some scholars have sought to distin-
guish protection from care (Tronto, 1993), in the case of asthma, protection from harmfulexposures is indeed a central part of care regimens.
Environmental control exempliﬁes emplacement as a mode of care. While at times envi-
ronmental control practices are enacted in response to exposures – such as Greg’s responseto the rabbit at the house party and Janet’s retreat to the van in Matamoros – these practices
may also be routine and habituated. They may be prompted by attunement, such as when
Cynthia begins her day by sensing air quality and then closing windows, or when Max wipesdown surfaces before sitting down at a friend’s house. In both cases, the breather’s attune-
ment conditions and directs care.
While Greg, Janet, and Max’s stories highlight how breathers with asthma move through
spaces they are visiting, often by creating distance between themselves and elements of place,
others described —they fortify their homes against risky air. Cynthia, for example, may
open the doors ﬁrst thing in the morning, as she wakes up to the day, but once the worldbegins moving she needs to emplace herself in her sealed home.Kenner 1121
When we are some place or if it’s a humid day or something like that, you can almost see the air.
And I will say to my husband, we need to close up the house—we open up the doors in themorning and if there is a little bit of fresh air on a warm day we will say, oh, you know—butusually by about 8:30, 8:45 we close the doors. As you can see, most of the time, the curtains stayclosed. I do not open the windows downstairs because we live on this street, and this street andthe Boulevard are very busy streets. We have buses that are up and down. We have trucks,
we have ﬁre trucks, we have everything, delivery, everything on that street. And because this is a
wider street than a lot of the ones coming in on either side of it, people use this street a lot.And it’s not like living in the suburbs. You can smell the air in the city that you can’t when yougo some place else. So I tend to keep the doors and windows closed.
Homes can harbor harm or they can act as a safe haven (Bowlby et al., 1997), and some
scholars have argued that there is room to understand homes as a geopolitical space wherebroader national and cultural power dynamics become embedded in domestic spaces(Brickell, 2012a, 2012b). In this example, Cynthia sealed her home to create a boundarybetween the vehicle emissions from the busy roadway and her domestic breathing space,
similar to the way Janet did in the van she used in Matamoros. A kind of climate control
away from collectively breathed atmospheres. Here, emplacement operates as a form ofboundary work that acknowledges and protects against risk (Reno, 2011). BecauseCynthia was triggered by air quality and pollution, she was particularly attuned to thevolumes of trafﬁc on her street, with the road just twenty feet from her front door. But itwas more than just the trafﬁc; it was also the boulevard in relation to surrounding streets,which made it more likely that cars and trucks and buses used her boulevard. Cynthia alsonoted atmospheric differences between suburbs and the city, where a breather could smellthe air. What gets articulated here is a politics of emplacement that highlights the unequalties between place and pollution. Cynthia connected this to city planning: “It wasn’t alwayslike this,” she told me, noting that she and her husband had lived in the house for more thanthirty-ﬁve years. Over time, the road grew wider, the city bus routes were added, anddevelopment proliferated in the neighborhood. Also over time, Cynthia and her husband
sought to increase the distance, using enclosure, between themselves and the boulevard.
From triggers to doglife
When I asked Janet when she ﬁrst started noticing air quality, she described a context that
was mentioned repeatedly in interviews with asthma sufferers: “The ﬁrst thing I thought ofis how, as a kid especially, I would have arguments with my parents because they wouldsmoke in the car when we were traveling and I couldn’t stand that.” Others describedstruggling to breathe during childhood, stuck in a smoke ﬁlled car, asking parents toopen windows. This memory, of being trapped in a car while adults smoked cigarettes,sticks with many, providing a foundation for their sense of atmosphere and their abilityto move through it, or not. It also shapes responses to these atmospheres in the future.
My dad has smoked my entire life. In the house, in the car, everywhere. And my dad still smokes
and that’s a trigger for me. So when I go home, I am very sensitive to it. My clothes – even this
week, I was doing work on a guy’s house in upstate Pennsylvania and the guy smoked andthe ﬁrst thing I did when I got home was I took all my clothes off and got in the shower.Because I smelled of smoke and it was bothering me. And I was only in this guy’s house for anhour and a half.1122 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
Jake, a 41-year-old white working class man living in rural Pennsylvania, could not help his
exposure to cigarette smoke while working. As soon as he was able, however, he distanced
himself from the atmospheric traces he had picked up on the job: he removed his clothes and
showered. Even though Jake was no longer in the presence of smoke, the smell drove him
crazy, prompting him to distance himself further from the previous atmosphere. Whereas in
some cases emplaced care might mean cleaning surfaces to remove environmental triggers,in this case, it became necessary to clean clothes and hair to remove exposures, a kind of
boundary work that divides body from environment.
Jake’s experience points to the risk of moving through the world with asthma: It is not
always possible to close the windows, leave the party, retreat to an air conditioned van, or
even clean a surface before taking a seat. These actions, described in the previous narratives,
reﬂect a privilege not always held by breathers. This is particularly true for children, who donot have the ability to distance themselves or create the boundaries needed to breathe in
certain situations.
Vinny, a 29-year-old allergic asthma sufferer from Philadelphia, conveyed this dynamic
through a poignant childhood memory.
If there is an actual dog in the room that I’m allergic to and it’s on the couch and stuff, within
20 minutes, I’m whistling. These days, I just leave. But my aunt would always – I have these
horriﬁc memories of going to my aunt’s house for family parties and there are outdoors people
and hunters and their dogs and like, a ﬁnder dog that goes and gets the goose. And they wouldtragically kennel it up when I would come over and not understand that it’s not the animal, it’s
your couch. And then they would sort of go out of their way to do this and accommodate me, so
then I would go there and hide it and try to breathe for a few hours, because it’s so and so’sbirthday party or whatever. Now I can just leave, but I vividly remember having to stay in
rooms for hours on end. It’s not even the dog itself. If it’s on the street, it’s nothing. It’s like,
carpeting. And dog life. I have a friend, he used to live with someone who was a dog lifer. Like,they would have dogs in a kennel that weren’t theirs in their house for long periods of time. She’s
gone, she’s been gone for months, for like, six months, but I can still feel even slightly just
coming into their house. It’s like – it usually comes out like in carpet or if I’m on the couch orinvolved like that.
When I asked Vinny what triggered his asthma, he began talking about his experiences with
dogs. In this relatively quick move, he reframed my reference to the dog-as-trigger to
“doglife,” the living space within which his breathing would become disordered.
While medical professionals and public health experts emphasize that asthmatics should
avoid triggers, which appear as singular objects on the page—dust, pets, chemicals, pollen—
asthma sufferers experience these exposures within a more complex and layered substrate.
Avoidance is rarely simple. In interviews, when I asked subjects what their asthma triggerswere, rather than respond in list format—as I have performed throughout this article, fol-
lowing the fashion of medical associations, public health agencies, and peer-reviewed
articles—subjects would describe in detail the circumstances under which symptoms mayemerge. Over the course of my research, the word trigger began to feel like a too simple
shorthand for much more complicated entanglements, and the emplaced care tactics devel-
oped to create breathable space.
The idea of ‘triggers’ comes from the work of Francis Rackemann, one of the foremost
20th-century doctors specializing in allergy and asthma. In his 1931 book, Clinical Allergy,
Particularly Asthma and Hay Fever , Rackemann described asthmatics as “loaded guns.”
Used to label a wide range of factors and circumstances, “triggers,” had the potential toKenner 1123
“ﬁre the charge” of the immune system in breathers with asthma. The imagery of pulling the
trigger on a loaded gun is a metaphor violent in nature, and one that derives from older
descriptions of asthmatic events as “attacks.” Consider Dr. Henry Hyde Salter’s description
of an attack from his foundational 1868 book, On Asthma —which, in full, describes a
terrifying moment—as well as the overarching life of an asthmatic.
...The sense of impending suffocation, the agonizing struggle for the breath of life are so ter-
rible, that they cannot even be witnessed without sharing in the sufferer’s distress ...And even in
the intervals of health the asthmatic’s sufferings do not cease: he seems well, he goes about like hisfellows and among them, but he knows that he is altogether different from them; he bears about his
disease within him wherever he goes; he knows he is struck ...he is conscious that he is not sound–
he cannot be warranted ; he is not certain of a day’s, perhaps not of an hour’s health; he only
knows that a certain percentage of his future life must be dedicated to suffering; he cannot make
an engagement except with a proviso, and from many of the occupations of life he is cut off; the
recreations, the enjoyments, the indulgences of others are not for him; his usefulness is crippled,his life marred ...(Salter, On Asthma, 1868)
Salter opens his monograph with a description of a full blown asthma attack, the kind that
most people are able to avoid in the 21st century, thanks to medical advancements such as
rescue and controller inhalers. Although Salter insists that such an attack cannot be seen
without sharing the sufferer’s terror, it is unlikely many people witness asthma in this formtoday. This invisibility is compounded by the efforts many asthmatics make to hide symp-
toms, wishing to avoid social stigma or concern, similar to Greg’s response at the house
party. Tactics of de-escalation, which work to halt the progress of an attack, contribute toasthma’s invisibility and normalization. How can the unbreathability of atmosphere be
collectively shared, and understood, with all the cultural, technological, economic, and
institutional forces conspiring to mask our attunement to atmosphere? How can theterror of the everyday asthma attack, which might appear at any moment, be collectively
sensed and felt, giving sway to a collective politics that many scholars hope for? How can
this be felt amid technologies that conspire to make our atmosphere breathable? The every-day violence felt by breathers with asthma is not the atmoterror described by Sloterdijk,
which is a more pointed form of violence (2009; see also Nieuwenhuis, 2016). Here, there is a
slow violence that affects the most vulnerable (Ahmann, 2018; Nixon, 2011), and often inways that are silent, submerged, and removed, undirected but designed nonetheless.
In the second half of the paragraph above, Salter describes the substrate of the 19th-
century asthmatic life—the asthmatic “bears about his disease within him wherever he goes”never knowing when he will be struck with symptoms. This is a kind of suffering in itself
because of the way in which the disease shapes, cuts off even, the breather with asthma from
the social world (Biehl et al., 2007; Charmaz, 1983; Kleinman et al., 1997). Any place may beunbreathable, making it difﬁcult to be certain of health, how the body will respond to its
environment. And this orientation to the world is not a mere remnant of the 19th century,
but a reality for many today. Consider Savannah’s sense of place after losing her homeand job,
I had a six month period where I lost my job. I lost my apartment, it was horrible and all my
stuff was in storage and I had to move and I sent my cat to live with a friend. I needed to live
really cheaply. But the place I stayed at during that period was just like, rotting. It was like, the
windows – the glass would fall out of the windows. It was an old brick factory and they hadresurfaced the brick so that it was like a sponge. So anytime it would rain outside, it would rain1124 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
inside. It was moldy and dusty and – it was bad. I was really having – I was so sensitive to
everything. Then when I left that place, I noticed the difference and then I thought, okay, that is
something I should pay attention to. It’s even more important when moving to a new state and
you get all the different pollens or whatever. Yeah, if you are just every day in a place that hasbad carpeting or – it’s like working in a foundry and being around that every day. It has a huge
effect. So yeah, I think its in all those little things around you.
The little things have a way of accumulating.
Care does not happen in a “separate cozy realm where ‘nice’ relations can thrive”
(Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015: 707); care may mean limiting, negotiating, or ending relation-ships of various kinds, if you can. If not, breathers must negotiate the substrate of everyday
life by using the breath itself, like Greg and Vinny, who found they could use their breath to
stay in place a little longer.
For Stewart and others, what is atmospheric often points to a collective sense of the
world and its contours, and sometimes its effect. Asthmatic attunement, however, is speciﬁc
to and starts with the breather who is marked and differentiated by symptoms, which havebeen triggered by an environment that is shared, but not evenly or collectively embodied.
Indeed one of the most common forms of asthma, atopic or allergic asthma, traces its
etymological origins, back to the Greek atopia : out of place. But what is out of place?
The breather or environmental matter? And when does the displacement begin? If some-
thing is out of place, it must be out of time as well (Massey, 2005). Public health statisticsand environmental justice research show how speciﬁc vulnerabilities to unbreathable spaces
accumulate if you are a woman, black, poor, under the age of eighteen, or are living in
dilapidated housing or a neighborhood with poor air quality—and all the more so if youtake on several of these markers. This is the marked identity that Dr. Salter describes at the
end of this passage: The breather with asthma cannot be warranted, does not know when
they will be struck by atmosphere, and in some cases, cannot escape these conditions, theatmospheric-substrate. Rather than attuning to a collective experience, asthmatic attune-
ment is felt as a vulnerability that sets one apart.
Conclusions
Today, more than 25 million people live with asthma in the United States. A little more than
half of those diagnosed with asthma suffer from allergies, but increasingly asthma is diag-nosed in people who have no allergies, like Cynthia and Janet. While medical and public
health descriptions advise people with asthma to avoid common triggers—including pollen,
mold, smoke, and animal dander, as well as domestic chemicals, industrial andtransportation-related pollution, and atmospheric condition such as rapid change in tem-
perature, humidity, and air pressure—the very concept of triggers seems to obscure the
entangled sociomaterial environments that could be more accurately described as everydaysubstrates. Often conceived of as singular objects that can simply be avoided, the reality is
that asthma triggers are often intricately embedded and involved in places. The trick to
breathing in such spaces is to not get too involved with them, as Vinny put it. Avoidance of
triggers then may necessitate distancing from unbreathable spaces , which is a kind of care
labor that involves negotiating the relationship between atmosphere and body.
As Peter Sloterdijk has noted, we are still very much working on a “theory of unbreath-
able spaces,” even though for more than a hundred years now scientists and medical practi-
tioners have been developing technologies that protect breathers from their surroundingenvironment. Important to this emergent theory of unbreathable space, a theory whichKenner 1125
many are contributing to today (Ahmann, 2018; Calvillo, 2018; Choy and Zee, 2017;
Shapiro, 2015), is an understanding of the defensive style of care that these descriptions
of environmental engagement invoke, a protective care that derives from the terror of not
being able to breathe and by a striving to survive and persevere. Noteable in these examples
is the fact that the threat to survival, to breathing, comes from the substrate of the everyday,
ordinary environments that breathers traverse and become “involved” with. Living in an
increasingly unbreathable world—with dogs and cats, friends and loved ones, in neighbor-
hoods and careers—requires a mode of worlding that is persistently negotiating contact
between body and place. Unless, of course, you have drugs that allow you to breathe
(almost) anywhere. And if you do not, you may ﬁnd yourself in a situation like Greg at
the house party, tumbling down the rabbit hole if you will, desperately sensing the substrate
that takes his breath away.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Vincent Duclos and Alex Nading for providing feedback on an earlier version of
this article, as well as my colleagues in Drexel’s Center for Science, Technology, and Society whoprovided comments on this article during a works-in-progress talk. I would also like to thank thearticle’s reviewers for their recommendations, as well as the editors.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication ofthis article.
References
Adey P (2015) Air’s afﬁnities: Geopolitics, chemical affect and the force of the elemental. Dialogues in
Human Geography 5(1): 54–75.
Ahmann C (2018) “It’s exhausting to create an event out of nothing”: Slow violence and the manip-
ulation of time. Cultural Anthropology 33(1): 142–171.
Ahmed S (2006) Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others . Durham, DC: Duke
University Press.
Anderson B (2009) Affective atmospheres. Emotion, Space and Society 2: 77–81.
Bell SE (2018) Placing care: Embodying architecture in hospital clinics for immigrant and refugee
patients. Sociology of Health & Illness 40(2): 314–326.
Berlant LG (2011) Cruel Optimism . Vol. 226. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Biehl J, Good B and Kleinman A (eds) (2007) Subjectivity: Ethnographic Investigations . Vol. 7.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Bowlby S (2012) Recognising the time–space dimensions of care: Caringscapes and carescapes.
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 44(9): 2101–2118.
Bowlby S, Gregory S and McKie L (1997) “Doing home”: Patriarchy, caring, and space. Women’s
Studies International Forum 20(3): 343–350.
Brickell K (2012a) Geopolitics of home. Geography Compass 6(10): 575–588.
Brickell K (2012b) ‘Mapping’ and ‘doing’ critical geographies of home. Progress in Human Geography
36(2): 225–244.
Brown P, Mayer B, Zavestoski S, et al. (2003) The health politics of asthma: Environmental justice and
collective illness experience in the United States. Social Science & Medicine 57(3): 453–464.1126 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
Calvillo N (2018) Political airs: From monitoring to attuned sensing air pollution. Social Studies of
Science 48(3): 372–388.
Centers for Disease Control (2015) National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2015
Emergency Department Summary Tables . Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control.
Charmaz K (1983) Loss of self: a fundamental form of suffering in the chronically ill. Sociology of
Health & Illness 5(2): 168–195.
Chen MY (2012) Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect . Durham, DC: Duke
University Press.
Choy TK (2011) Ecologies of Comparison: An Ethnography of Endangerment in Hong Kong . Durham,
DC: Duke University Press.
Choy T and Zee J (2015) Condition—Suspension. Cultural Anthropology 30(2): 210–223.
Chudakova T (2017) Caring for Strangers: Aging, Traditional Medicine, and Collective Self-care in
Post-socialist Russia. Medical anthropology quarterly 31(1): 78–96.
Cohen E (2009) A Body Worth Defending: Immunity, Biopolitics, and the Apotheosis of the Modern
Body . Durham, DC: Duke University Press.
Degen M, Melhuish C and Rose G (2017) Producing place atmospheres digitally:
Architecture, digital visualisation practices and the experience economy. Journal of Consumer
Culture 17(1): 3–24.
Englund H (2002) Ethnography after globalism: Migration and emplacement in Malawi. American
Ethnologist 29(2): 261–286.
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA Reports) (2018) Global Strategy for Asthma Management and
Prevention. Available at: http://ginasthma.org
Guell C (2012) Self-care at the margins: meals and meters in migrants’ diabetes tactics. Medical
Anthropology Quarterly 26(4): 518–533.
Haraway D (1999) The biopolitics of postmodern bodies: Determinations of self in immune system
discourse. Feminist Theory and the Body: A Reader 1(1): 203.
Held V (2006) The ethics of care: Personal, political, and global . London: Oxford University Press.
Hodgetts DJ, Stolte O, Chamberlain K, Radley A, Groot S and Nikora LW (2010) The mobile hermit
and the city: Considering links between places, objects, and identities in social psychologicalresearch on homelessness. The British journal of social psychology 49(2).
Irigaray L (1999) The Forgetting of Air in Martin Heidegger. Translated by Mader MB . Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
Isserles RG (2010) Caring for and about the work we do: The dialectics of alienation, emotional labor,
and an ethic of care. In: 28th International Labour Process Conference, 15–17 March 2010,
New Jersey, USA.
Jackson M (2009) Asthma: The Biography . New York: Oxford University Press.
Kenner A (2018) Breathtaking: Asthma Care in a Time of Climate Change . Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Kittay EF (1999) Love’s Labor: Essays on Women, Equality and Dependency . New York: Routledge.
Kleinman A, Das V and Lock MM (eds) (1997) Social Suffering . Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press.
Latour B (2004) How to talk about the body? The normative dimension of science studies. Body &
Society 10(2-3): 205–229.
Langstrup H (2013) Chronic care infrastructures and the home. Sociology of Health & Illness
35(7): 1008–1022.
Lofving S (2009) Liberal emplacement: Violence, home and the transforming space of popular protest
in Central America. Struggles for Home: Violence, Hope and the Movement of People 3: 1149.
Martin E (1994) Flexible Bodies: Tracking Immunity in American Culture from the Days of Polio to the
Age of AIDS . Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Massey D (2005) For Space . London: SAGE.
Meng YY, Babey SH, Brown ER, et al. (2006) Emergency department visits for asthma: The role of
frequent symptoms and delay in care. Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: Ofﬁcial Publication
of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology 96(2): 291–297.Kenner 1127
Milligan C and Wiles JL (2010) Landscapes of Care. Progress in Human Geography 34(1): 736–754.
Mitman G (2007) Breathing Space: How Allergies Shape Our Lives and Landscapes . New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Mol A (2008) The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . London: Routledge.
Murphy M (2015) Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health
practices. Social Studies of Science 45(5): 717–737.
Murphy SL, Xu JQ, Kochanek KD, et al. (2017) Deaths: Final data for 2015. National Vital Statistics
Reports , Vol. 66, No. 6. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Nieuwenhuis M (2016) Breathing materiality: Aerial violence at a time of atmospheric politics. Critical
Studies on Terrorism 9(3): 499–521.
Nixon R (2011) Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientiﬁc futurity and the pace of care.
Social Studies of Science 45(5): 691–716.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2017) Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds .
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Rackemann FM (1928) Studies is asthma: II. An analysis of two hundred and thirteen cases in which the
patients were relieved for more than two years. Archives of Internal Medicine 41(3): 346–369.
Reno J (2011) Beyond risk: Emplacement and the production of environmental evidence. American
Ethnologist 38(3): 516–530.
Rosenthal E (2013) The Soaring Cost of a Simple Breath. New York Times , 13 October.
Salter HH (1868) On Asthma: its Pathology and Treatment . London: Churchill.
Shapiro N (2015) Attuning to the chemosphere: Domestic formaldehyde, bodily reasoning, and the
chemical sublime. Cultural Anthropology 30(3): 368–393.
Simmons K (2017) Settler Atmospherics. Member Voices, Fieldsights, November 20. Available at:
https://culanth.org/ﬁeldsights/settler-atmospherics.
Sloterdijk P (2009) Terror from the Air. Translated by Patton A and Corcoran S . Los Angeles:
Semiotext(e).
Stewart K (2011) Atmospheric attunements. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space
29(3): 445–453.
Trnka S (2017) One Blue Child: Asthma, Responsibility, and the Politics of Global Health . Stanford:
Stanford University Press.
Tronto JC (1993) Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . London:
Psychology Press.
Wenzel SE (2012) Asthma phenotypes: The evolution from clinical to molecular approaches.
Nature Medicine 18(5): 716.
Williams A (2002) Changing geographies of care: Employing the concept of therapeutic landscapes as
a framework in examining home space. Social Science & Medicine 55(1): 141–154.
Wright RJ (2006) Health effects of socially toxic neighborhoods: The violence and urban asthma
paradigm. Clinics in Chest Medicine 27(3): 413–421.
Zee JC (2017) Holding patterns: Sand and political time at China’s desert shores.
Cultural Anthropology 32(2): 215–241.
Alison Kenner is an assistant professor of Politics and a faculty member in the Center for
Science, Technology, and Society at Drexel University. Her research focuses on breathabil-
ity, climate epistemologies, and the politics of urban development. Kenner also runs the
Philadelphia Health and Environment Ethnography Lab, which facilitates collaborative
projects between Drexel students, governmental and nongovernmental partners, and com-
munity organizations.1128 EPC: Politics and Space 39(6)
