Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  1  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 https://doi.org/10.7577/formakademisk. 4180  
 
Riikka  Latva -Somppi   
 Doctoral student, Master of Arts    
                                               Aalto University  
                       School of Arts, Design and Architecture , Department of Design  
riikka.latva -somppi @aalto .fi  
 
Maarit  Mäkelä   
 Associate Professor, Doctor of Arts  
Aalto University  
                                                                                          School of Arts Design and Architecture , Department of Design  
maarit.makela @aalto.fi   
 
Kristina Linds tröm  
Senior lecturer, PhD   
Malmö University  
    Faculty of Cultur e and Society , School of Arts and Communication  
kristina.lindstrom @mau.se  
 
Åsa Ståhl  
Senior lecturer, PhD 
Linnaeus University  
         Faculty of Arts and Humanities , Department of Design  
asa.stahl @lnu.se 
 
Entangled Materialities   
Caring for  soil communities at glass industry  sites  
ABSTRACT   
This paper discusses craft and design practices through their impact on the environment. We consider 
how to act concerning the consequences of the craft and design industry . Also, we reflect on the agency 
of our field of practice in changing how we perceive the environment. We present three case studies of 
the European glass industry sites in Sweden, Italy and Finland, where we study contamination of the soil 
with participato ry, speculative and craft methods. Through these cases, we reflect on our role in soil 
communities and ask how we may act in them with responsibility, hope and care. We conclude by 
proposing to act locally, to share our practices and make them visible , expanding our situated, personal 
skills and knowledge towards the political . 
 
Keywords :  
Soil, Craft  and Design , Aftermath , Glass industry , Care .  

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  2  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 INTRODUCTION  
Design  is traditionally regarded as the practice of making (new things ). A designerly impetus is to solve 
how things ought to be (Simon, 1969).  In craft, a specific  area of design, making extends to areas of 
conservation and restoration.  Design researcher Ramia Mazé ( 2013 ) explains that design involves 
synthesizing knowledge from across sciences to solve complex technical and social problems. The field 
of design has previously mainly been target ed at creating desires for new consumer products , thus 
consuming natural resource s such as energy, water and earth metals. Mazé argues that d esign is now 
also tak ing a central role in the sustainable development discourse by engaging critically and politically 
in the issues of resource consumption. In search of "how things ought to be" , the very idea of design is 
rethought and reformulated to include design practices similar to art, pedagog y or activism. In doing so, 
she continues, design extends to , for example , feminist and environmental theories which are explicitly 
grounded in exploring how things could be otherwise  (Mazé, 2013, pp. 83 -110).  
Design processes and systems make ideas, objects and spaces become real and thus have a 
great capacity to affect how we live in the world (Fletcher et al. , 2019, p. 9). Design researcher Louise 
St. Pierre (2019 ) understands design as a systematic activity that shapes the world through arte facts, 
interactions and communication materials  (p. 92) . She states  that the design field, including the area of 
craft, therefore  has a tremendous impact on nature and how nature is perceived.   
In the storyline of what is now being termed the Anthropocene, humanity has now entered in 
its third phase (Steffen et al., 2007, pp. 618 -619), characteri sed by a growing awareness o f the 
consequences that humans have had on the geological environment. It has become evident that non -
human forces react to the impact of humans and guide the ways in which we live and practi se. We do 
not argue for or against (see Malm & Hornborg, 2014; Har away, 2016) the concept of the Anthropocene, 
but instead acknowledge what design researchers such as Akama et al. (2020) have proposed that more 
critical, more inclusive — and including also more -than -human entities — craft and design practices are 
needed in the concurrent planetary situation: Being aware of how worlds and futures are formed in co -
existence with multiple others, human and non -human, requires rethinking with ethical, political and 
onto -epistemological interrogations. A rchitect and researcher  Lydia Kallipoliti (2018) invites designers 
to rethink the idea of ecology — living organisms and their interrelations in their biotic and abiotic 
habitat — as a recirculatory understanding of the world. She suggests making room for design practices 
that d ecentrali se humans and see the world of ideas, information and matter as flow s rather than an 
accumulation of objects (pp. 42 -43).  
In this study , we use our situated knowledge (Haraway, 1991; Akama et al. , 2020, p. 9), to 
examine how we can use our skill as design and craft practitioners in a response -able (Haraway, 2016) 
way to act in the aftermath of the production of design objects. We will disc uss three cases which are 
all place -based and context -dependent (St. Pierre 2019, pp. 104 -105) as they are situate d in specific 
sites of ecological disruption, that is in places where the glass industry has contaminated soil  in Sweden, 
Italy and Finland . We do not propose practical or technical resolutions to the environmental problems, 
but examine , as explained by Akama et al. (2018) how we may participate in the change -making instead 
through  intervention and openness (p. 3). We do so by looking back into history to trace how our 
professional field has participated in changing the materiality of the environment. We also dwell in the 
troubling present (Haraway , 2016) and reconsider how we use our practice with  humility to understand 
ecological relationality in the geological environments in question. By bringing these situated cases 
together, we also hope to articulate partial connections that link these sites (Strathern, 2004).   
We conclude, based on the three case studies, by proposing three ways of acting to shift craft 
and design's agency towards the ecological: First, going to the sites in question and exploring them 
attentively, including the personal and subjective experiences; second, inviting others to share with us 
the immersive practices and the narratives around soil; third, making the abovementioned acts visible, 
thus taking a step towards the political.  
We, the authors of this article, are craft and design practitioners who also situat e our practices 
in the field of research. Riikka Latva -Somppi has achieved her skills in the craft and design field by 
working in the area of glass art, and Maarit Mäkelä has gained her experience as a practicing  ceramic 
artist. Kristina Lindström and Åsa S tåhl, on the other hand, work at the intersection of  participatory and 
Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  3  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 speculative design .1 We four are also the same persons who have planned, conducted and carried out 
the three case studies.  
THE AFTERMATH OF THE GLASS INDUSTRY: THREE CASES  
Glassmaking is a traditional craft, requiring a specific skill often obtained only through years of 
experience. The glass making skill has been passed down in factories from masters to skilled manual 
workers lower in the hierarchy of production and from th em to apprentices. In particular,  the 
glassblowing craft has often been kept in families (Metsänkylä & Suutari, 1992, p. 9). As with many 
industries, entire villages and glass communities were formed around glass factories. Thus, the sites of 
glass production often have long histories , allowing a slow accumulation of heavy metals in the 
environment. As such, the soil at these sites  can be regarded as a geological archive (Denizen, 2013, p. 
42) of the glass industry  (Figure 1).  
 
 
FIGURE 1 . Soil in the Kingdom of Crystal, Sweden. Photo: Louize Mazet . 
Feminist science and technology studies scholar Maria Puig de la Bellacasa (2015) points out that what 
we think soil is affects the way we care for it (p. 2). Deviating from the idea of soil onl y as a commodity 
for making design objects, we regard, through the cases presented in this paper, soils as living 
environments of soil communities (Lindström & Ståhl, 2019,  Puig de la Bellacasa , 2015 ). Importantly, as 
Puig de la Bellacasa acknowledges, soil communities do not only include micro -organisms, plants and 
worms, but also humans  – with obligations as well as vulnerabilities. This concept can be trace d to 
philosopher and conservationist Aldo Leopold’s (1949 /2020 ) famous "land ethic " in understanding that 
the role of humans is not that of a conqueror or exploiter, but that we are citizens of land communities, 
able to care for and respect our fellow -members of the community as well as the community itself  (p. 
192) . Puig de la Bellacas a (2015) states that soil care and soil ontologies are entangled: Changing how 
we care for soil also challenges the way we think of it (p. 2). Caring from the perspective of maintenance 
or caring with a progressivist and productionist ethos create differen t relationalities  (p. 8) .  

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  4  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 We will discuss three case studies  that draw on and are in dialogue with  feminist technoscience 
and environmental sciences. Two main design practices are used: on the one hand, speculative and 
participatory approaches and, on the other hand, craft practice.    
In the first case , participants were invited to eng age with the speculative method of asking 
plants for help to clean polluted soil in the Kingdom of Crystal, southern Sweden. This was a way of 
thinking and acting together with the residents in an area where the glass industry has contributed jobs, 
iconic design  and a bustling community  – but also a poisonous legacy  (Lindström & Ståhl, 2019; 2020). 
The focus was on gaining more awareness on how to act concerning the consequences  of the design 
industry and how more -than -humans participate in unmaking damage that humans cannot repair alone 
(Akama et al., 2020, p. 2).  
In the second case, craft practitioners studied the local environment of the Venice Lagoon area. 
They used soil cont amination research methods , such as gathering and analy sing soil and sediment 
samples in tandem with ceramic art practice (Latva -Somppi & Mäkelä, 2020; Latva -Somppi et al., 2020). 
The soil was analy sed for heavy metals and processed into ceramic material.  The project aimed to reflect 
on how humans become with their environment and how the materiality of soil changes through human 
actions.   
The two abovementioned practices — speculative and participatory design practice and craft 
practice — merge in the third case, which is presented as an ongoing project located in the Glass Village 
of Nuutajärvi in Finland. There, an invitation based on experiences and insights gained from the first 
case study w as passed on to the craft practitioners  of the second case to engage with local sites of the 
glass industry in their own country, Finland. In response to the invitation, the soil and its contaminants 
are studied with speculative design methods , such as rethinking the concept of mining metals with the 
help of plant s aiming to revisit aiming to revisit  the old craft knowledge of using plant ash to replace 
minerals and metals in ceramic glazing . The public can follow the practical research taking place in an 
exhibition space surrounded by a display which also includes iconic glass design objects made in the 
former Nuutajärvi glass factory. In the following, we will discuss the three cases in more detail .  
The case of Kingdom of Crystal: Un/making soil commu nities  
The first case, Un/making Soil Communities , asks how we should  engage with  the consequences  of 
design and whom to include and how (Lindström & Ståhl, 2020). The project took place in Småland in 
Southern Sweden in an area which is called the Kingdom of Crystal for its extensive glass production , 
dating back to  1742. Especially in the 20th century , Swedish glass designers and artists working for 
factories in this area boosted the reputation of Sweden's desired avant -garde glassware ; however, t he 
success of the industry has left its mark in the soil. High amounts of metals such as arsenic, cadmium, 
lead and zin c have been detected in the open glass dumps where factory wastes have been deposited 
(Mutafela et al., 2019). Significant concentrations of these harmful metals have been found even in the 
soil of public and resident ial gardens in the area (He lmfrid, 2014). Elevated levels of carcinogenic arsenic 
in garden vegetables grown in the area indicate its presence in the local soil food  webs (Uddh -Söderberg 
et al., 2015).    
The polluted soil in the Kingdom of Crystal is a well -known fact, but ideas on  how to care for it 
vary (Lindström & Ståhl 2020, p. 16). The main idea of soil remediation has been to remove the polluted 
layers and replace them with clean soil (J. Reinikainen, personal communication, August 20, 2019). In 
some cases, this may create mo re harm for the environment as removing and placing the contaminated 
soil does not solve the problem, only changes its location. Also, experimental c oncepts such as  glass 
mining and phytoremediation, the ability of specific plants to remediate soil, have been discussed as 
one solution to the local problem (Hogland et al., 2019).  
Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  5  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 To further speculate on the un/making of the polluted soil with plants, the designers invited the 
residents of the area to think together on how they could care for the environment (Lindström & Ståhl, 
2020, p. 16)  (Figure 2) . They crafted  invitations for the residents asking to think of soil in a specific place  
that they thought needed care . The participatory workshops were made in new iterations along the 
way. First , designers and residents visited the sites picked by the residents . Such sites were  locations 
marked on official maps indicating areas of  polluted soil, as well as resident gardens and a rail track area 
turned into a recreational  zone . During these walks , the thoughts shared were not primarily speculations 
on the future, but rather reflecting on the past practices and living in the area. Th e proposal to care for 
these places with plants sparked curiosity and interest , but also worry. For example, the white lupin was 
recogni sed as an invasive species, and since all of the suggested plants were edible there were worries 
about what would happen  if they  were eaten by mistake.  Images, field notes and soil samples were 
shown as a work -in-progress in the exhibition Multispecies Storytelling  at Växjö Art Gallery at the 
beginning of 2019  to make visible the need for care and to invite engagement rather than simply exhibit 
a solution  (Figure 3) .   
 
FIGURE  2 AND  3. The residents getting to know plants that accumulate metals  (Figure 2). Photo: Louize Mazet . The soil and 
seeds were placed in glass spheres that were hand -blown in a contemporary  local glassworks  (Figure 3) . Photo:  Kristina 
Lindström .  
To respond to the uncertainties that emerged during the site visits and the desire to know more about 
the soil, the designers set up two soil scanning workshops in collaboration with two doctoral students 
of environmental science. One of the workshops was set in the exhibition space. The other took place 
on location during a cleaning day that was organised by a local community. During b oth workshops, 
residents were invited to collect and bring soil samples ( Figure 4) from various sites of interest. The 
environmental scientists then scanned the soil samples, using X -ray fluorescence to detect metals in the 
soil. Then, seeds of plants  whic h would potentially phytoremediate the polluted soil were distributed 
(Figure 5).  
 
 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  6  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 FIGURE  4 AND  5. Taking soil samples with a core sampler  (Figure 4). Photo: Åsa Ståhl . Seeds with the capacity to accumulate 
heavy metals in the soil  were selected  (Figure 5) . Photo: Louize Mazet . 
The project  brought together design  researchers, environmental scientists and people from the 
community. Together , they discussed the past and present of the environment polluted by the glass 
industry. In addition , thoughts on a speculative future where plants could remediate the soil were 
exchanged. There is no easy fix for issues of soil contamination. Instead, the soil scanning workshops 
and invitation to plant seeds opened up different ways of sensitizing ourselves to soil communities in 
the area. They provided the conditions for sharing and articulating situated responses on how to go on 
living with it.  
 
The case of Murano: From waste to landscape  
The location of the second case also included a central area of glass production. Traces from the 
Anthropocene: Working with Soil  was an artistic research project in the area of craft which took place in 
Venice,  Italy , in the context of the Research Pavilion  in 2019 (Elo  et al. , 2020). The objective of the study 
was to discuss the entwining of human and soil ontologies. In the project, craft practitioners used 
methods of soil contamination research  together with their skill and knowledge in the area of ceramic 
art to investigate anthropogenic contamination in the Venice Lagoon area.     
The craft practitioners familiari sed themselves with the environmental research of the Venetian 
Lagoon. They procee ded by taking soil and sediment samples with the support of soil contamination 
specialists from the Finnish Environment Institute SYKE. After the samples were analy sed for their heavy 
metals, the soils were regarded as materials for artistic production: th e contaminated soil samples were 
processed into a fine slip and used as ceramic paints on large  vessel  forms built from clay from the local 
fields of Veneto. Through the research, the craft practitioners reflected on how matter changes into 
material (Adamson, 2018, pp. 151 -156; Ingold, 2012 , pp. 17 -31), and what implications this process has 
on the environment . 
One of the sites where the craft practitioners took soil samples was Murano , where glass making 
has been practi sed for nearly 700 yea rs. The Muranese wasteland island of Sacca San Mattia offered a 
disturbing place to reflect on soil relations ( see also Latva -Somppi & Mäkelä, 2020, p p. 38-40). In places, 
there were blankets of glass shards partly covered by soil and grass. The broken pieces represented the 
production of skillfully made artefacts, but also the possible presence of , for example , copper, cobalt, 
cadmium, selenium and chromium in soil  (Figure 6) . The island was inha bited by rabbits and seagulls 
guarding their nests. When the craft practitioners returned once again later in the summer the same 
year, swarms of cicadas had emerged from underground and tall Aaron's Rods (Verbascum thapsus) 
rose persistently everywhere from the bare, glass -covered soil.  
The heavy -metal analysis revealed an uncontestable connection to the metals used in the glass 
industry ( see also  Latva -Somppi et al., 2020, pp. 11 -14). In several places, arsenic, silver and lead were 
detected.  According to the senior research scientist of soil contamination Jussi Reinikainen (personal 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  7  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 communication April 15, 2019) f rom the Finnish Environment Institute SYKE, the levels were not 
extremely alarming for humans, yet even at lower levels accumulatio n of certain metals present 
consequences to other living organisms. Heightened levels of these metals have been detected in clams 
and mussels in the waters near Murano (Giusti & Zhang, 2002). Later , the craft practitioners learned 
that the island had been artificially built from glass waste, domestic waste and construction rubble and 
then completed with dredged sediments from the waterways and canals in the lagoon. This followed a 
long tradition of island -making in the Lagoon area (personal communication, a nonymous local glass 
professional ,2 February 11, 2019). It exemplified the amount of waste the glass industry produces, albeit 
in combination with solid waste from households and construction.  
The ongoing research was exhibited in the Research Pavilion  with an array of soil samples, maps 
and related research diaries. The display formed a material narrative , enabling an exchange of stories 
and thoughts around the contamination of the local environment to be shared with the audiences  
(Figure 7). The vessel forms were made using the ancient method of coiling and cited the forms of 
historic pottery , hence attaching the practice closely to the history of crafting objects (Latva -Somppi et 
al., 2020, p p. 7, 14-15) (Figure 8) . 
The public was invited to work with local brick clay alongside the craft practitioners , allowing a 
contemplative space to engage physically with clay in the given context (Figure 9) . When working, the 
audience often shared their personal stories related to soil. In this way, the Research Pavilion  acted as 
a platform for the vivid discussion around manifold meanings related to soil that was shared with craft 
practitioners and visitors – many of them being local residents of the Veneto area. In addition, the 
pavilion also hosted a public discussion with a soil contamination specialist.    
FIGURE 6 AND 7 . The ground of Sacca San Mattia was partly covered with waste glass.  Photo: Riikka Latva -Somppi (Figure 6).  
Engaging the audience in discussion . Photo: Maarit Mäkelä  (Figure 7).  
 
 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  8  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 FIGURE 8 AND 9 . The vessels were painted with contaminated soil. Photo: Riikka Latva -Somppi (Figure 8).  Visitors worked with 
local brick clay. Photo: Tzuyu Chen  (figure 9).  
Using the geological research methods took the craft practitioners to the sites where they gathered the 
materials for their practice. The chosen method s also brought them to share the ir research ideas, 
enquiries and practices with various professionals of other fields. For example, soil contamination 
specialists shared their knowledge in several  meetings and phone calls. They directed the craft 
practitioners to contact local environment officials. While only one of these contacts led to a meeting 
(see also  Latva -Somppi & Mäkelä, 2020, p. 37 -38; Latva -Somppi et al., 2020, pp. 9 -10), the researcher s 
then used their own networks to proceed with the project. This unplanned trajectory led to encounters 
where the concern and need to care for soil was shared with local designers, glass and ceramic 
specialists  and artist -activists . As the researchers were also educators, they returned to the sites in 
question with university students  (Figure 10).  
FIGURE 10. Getting to know the Muranese island together with students . Photo: Maarit Mäkelä . 
The case of Nuutajärvi: Ongoing speculations  
The third case  is locate d in the Glass Village of Nuutajärvi in Urjala, Finland. In early 2020 , the curators 
of the Soil Matter s exhibition  (www.designmuseum.fi/en/soil -matters) , who are also the first and 
second authors of this paper, invited the Un/Making Studio to participate in the exhibition , which would 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  9  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 gather together multiple soil -related design projects at the Design Museum in Helsinki. As all travel was 
restricted because of the pandemic COVID -19, the Finnish craft practitioners  were invited, in a relay -
manner, to implement the Un/Making Soil Communities  project in the local glass scene in Finland. Soil 
Laborato ry (www.soil -laboratory.aalto.fi) , which was organi sed as a living laboratory and studio space 
at the exhibition, was used for analy sing the soil and carrying the phytoremediation experiments. 
Participatory design, which previously  took place in the form of workshops with  the residents in the 
Kingdom of Crystal, was now reconstructed. Instead  of that , a collaboration between a team of design -
researchers from different backgrounds was shared with  the public through the exhibition.    
The Finnish research team consisted of a local glass professional with twenty years of 
professional and educational experience in glass blowing ; the first author of this paper , Riikka Latva -
Somppi , who has similarly worked as an artist and educator in the glass field for three decades ; and a 
recently graduated designer, who had also participated in the case of Murano  as a research assistant. 
Thus, the research team had a solid understanding of glass as a working medium. Th is knowledge 
included glass chemistry as well as the history of glass design and production in Finland.  
Nuutajärvi Glass Village is the oldest sit e of the glass industry in Finland where glass making still  
continues . The factory  there function ed from 1793 to 2014  in three different locations , and now 
Nuutajärvi is a village of glass artisans (Salo , 2015, p. 11 -12). Unlike the cases of the Kingdom of  Crystal 
and Murano, environmental research on the area concerning pollution from the glass industry was not 
publicly available. The samples were taken  from  sites that were found relying on old maps, stories told 
by the villagers and retired glassblowers , as well as  observations of possible dumpsites  (Figure 11). 
FIGURE 11 . One of the sites where glass waste was known to be found was the riverbank . Photo: Tzuyu Chen .  
Following the pr ocess  of Un/Making Soil Communities  in the Kingdom of Crystal, the metal content of 
the soil samples was analysed . The soil scanning events took place in the exhibition space, and the public 
was invited to follow the event  (Figure 12) . Three samples which showed a varying presenc e of heavy 
metals were selected  for the phytoremediation experiment.  For example, a sample taken from by the 
most recent glass factory had 5.3 times the higher guideline value  set for assessing ecological and health 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  10  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 risks (Ministry of the Environment, Finland, 2007) of chromium in soil and twice the higher guideline 
value of antimony. Respectively, the sam ple taken from a riverbank was high in zinc, chromium, arsenic 
and lead. The third sample, taken from a roadside where the glass industry's waste formed the 
foundation for the road, also revealed arsenic and lead levels that exceeded the higher guideline v alues 
set in the Finnish legislation for soil contamination.   
Currently, when writing this paper, the seeds sent by our Swedish colleagues are sprouting from 
the soil in the exhibition space  (Figure 13) . We plan to care  for them for two months before harvesting. 
The plants will then be dried and analy sed to reveal whether they have drawn heavy metals from  the 
soil. We then plan to use our ceramic knowledge to develop them into ceramic ash glazes relying on 
traditional gla zing recipes. The process is open to the public in the exhibition space in the form of a 
research display, including the phytoremediation experiment, talks and other events such as soil 
scanning. The audiences can also follow the daily car e of the plants.  This mode  of making the caring for 
soil visible can be regarded  as a way of making it political (Mazé, 2013, p. 89).  
FIGURE  12 AND 1 3. Nuutajärvi soils were scanned for their heavy metals in the exhibition space . Photo: Minni Soverila / Design 
Museum Helsinki  (Figure 12).  Sunflowers and soybeans sprouting from the roadside soil of Nuutajärvi . Photo: Tzuyu Chen  
(Figure 13). 
UNDERSTANDING OUR ROLES AS CITIZENS OF SOIL COMMUNITIES     
Reflecting on the different sites of glass production, we have understood that the soil contamination 
that follows is very similar regardless of the local, possibly varying, practices and environmental 
legislation. The materials and processes used in the glass industry follow the historical narrative of 
innovations an d regulations — and aesthetic preferences. Our analyses were in line with the 
environmental research of the areas: the most prominent metals found around glass industries are lead, 
arsenic, and zinc, but sometimes even cadmium exceeds the guideline values.  It has been shown, for 
example, that a low pH -level considerably increases the risk of hazardous concentrations of harmful 
metals, such as lead and arsenic, escaping into the environment (Mutafela et al., 2019). In many places, 
the soil is not only pollut ed by toxic metals, or littered by glass trash, but also the landscape itself may 
be an artificial construct. Waste glass has transformed large areas of land, creating landfills as in the 
Kingdom of Crystal, foundations for roads as in Nuutajärvi and even islands, as in Murano.  
During the projects, we also learned that plants may have capacities to act on their own in 
phytoremediation. One of the soil samples from Nuutajärvi was taken by the Prykäri building, where 
exceptionally high willowherbs (Chamaeneri on angustifolium) grew (Figure 14). Prykäri used to be a 
storage house for potash, a potassium -rich ingredient in glass, which was formerly made by extraction 
from wood and plant ashes. The sample from the topsoil revealed a high level of cadmium. We 
hypot hesised that this might have resulted from willowherb's capacity to accumulate cadmium (Trubina 
& Vorobeichik, 2013) from the soil that has been enriched with cadmium from the wood ash (Ministry 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  11  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 of Agriculture and Forestry, 2001). However, we were not able  to prove this with the explorative 
scanning of the plant fibres. Also, Aaron's rods, which had taken over the Muranese island, are known 
to accumulate heavy metals, especially lead ( Čudić & Stojiljkovi ć, 2016) (Figure 15). Nevertheless, we 
regard this – the appearance of specific plants in certain polluted areas – as an interesting finding that 
should gain more attention in our future studies.  
Being a part of a specific community does not automatically create a need to care for it. Work ing 
in the context of the polluted soil in the three different locations of the former glass industry has allowed 
us the space and time to reflect on our roles in the soil community. Our roles are those of citizens of the 
community but also members who are  consumers and designers and makers. Although we do not live 
in the areas of our case studies, we share a feeling of belonging to these sites, partly through our 
responsibility as design -researchers and professionals of the craft and design field . A sense of belonging 
cultivates the need to care . We are also aware of our accountability as educators of future generations 
of designers and craft persons, and feel the need to pass on a solid understanding of their share in 
world -making (see Saito, 2017 , p. 141; also in Latva -Somppi et al. 2020).  
FIGURE 1 4 AND 1 5. Willowherb growing by the Prykäri -building . Photo: Sara Hulkkonen (Figure 14).  Aaron 's rods pushing from 
the ground in Sacca San Mattia, Murano . Photo: Riikka Latva -Somppi  (Figure 1 5). 
CONCLUSION  
Through this paper, we have considered, (1) how does craft and design practice, both the history and 
the present, affect the soil at sites of glass production ? and (2) how may we as design and craft 
practitioners act with responsibility and care for them ? Building on the fundamental ideas of craft and 
design , we have discussed three ways with  which to engage in the time -requiring, slow, messy and 
sometimes polit ical tasks of care (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015, pp. 15-17) concerning the consequences  
of the craft and design industry. These three ways are: First, going to the sites in question and exploring 
them through the skills and knowledge acquired through our pr actice; second, inviting others , such as 
locals, authorities, scientists, colleagues, students and exhibition visitors to engage in dialogue; third, 
making the processes, reflections and outcomes visible in the forms of exhibitions, events, discussions  
and lectures.  
In questioning how our practices, presented in this paper, are situated in the craft and design 
field, we rely on the designerly knowledge of processes and materials. As craft and design practitioners 
and also as makers , our practice is deeply r ooted in the materiality of soil. We are thus entangled in the 
consequences of the making of our field of practice. More so, we are engaged in the present. Through 
these cases, we have explored ways of acting, with hope, in the intersection of the natural and artificial 

Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  12  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 world.  We have not only focused on the known troubles of polluted soil as a consequence  of design, but 
we have also opened up trouble in a place where it was  not previously on the public agenda by literally 
digging up soil, revealing its con taminants and bringing it into an exhibition setting. By bringing these 
cases together in this paper and through relaying invitations across sites and different design practices, 
we not only show how issues of soil matter across location s, but also that they make connections across 
craft and design practices.  
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   
Kristina Lindström and Åsa Ståhl thank Louize Mazet, Alicia Smedberg, 
Laura Ferrans and Sina Shahabi Ghahfarokhi, Ragnhild Lekberg, Ida 
Bencke  and Växjö Art Gallery , and finally the Swedish Research Council 
grant 2017 -02198  for funding of the Un/making Soil Communities in 
the Kingdom of Crystal.  
Riikka Latva -Somppi and Maarit Mäkelä thank Tzuyu Chen , Sara 
Hulkkonen  and Hannu Revitzer , Maarit  Saresma from the Geological 
Survey of Finland, the Finnish Environment Institute SYKE  and Design  
Museu m Helsinki , and finally the Jenny and  Antti Wihuri Foundation for 
funding Riikka Latva -Somppi’s doctoral research .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  13  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 REFER ENCES  
Adamson, G . (2018 ). Fewer, Better Things: The Hidden Wisdom of Objects .  Bloomsbury.  
Akama, Y., Light, A.  & Kamihira, T. (2020). Expanding Participation to Design with More -Than -Human Concerns. 
Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference , Manizales,  Colombia,  16(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3385010.3 385016  
Akama, Y., Pink, S.  & Sumartojo, S. (2018) . Uncertainty and Possibility. New Approaches to Future Making in 
Design Anthropology . Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.  
Čudić, V. & Stojiljkovi ć, D. (2016). Phytoremediation potential of wild plants growing on soil contaminated with 
heavy metals. Archives of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology  67(3), 229 -239. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/aiht -2016 -67-2829  
Denizen, S. (2013). Three Holes: In the Geological Present. In E. Turpin (Ed.). Architecture in the Anthropocene: 
Encounters Among Design, Deep Ti me, Science and Philosophy . Open Humanities Press. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.3998/ohp.12527215.0001.001  
Elo, M., Heikkinen, T., & Slager, H. (2020). Ecologies of Practice. RUUKKU - Studies in Artistic Research  14. 
http://ruukku -journal.fi/fi/issues/14/editorial  
Fletcher, K., St. Pierre, L.  & Tham, M. (2019). Introduction. In K. Fletcher, L. St. Pierre, M. Tham (Eds.), Design and 
Nature: A Partnership (pp. 92 -108). Routledge.  https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351111515 -14 
Giusti, L.  & Zhang, H. (2002). Heavy metals and arsenic in sediments, mussels and marine water from Murano 
(Venice, Italy). Environmental Geochemistry and Health 24 (1), 47 -65. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013945117549  
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, Cyborgs an d Women. The Reinvention of Nature. Routledge.  
Haraway, D. (2016). Staying with the Trouble. Making Kin in the Chthulucene.  Duke University Press.  
Helmfrid, A. (2014). Konceptuell modell över spridningsv ägar f ör glasbruksf öroreningar i Rejmyre samh älle 
(Publication n:o 384) [Bachelor thesis, University of Lund]. https://lup.lub.lu.se/stu dent -
papers/search/publication/4460023  
Hogland, W., Burlakovs, J., Mutafela, R.  & Jani, Y. (2019). From glass dump to phytoremediation park. IOP 
Conference Series Earth and Environmental Science  390:012007. https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1755 -
1315/390/1/012007   
Ingold, T. (2012). Toward an Ecology of Materials.  Annual Review of Anthropology , 41, 427 -442. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/23270720  
Kallipoliti, L. (2018). History of Ecological Design .  Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science . 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.144  
Latva -Somppi, R.  & Mäkelä, M. (2020) Exploring Ecological and Material Sensitivity through Craft Practice in the 
Context of the Ve nice Lagoon. Aisthesis 13 (1), 31-46. https://doi.org/10.13128/Aisthesis -10916  
Latva -Somppi, R., M äkelä, M. & Gündeşlioğlu, Ö. (2020). Traces from the Anthropocene: Working with Soil. 
RUUKKU - Studies in Artistic Research, 14 .  https://doi.org/10.22501/ruu.697190  
Leopold, A.  (with Kingsolver, B.).  (2020 ). A Sand County Almanac and Sketches Here and There . Oxford University 
Press.  (Original work published 1949)  
Lindström , K. & Ståhl,  Å. (2020) . Un/Making in the Aftermath of Design .  Proceedings of the Participatory Design 
Conference , Manizales, Colombia, 16 (1) https://doi.org/10.1145/3385010.3385012  
Lindstr öm, K.  & Ståhl, Å. (2019). Caring design experiments in the aftermath. Proceedings of the Nordic Design 
Research Society Conference, Espoo, Finland.   8. 1-9. 
https://archive.nordes.org/ index.php/n13/article/view/495/465  
Malm, A.  & Hornborg, A. (2014). The geology of mankind? A critique of the Anthropocene narrative . The 
Anthropocene Review, 1 (1), 62 –69. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/2053019613516291  
Riikka  LATVA -SOMPPI, Maarit MÄKELÄ, Kristina LINDSTRÖM & Åsa STÅHL  – Entangled Materialities   
www.FormAkademisk.org  14  Vol.1 4 Nr.2, 2021, 1-14 Mazé, R. (2013). Who is sustainable? Querying the politics of sustainable design practices. In R. Maz é, L. 
Olausson, M. Pl öjel, J. Redstr öm & C. Zetterlund (Eds.),  Critical perspectives and dialogues about design 
and sustainability  (pp. 83 -121). Axl Books.  
Metsänkylä, A.  & Suutari, P. (1992). Työryhmä: Verstaikko. Raportti lasinpuhalluksesta Nuutajärvellä . National 
Board of Antiquities.  
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (2001). Cadmium in Wood Ash Used as Fertilizer in Forestry: Risks to the 
Environment and Human Health . 
https://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/80715/2001_5%20Cadmium%20in% 20Woo
d%20Ash%20Used%20as%20Fertilizer%20in%20Forestry.pdf  
Ministry of the Environment, Finland (2007). Government Decree on the Assessment of Soil Contamination and 
Remediation Needs  214/2007, March 1 . www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kaannokset/2007/en20070214.pdf  
Mutafela , R., Marques, M., Jani, Y., Kriipsalu, M.  & Hogland, W. (2019). Physico -chemical characteristics of fine 
fraction materials from an old crystal glass dumpsite in Sweden. Chemistry and Ecology. 35 (9), 877 -890, 
https://doi.org/ 10.1080/02757540.2019.1648442  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making Time  for Soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social 
Studies of Science, 45 (5), 691 -716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851  
Saito, Y . (2017). Aesthetics of the Familiar: Everyday Life and World -Making . Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199672103.001.0001  
Salo, M -L. (2015) . Into ja polte. Nuutajärven lasikylän tarinoita . Muotohuone Oy.  
Simon, H.A. (1969). The sciences of the artificial . MIT Press.  
St. Pierre, L. (2019). Design and Nature: A History. In K. Fletcher, L. St. Pierre,  & M. Tham (Eds.), Design and 
Nature: A Partnership (pp. 92 -108). Routledge.  
Steffen, W., Crutzen, P.J.  & McNeill, J.R. (2007). The Anthropocene: Are Humans Now Overwhelming the Great 
Forces of Nature, AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment, 36 (8), 614 -621, 
https://doi.org/10.1579/0044 -7447(2007)36[614:TAAHNO]2.0.CO;2  
Strathern, M. (2004). Partial Connections . Rowman and Littlefield. (Original work published 1991)  
Trubina, M.R.  & Vorobeichik, E.L. (2013). Content of heavy metals in medicinal plants in the area under 
aerotechnogeneous impact of the Middle Urals copper smelter. Rasitel’nye Resursy  49(2), 203 -222.  
https://www.cabdirect.org/globalhealth/abstract/20133318877  
Uddh -Söderberg, T.E., Gunnarsson, S.J., Hogmalm, K.J., Boel, M.I., Lindegård  & G., Augustsson, A.L.M. (2015) . An 
assessment of health risks associated with arsenic exposure via consumption of hom egrown vegetables 
near contaminated glassworks sites. Sci Total Environ, 536 , 189 –197. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.07.01 8 
 
1 Participatory design and speculative design both aim to engage and involve various stakeholders in issues related to design. They do , 
however , differ in their approaches. While participatory design aims to involve those who are affected by a new design in the design p rocess, 
speculative desig n often exhibit s evocative design objects with the aim of sparking debate and imagination.  
 
2 During our fieldwork, we interviewed two experienced glass professionals from Murano about the contamination in the lagoon ar ea. They 
wished to remain anonymous a s they felt that  the topic was delicate.  
 
