Minerva (2025) 63:93–113
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-024-09538-y
Abstract
Marine scientists have reported drastic environmental changes in marine and polar 
regions as a result of climate change. The changes range from species compositions 
in coastal regions and the deep-sea floor, the degradation of water and ice quality 
to the ever-growing plastic pollution affecting marine habitats. Marine scientists 
study these changes in their fieldwork, and communicate their findings in scientific 
publications. Some also rally in protests for the necessity of political programs to 
tackle changes. Based on ethnographic visits and interviews with marine scientists, 
this study examines how marine scientists experience and act on environmental 
changes as individuals and as collectives. In order to analyze their experiences 
and actions, I use the notion of care and portray care in different times and spaces, 
from work to protest. I demonstrate how care needs to be situated in different 
times and spaces, how care is embedded in a complex relationship of institutional 
requirements and structural demands that researchers experience, but also how care 
receives institutionalization and has an impact on research interests and agendas. In 
doing so, I show the social and epistemic consequences of care, opening up a view 
of individual and collective care in the marine sciences.
Keywords Care · Environmental care · Activism · Marine science
Introduction
In 2022, I participated online in the UN Ocean Conference which took place in 
Lisbon. At this event, early career representative of the European Marine Board, 
Rebecca Zitoun, mentioned that the relationship between scientists and politics is of Accepted: 13 June 2024 / Published online: 16 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to 
Environmental Changes
Sarah Maria Schönbauer1
 Dr. Sarah Maria Schönbauer
sarah.schoenbauer@tum.de
1 Department of Science and Technology Studies, Technical University of Munich, Munich, 
Germany
1 3
S. M. Schönbauerhigh importance in the field of marine science. In fact, she argued that research insti -
tutes should already engage with political dimensions of research and development 
at the level of education. She suggests that policy training should become part of uni -
versity curricula and that these changes need to be implemented in a timely manner. 
Rebecca stated, “we want to see change happen much faster.” Another conference 
participant, director of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, Margaret Leinen, nar -
rated her experience of an attendant who stood up during dinner and said “we need 
to stop the science and start to act.” Leinen recalled how they received a round of 
applause and agreed with the statement by arguing for a better connection of research 
and action. These observations at the 2022 UN Ocean Conference are exemplary 
of broader trends in the marine science community, in which scientists are not only 
presenting research results but also calling for political change and action. Although 
other scientific fields likewise observe and research environmental changes, marine 
scientists are already socialized into a community concerned with environmental 
changes (see, for example, Oreskes 1996 ). The ocean and areas adjunct to it –– for 
example, the polar regions –– have been studied for decades to document long- and 
short-term changes. Lately, man-made environmental concerns, such as effects of 
climate change, biodiversity loss, or environmental pollution, have reached a new 
dimension based on the expected irreversibility, urgency and rapidity of changes. 
This also feeds into calls for urgent action as exemplified by observations at the UN 
Ocean Conference.
In this study, I focus on scientists who work at a renowned German marine science 
research institute and are concerned with changes measured and depicted through 
different disciplines, such as ecology, microbiology, and biogeoscience. The scien -
tists of the institute research a range of topics that focus on anthropogenic effects 
on the environment. For example, they study changes in species compositions in 
coastal regions and the deep-sea floor, the degradation of water and ice quality, or 
the ever-growing plastic pollution affecting marine habitats. They not only study and 
write scientific publications about environmental changes; some also participate in 
or even organize protest activities. Furthermore, many scientists that I interviewed 
experience what Albrecht and colleagues ( 2007 ) call “Solastalgia”: emotional dis -
tress caused by environmental changes. The scientists often speak of deep sadness 
when they talk about their research and their motivations for protest. For example, 
a marine ecologist told me about colleagues who research the Great Barrier Reef 
in Australia and how they are deeply touched after every dive, seeing the ruins of 
the coral reef. She starts sobbing when she talks about her colleagues and says that 
she too is overwhelmed when she sees how the environments she researches change 
so drastically. Yet what does the feeling of sadness or even desperation stand for? 
According to emotion theorists, emotions often indicate the initiation into care prac -
tices (see Pulcini 2017 ). Thus, I take the scientists’ emotional distress as an initiat -
ing moment for their environmental care. To understand the environmental care of 
marine scientists, I ask: How do scientists care for environmental changes? What are 
the social and epistemic impacts of their care? The notion of care allows me to focus 
on an “affective state, a material vital doing, and an ethico-political obligation” (Puig 
de la Bellacasa 2010 : 90). It also allows me to analyze different times and spaces in 
which they care, at work and beyond.
1 394
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…Based on interview material and field notes from my observation at the institute, I 
show that for these marine research scientists, environmental care is part of different 
practices. To do so, I conceptually lean on care and care-related debates in Science 
and Technology Studies (STS). According to Murphy ( 2015 : 721), care carries four 
different meanings (if not more): “first, it refers to the state of being emotionally 
attached to or fond of something; second, it means to provide for, look after, protect, 
sustain, and be responsible for something; third, it indicates attention and concern, to 
be careful, watchful, meticulous, and cautious; while its fourth meaning (…) is to be 
troubled, worried, sorrowed, uneasy, and unsettled.” These four different meanings 
are opened up in various care-related debates in STS. Scholars in STS have concep -
tually focussed on care as a sensitivity to unfold what otherwise stays at the margin 
(see e.g. Puig de la Bellacasa 2011 ). They have asked what is cared for, how care is 
put into practice, by whom, and why. Connected to these questions, a focus on care 
allows me to analyze different times and spaces that are being cared for in affective 
relationships which sometimes do and sometimes do not translate into consequential 
action (Schrader 2015 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). It is important to note that caring 
also has a “dark side” (Martin et al. 2015 ), for example, when caring has a selective 
attention to something and disregards other concerns.
Care-debates in STS are central for my analysis of marine scientists’ environmen -
tal care. They allow me to show when the scientists care, what their care consists 
of, and what it results in. STS based care-debates also allow me to illustrate envi -
ronmental care in its complexity, namely by showing that environmental care needs 
to be situated in today’s research realities, which configures care not as naïve but as 
embedded in research structures and institutional processes. For example, I demon -
strate how the marine scientists’ environmental care relates to research programs 
and competitive parameters, and also how it leads to potential coping possibilities or 
receives institutionalization. In so doing, I focus on the social and epistemic conse -
quences of individual and collective caring.
In the following sections, I first attend to relevant characteristics of environmental 
sciences with a focus on marine science through a literature review that contextual -
izes my study in the historical foundations of marine science. Subsequently, I will 
elaborate on relevant care debates and how these provide a basis for my understand -
ing of environmental care of marine scientists.
Marine Science: Between Continuity and Change
In the context of this paper, I am interested in how marine scientists’ environmental 
care impacts research and knowledge production as well as lives of marine scientists. 
Knowledge about environmental changes is never neutral, and is embedded in the 
beliefs and values of knowledge cultures, meaning that different “knowledges lead 
to different actions” as “how one acts is already bound up with how one knows” 
(Mahony and Hulme 2018 : 411). Hence, I first situate the marine scientists in the 
historical development of a research culture with its own beliefs and values.
Environmental sciences have recently gained widespread attention from schol -
ars, as they inhabit a prominent role for demarcating today’s relationship between 
1 395
S. M. Schönbauerscience and society and executing responsible research in practice (e.g. Dickel et 
al. 2020 ; Kaldewey 2018 ; Weingart 2002 ). One field which offers insights into the 
changing relationship of science and society is that of marine sciences. Marine sci -
ence is specifically interesting as a field characterized by continuity and change in its 
field-specificities (Lehman 2018 ; Vermeulen 2013 ). This interplay of continuity and 
change is a reason to think of it as a form of new natural history (Vermeulen 2013 ) or 
as a representative field which deals with questions critical to the planet and thereby 
offers a reflexive account of today’s research practices. For example, ocean science 
–– an even larger umbrella term that captures the many sub-disciplines studying the 
ocean –– is considered a central community to understand how evaluation practices 
change and impact knowledge practices1. In line with this, I argue that marine sci -
ence represents an ideal field for a reflection on how scientists care for environmental 
changes.
Marine scientists have a long history of intimate engagements with the ocean and 
marine life. This history has had an impact on how and where marine scientists work 
and what their studies focus on. In the late 19th century, marine science underwent a 
transition regarding the place of knowledge production. Marine institutes were often 
transferred closer to the shoreline and away from larger university buildings, which 
brought scientists closer to their objects of study (Kohler 2002 ). De Bont ( 2009 ) has 
argued that such a move led to specific ecologies of the respective marine stations, 
which had social and physical effects on epistemic work and eventually resulted in 
scientists becoming involved with local communities, such as through collaborations 
with fishermen. At the same time as place played an important role for the develop -
ment of the field, the research practices of marine science changed from mainly ship-
based to based on remotely-operated sensing instruments and machines (Helmreich 
2009 ; Lehman 2018 ). This shift did not substitute for ship-based research but rather 
marked a development in the physical sector of marine science, a development which 
is claimed to make the ocean more abstract and less situated (McCormack 2012 ). 
This methodological shift also allowed the inclusion of a broader range of scientists, 
as it made the ocean more accessible and changed the relationship with and reliance 
on non-human technologies in the field (Lehman 2018 ).
In addition to these broader developments in marine science, field-specific narra -
tives help construct scientific ideals that mirror the environmental care of scientists in 
this research field. For example, for a long time, marine scientists have been consid -
ered deeply passionate about their work, leaving family behind to go to sea (Oreskes 
1996 ). This historical narrative is informed by an emotional relationship with the sea. 
It also coexists easily with other ideals that foregrounded the scientist as an individ -
ual trailblazer and creative inventor (e.g. Daston 2003 ; Shapin 2008 ). The interpreta -
tion of marine scientists and their scientific ideals continued further in the mid-20th 
century, developing into an imagination of “science pursued by barefoot youths in 
ragged shorts and greasy shirts on the wave-swept decks of sailing ships” (Sullivan 
1961 : 246). Both field-specific ideals similarly configure a scientist deeply passionate 
about the sea. This inclination to research the environment is in line with the develop -
1  See, for example, the ERC-funded project “Fluid Knowledge” (PI: Sarah de Rijcke): www.fluid-knowl -
edge.com
1 396
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…ment of marine science alongside predominant problems in the 20th century, such as 
marine pollution and overfishing (Vanderpool 1983 ). As a result, research in marine 
science has recently changed and is now largely about “human encounter with the 
sea” (Helmreich 2009 : 133).
The human encounter with the sea has transformed prominently in the last 
decades, for example, due to increased levels of pollution and the effects of anthro -
pogenic climate change. Marine scientists not only articulate scientific responses to 
environmental changes but also relate to environmental problems in their fieldwork, 
in dissemination activities, in policy counseling or in protests. Protecting the ocean 
and studying environmental changes are connected to a shift in viewing the ocean as 
a space of abundance and infinite recovery to understanding it as a space in need of 
protection connected to the vast changes it has undergone in the last century (Roz -
wadowski 2018 ). Marine science institutes that study the ocean and organizations 
intending to raise awareness for ocean protection formed in the last century and since 
then have been an important signifier of environmental care in the marine sector. 
This care continues until today. Working with environmental changes leaves scien -
tists “deeply engaged with harmful matter on a daily basis,” a situation which also 
allows for radical responses and “radical scientists” (Liboiron 2016 : 92). The term 
“radical scientists” refers to research that scientists in the marine area accomplish and 
also to political involvements that result from it. The concern for the environment 
that accompanies prominent environmental changes is also evident in the story that 
this article starts with, or in a plethora of institute homepages that declare potential 
threats to the well-being of the ocean, or in funding schemes and political campaigns. 
The UN Decade for Ocean Science campaign, a framework of the United Nations, 
is an example for the latter. It is promoted as a campaign that aims to bring together 
stakeholders and projects to create “the science we need for the ocean we want”2.
While the marine scientists’ environmental care has historical roots, it is also very 
much a care in the present. Environmental care is tangible as a research concern 
that is oriented towards environmental changes; as funding programs and the cre -
ation of research areas; or as political involvement. But although there are traces of 
environmental care in the history and development of marine science, they have not 
necessarily been deciphered as such. In the following, I discuss STS-based conceptu -
alizations of care that are important for my analyses.
Analytical Framework: Environmental Care
As the historical development of the field of marine science shows, care is central in 
a field researching and at times even acting upon potentially dramatic environmental 
changes. I use care as a way to stay attentive to the relationships between scientists 
and environmental changes. This attentiveness urges me to capture how the scientists 
care, in what times and places they care, and what their care entails. Inspired by 
Murphy’s ( 2015 ) proposed four meanings of care, I attend to the marine scientists’ 
care as emotional attachment that researchers have with their place of research and 
2 https://oceandecade.org
1 397
S. M. Schönbauertheir research objects; their perceived responsibility and efforts to protect environ -
ments and species; the attention and concern for environmental changes they enact 
in research and protest; and their experiences of being troubled and worried about 
environmental changes.
In the two main empirical parts, I attend to four aspects of care that are particularly 
important for this paper.
First, I introduce the marine scientists’ care with a focus on what would otherwise 
stay implicit: emotional attachments, as well as the socio-political orderings that the 
scientists create when they care. Studies of care emphasize revealing what might be 
lost otherwise, what transgresses social orders in a way that it might be missed or 
unseen. Care has been described as practice and as “persistent tinkering” (Mol et al. 
2010 : 14). Mol and colleagues ( 2010 : 7) argue that care practices have to be “care -
fully attended to” in order not to disappear or stay at the margins. They further claim 
that we have to be specific about care in order to maintain its “effectiveness, its tenac -
ity and its strength.” Along these lines and building on Latour’s ( 2004 ) ‘matters of 
concern,’ Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2011 : 96) developed the well-known term ‘matters of 
care,’ an idea that foregrounds care as a critical device to ask questions such as: who 
cares, what for and how to care. She thereby draws on a “speculative commitment to 
neglected things” (2011: 85). Staying attentive to what might otherwise be unseen is 
a core concern in my work on marine science, such as when paying attention to care 
as situated in today’s competitive research realities or to care in relation to emotions.
Second, another conceptualization that has become part of care-related debates and 
is relevant for environmental care is the classification of care into caring for  and car-
ing about  someone (Schrader 2015 ). Caring for , a goal-oriented form, for example, 
present in the health care sector (Mol 2008 ), means to work towards improvement of 
a specific situation. Caring about  evokes an affective relationship, but it also means 
one that does “not have to issue from a specific ‘need’, nor must it translate into a 
specific action” (Schrader 2015 : 668). This specification is relevant for the different 
times and spaces this study considers. While some instances point towards the aim 
to create action, others do not, such as protest organization or fieldwork observation, 
respectively. Yet while caring for  is set to create a hands-on modus, caring about  can 
at the same time “[nurture] caring ideas, intentions or feelings” (Blazek et al. 2015 ). 
It is thus important for me to stay attentive not necessarily to potentialities of action 
but rather to the effects of care and the relationships that are formed.
Third, I analyze different times and places of environmental care. Care studies 
often focus on local contexts, such as when analyzing care in the health sector, which 
is unavoidably anchored locally (see e.g. Moser 2011 ; Swallow and Hillman 2019 ; 
Jerak-Zuiderent 2015 ; Coopmans and McNamara 2020 ). At the same time, care has 
also been related to the distant other, for example, in the case of global transforma -
tions. Pulcini ( 2017 ) discusses care as a form of attending to the unknown other, an 
“other” as variable as marginalized people living in suburbs or catastrophic environ -
mental events (e.g. earthquakes, tsunamis). She discusses the probability of com -
passion and emotional involvement for far-away events and suggests that while the 
emotional involvement might take place even for geographically-distant events, the 
commitment might remain vague. Activating a critical commitment in a “global and 
interdependent world” (2017: 70) and turning it into practice creates a challenge when 
1 398
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…caring for distant others. This complexity is tangible in the marine scientists’ relation -
ship with environmental changes, for example, when fieldwork is accomplished in 
far away places. Care has also been researched along different timescales. Puig de la 
Bellacasa ( 2015 : 692), for example, considers “care time” as the possibility to reflect 
on and rethink experiences with potentially threatening futures. She argues that “care 
time” appears “dense, thickened with a multiplicity of entangled and involved time -
lines, rather than compressed and subordinated to the linear achievement of future 
output” ( 2015 : 709). The marine scientists’ care likewise involves narratives of the 
past and present while remaining relevant when imagining (potential) futures.
Finally, similar to the scholarly characterization of emotions as not naïve and 
embedded in power structures (e.g. Hochschild 2003 ; Ahmed 2010 ; Illouz 2007 ), 
care too has a “dark side” (Martin et al. 2015 : 627). Martin and colleagues sug -
gest thinking of care as “critical care” ( 2015 ), a reflexive moment in which we as 
researchers question how we engage with our research in our studies and what we 
encourage with our engagement and questions. Critical care would, accordingly, 
allow to frame our own care as a “selective mode of attention” (Martin et al. 2015 : 
635) in which some debates are cared for while others stay at the margins (see also 
Lindén and Lydahl 2021  for another summary of care as an analytic). Jerak-Zuiderent 
(2020 : 197) explores the position of the knower in scholarly accounts and attends to 
neglected things that demand “caring obligations.” Yet she states that this attentive -
ness is necessarily asymmetrical, an asymmetry that echoes the importance of critical 
care and of understanding care’s materialities and ethico-political obligations.
Following the depiction of how care starts, I will analyze the scientists’ individual 
and collective care in different times and spaces and demonstrate what their care 
entails. Thus, I show environmental care in different times and places as the scientists 
relate with, think along and potentially also act on environmental changes.
Material and Methods
The core of my empirical material consists of interview data and ethnographic 
observations with scientists from a renowned German marine research institute. I 
conducted 25 qualitative interviews that lasted between 40 and 90 minutes. The inter -
viewees range in rank from PhD students, postdocs, and group leaders to tenured 
senior scientists and full professors. The interviewees are part of or lead different 
research groups. While the interviewees represent a mix of senior and junior scien -
tists, differences in their relationship with environmental changes were not a main 
concern in this paper. All of them are employed by the same research institute: a 
leading research institute in the field of marine science. I also draw on fieldwork in 
the research institute, including observations of work in the laboratory, participation 
in team meetings and observations of TV interviews with scientists. While this paper 
draws mainly on interview material, the observations represent an important con -
textualization for this study which makes tangible the importance of individual and 
collective dimensions of scientific work (see e.g. Schönbauer 2017 ).
In order to gain insights about the scientists’ environmental care, I composed an 
interview guideline with three parts. The first part focused on the scientists’ socializa -
1 399
S. M. Schönbauertion into their discipline and how they experienced their first academic expedition to 
a far-away place. The second part focused on their research work and science com -
munication efforts, protest activities and engagement in multi-stakeholder settings. 
The third and final part encouraged interviewees to reflect on the social, political and 
epistemic dimensions of their research and other involvements (if applicable), and 
allowed participants to reflect on future imaginations for the role of environmental 
scientists. The interviews showed how the scientists narrate their past and present 
experiences with environmental changes and how they understand and act on their 
relationship with these changes. To paraphrase Murphy ( 2015 ), the narratives allowed 
me to convey how the scientists characterize their emotional attachment, their efforts 
to protect and take on responsibility for changes, their attention and concerns, as 
well as their troubles and worries with regard to environmental changes. I take their 
narratives as essential elements of social life (Czarniawska 2004 ), a form of know -
ing which steers the scientists’ stories and their interpretations of these stories. For 
example, the interviewees reference potential environmental risks; they also explain 
what it means to care as a marine researcher and in which format; they explain how 
they define and understand anthropogenic change; and they craft ways to care for 
environmental harm while also referring to the difficulties of action. These and other 
references provide insights into narratives that construct a storyline (Czarniawska 
2004 ) connecting past and present experiences into a life story. They also provide 
stories of a particular community that is predominantly concerned with studying 
environmental changes.
To analyze the interviews with marine scientists, I used a grounded theory 
approach (Charmaz 2006 ; Strauss and Corbin 1998 ). My analysis began with a first 
phase of multiple rounds of open coding using the ATLAS.ti software, which allowed 
for initial codes to emerge. In the second analytical phase, I refined and ordered the 
codes and conducted extensive memo writing until the analysis reached a point of 
saturation and no new codes emerged. Based on this analytical scheme, I identified 
salient themes in the stories of the marine scientists: career pathways, research direc -
tions, environmental harm, political action, emotional distress. These salient themes 
instructed my resulting analysis. I have divided the empirical part into two main parts 
that describe caring as individuals and caring as collectives, respectively. Below, I 
first sketch individual care of scientists in the workplace, and then dwell specifically 
on collective care as part of a protest group and other institutional interest groups. 
Many scientists that I interviewed sympathize with protest activities while only some 
routinely participate in them. Thus, the second part includes additional interview 
partners with scientists from the institute that participate in and organize protest 
activities. Moreover, I have anonymized all interviewees’ names using pseudonyms 
and removed information related to the research institute which could disclose their 
identities.
1 3100
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…Findings
Caring as Individuals
The marine scientists’ environmental care is often embedded in a long-standing envi -
ronmental interest, an interest inspired by specific events such as fieldwork experi -
ences. Even despite technical changes, expeditions represent a cornerstone of marine 
science research (see e.g. Helmreich 2009 ; Lehman 2018 ). The institute’s policy 
encouraged the marine scientists to participate in an expedition at least once. Expedi -
tions at this research institute were typically undertaken with midsize to large ships, 
including scientists and ship crews, with longer expeditions lasting for up to eight 
weeks. During the expeditions, the scientists collected samples in areas that are other -
wise inaccessible to humans. These expeditions are often perceived as opportunities 
to establish a close relationship with one’s research and datasets. Grit, a senior post -
doc studying jellyfish and freshwater snails, talked about expeditions as a possibility 
to “see how things are,” namely to see the landscapes the samples originate from. 
Expeditions were also understood as an important opportunity to create a relationship 
with the place under study. Victoria, a young group leader studying Arctic marine 
life, described expeditions as an experience of “something that you never saw before 
and you’ll never see again,” an experience in which one understands the “magic” of 
the place under study. For her, and many others, expeditions were an otherworldly 
experience. These and similar narrations appeared across all professional levels.
But there is more to it than that. Expeditions inform the emotional relationships 
of scientists and their research objects. This is most relevant when the environments 
they study start to change. Helena, a senior researcher with long-standing expertise 
studying the community of organisms in the deep sea, recalled sadness based on 
the last expedition in which the crew observed “more ice than we had in the last 20 
years.” She stated that “in 20 years it may no longer exist,” a circumstance which 
“makes you incredibly sad.” This emotional relationship is a motivational force for 
her care. In relation to her emotional experience, Helena was a frequent participant 
in Climate Marches and events of Scientists for Future, a collective of scientists that 
supports the Fridays for Future Movement. She also had a profound expertise regard -
ing coast-based wind parks and became an advocate for environmental harm in multi-
stakeholder dialogues. Accordingly, I conceive of care in Helena’s case not only as 
“a disposition, but also (as) a practical and moral action inspired by emotions and 
feelings” (Pulcini 2017 : 2). Hence, environmental care often starts with the marine 
scientists’ emotional relationships that create motivation and commitment for envi -
ronmental concerns. This emotional relationship has been shown to spur action and 
manage the eco-anxiety of scientists (Brunet 2022 ) or install coping mechanisms 
(Head and Harada 2017 ). The emotional relationship with changing landscapes also 
creates entanglements with more than human fragilities, such as Arctic ice landscape 
or marine life. Thereby, the emerging environmental care expresses more than an 
emotional relationship. It creates an emotional state in which the scientists can care 
about  and care for  the landscapes they study (see Schrader 2015 ).
There are other examples of how scientists connect with environmental changes. 
Michael, a group leader with a long-standing experience and reputation in marine 
1 3101
S. M. Schönbauerscience, was on numerous expeditions throughout his career. When he recalled his 
fieldwork experiences, he remembered the changing landscape and thinning ice, and 
argued that “we see the change,” something “no one can argue (…) away.”
It does affect you a little bit – doesn’t it? 1996 was my first trip to the Arctic and 
I remember it very well. It was a Swedish icebreaker, it was a big ship, but we only 
made slow progress because the ice conditions were completely different from what 
they are today. And to see that the ice is not only receding, but also thinning, and that 
the ecosystem is changing accordingly (…). I wouldn’t have thought that I could 
experience that with my eyes open. (Michael, group leader)
Michael reported that he always had been concerned with environmental changes, 
for example, with regard to deep sea mining. But observing changes over time first -
hand in a specific place affected him. He referred to awareness and uneasiness with 
environmental changes. This worry and uneasiness (see Murphy 2015 ) is a part of 
care that also resulted in his research in the deep sea based on long-scale time series. 
Based on his 25 years of tracking changes, he characterized change as also having 
political effects. Studies that trace changes over a long time can, for example, be used 
for reports and policy briefs. While many time series cover a project-related period of 
3–5 years, Michael’s time series already lasted for more than 25 years. His commit -
ment exemplifies what Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2012 /2011 ) describes as ethico-political, 
a commitment that stands for a strong urge to understand environmental changes at 
their core. While Michael’s work is not interventionist, his efforts to establish his 
time series shows continuous engagement to study change and establish knowledge 
practices that offer different accounts of the deep sea. Starting a time series in the 
deep sea could even be regarded as vanguard to understand what happens in what 
Pulcini ( 2017 ) calls an unknown other. Michael was successful in contributing to a 
different understanding of the deep sea: from a slowly changing to a more rapidly 
changing environment. In this caring for environmental change, he connects different 
spaces and times and creates an alternative depiction of the deep sea (see e.g. Puig de 
la Bellacasa 2015 ; Schrader 2015 ).
Environmental care is similarly evident in other cases: Two senior scientists whom 
I met during my time at the research institute narrated how they stood on deck of 
research vessels and saw plastic objects floating around in the sea or washed up on 
beaches. Tim, a senior scientist, recalled that he stood next to the ship railing and sud -
denly saw plastic objects floating around, which he started to count. Ulrike, a senior 
scientist, similarly remembered that she recognized an increasing amount of plastic 
objects during her monitoring work on a research vessel in the Arctic. Both scientists 
have researched plastic objects in and around the sea ever since. The initial attention 
for objects in the sea turned into a research direction on plastic in the environment. 
Ulrike became passionate about plastic and plastic pollution, a passion which resulted 
in numerous publications and research projects. She said that it is important to stay 
“cheerful” despite research that focuses on environmental changes, but mentions that 
she failed to create emotional distance between herself and the phenomena. This is 
based on her realization that litter also has effects on climate change, such as when 
plastic waste contributes to greenhouse gas emissions. Tim similarly stated that he is 
“touched” by the potential effects of litter, specifically plastic litter, on marine life, an 
“empathy” that he does not “want to (…) be taken away” from him. While he needed 
1 3102
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…distance in his day-to-day work, he lacked this distance when he talked about the 
development of his interest in plastic and how he began to “see” plastic everywhere.
Tim and Ulrike started their research on plastic in a time when environmental plas -
tic has not been a prominent societal concern or topic in the sciences. Tim recalled 
that it was difficult to defend one’s interest to study marine litter. He received nega -
tive responses from other scientists, also based on the fact that funding sources often 
remain limited. Other scientists at the research institute criticized the focus on marine 
litter. Similar to other plastic researchers that started their work on plastic (see e.g. 
Thompson et al. 2004 ), Tim and Ulrike advocated for a new research concern which 
only over time got public attention. Research on plastic subsequently received strong 
media coverage, TV and radio interviews, and an attention which lasts until today. 
Tim remembered that, based on the attention they received, he was granted more 
research freedom from his supervisor: “we were quite successful (…) and since then 
he [note: the supervisor] actually lets me do it.” In line with the media coverage, 
both scientists argued that responsibility is key for them as researchers, tangible, for 
example, in their public outreach activities and their research projects. Their eth -
ico-political commitment to study ocean plastic also resulted in specific academic 
questions. Ulrike collected ocean plastic with the help of citizen scientists in the 
North Atlantic. Back in Germany, she analyzed plastic objects from the Arctic ocean. 
Together with a master’s student, she identified the manufacturers of the collected 
plastic objects, which was narrated as extremely difficult, and traced their potential 
origins. She later on created an archive of plastic objects sorted by year and loca -
tion. In so doing, she cared for an environmental concern and opened up a relational 
conceptualization of plastic objects in the sea, objects that lose their ownership in the 
moment of their disposal.
Ulrike and Tim both stay with the trouble  (Haraway 2016 ). They work on a 
research concern which has not always been prominent but rather left at the margins. 
There are transformative moments in their research: seeing the relation of different 
environmental changes as well as creating relationships between producers, users 
and objects from the sea. These instances represent their ethico-political commit -
ment that has a strong impact on their research orientation and research choices. 
Environmental care combines emotional attachment and responsibility but also atten -
tion and concern for research objects (Murphy 2015 ; Lee 2016 ). This constellation 
can also be in tension. Angela, a research group leader who worked on effects and 
models relevant to climate change, remembered that she has always tried to find a 
way to continue to study human impacts upon the sea in her career. She stated that 
“you are really dependent on, of course, the internal institute policy” and that she 
always checked “if a niche opens up” in the institute. While the institute used to pre -
dominantly focus on matters in the Arctic, her research in the Antarctic ocean did not 
receive institutional attention for a while. Angela initially had trouble receiving fund -
ing but stayed with her research interest, an interest she deeply cared about. Later on, 
the institute shifted its research agenda and Angela received support for her research. 
Environmental care at work can therefore also be in tension between research inter -
ests and career stabilization.
In line with this tension, environmental care in marine science is also related to 
career trajectories. Grit, a senior postdoc, said that she cares for her research objects, 
1 3103
S. M. SchönbauerArctic snails and jellyfish, and that she demands proper policies for effects related 
to climate change and biodiversity loss. She also stated her frustration with political 
(in)action and said that “politicians aren’t listening to us and sometimes we are won -
dering, why are we doing this.” Based on her environmental worries, Grit started to 
retweet statements from Greta Thunberg on the platform X. She appreciated Greta’s 
prominent statement “listen to the scientists.” When she discovered a new freshwater 
snail species in her work, she named it Greta  in appreciation of Greta Thunberg’s 
work. This resulted in media coverage about her work which she used to “increase 
(the) impact factor.” Grit argued that naming a snail species after Greta Thunberg was 
“because we are concerned” about climate change, but it was also “for personal inter -
est” in career success. Grit’s care allows for a reflexive moment. The attention to an 
otherwise unseen species like snails or jellyfish represents a careful relationship for 
often understudied or unseen species, a care that turns to potentially neglected spaces 
(see Puig de la Bellacasa 2011 ). A colleague of Grit told me about the need to monitor 
species such as Arctic jellyfish in order to trace environmental changes in the sea. Her 
own research is a “matter of care” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ) in which she honors 
her political commitment and her scientific interests. But there is also a darker side to 
her care (see Martin et al. 2015 ). Choosing to relate environmental worries and career 
success shows care as environmental worry and uneasiness with the lack of political 
attention but also as career-related effort. In this case, care is not exclusively a lov -
ing act that follows environmental ideals of protection; it also creates attention for 
the scientists’ work and turns to self-care. Grit’s decision to both attend to environ -
mental worries and also her career concerns shows the importance of understanding 
care along its complexity. Related to Coopmans and McNamara ( 2020 ), I argue that 
environmental care needs to be situated in today’s research realities and competitive 
career scripts as it can relate care for research objects, self-care and care in academia.
Grit’s story is not the only one which provides insight into care situated in a merit-
based academic system. Eva, an expert on sea ice and appointed expert of the insti -
tute, similarly cared for environmental changes in her work practices. Eva was an 
engaged researcher with an Instagram channel where she posted pictures and videos 
of expeditions. She also wrote a popular science book on her work on melting sea ice. 
Like Grit, Eva, too, was worried about her impact factor and how well she would per -
form according to evaluation devices. She tied the lack of a high impact factor to her 
public engagement, specifically her dissemination and media outreach activities fea -
turing environmental concerns. It is not surprising that Eva’s reflection about metrics 
became bound up with her concerns over whether she is using social media ‘effec -
tively’: prior scholars have shown that social media has become a common event in 
the sciences (see e.g. Carrigan and Jordan 2022 ; Fochler and de Rijcke 2017 ). These 
efforts to increase visibility are inevitable when stable positions are not earned eas -
ily and metrics for competition and success have become integral to scientific work. 
Tim, the passionate plastic researcher, provided a similar story. He said that while he 
has achieved an internal and external reputation that is helpful for his career, he at the 
same time took on responsibility to communicate about environmental changes that 
are societally relevant. For Tim, there were two sides to research on environmental 
changes: research that is publicly funded and creates responsibility for scientists to 
1 3104
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…contribute to societal progress; and research as a job: “you also have to be very clear 
that it’s not only about science, it’s also about jobs.”
All these stories represent related components of a science system which connects 
environmental care, tangible, for example, in the perceived responsibility and long-
standing research concerns, with career success and visibility. Environmental care 
is complex and certainly not linear. It is dependent on career structures and research 
infrastructures and it is part of emotional resources. Thinking along Murphy’s four 
classification of care ( 2015 ), environmental care expresses the scientists’ emotional 
attachment, their worries, their efforts to be protective and create research responsi -
bility for a research object and also to create attention for an environmental concern. 
In addition, care is not innocent but also expresses the scientists’ need to succeed in 
a merit-based competition.
Caring as a Collective
Next to caring as individuals, the marine scientists’ environmental care was part of 
activities they pursued in groups and as a community. One example is an institute-
based Scientists for Future group. The Scientists for Future group (SFFi) was in line 
with the Fridays for Future movement and part of the wider Scientists for Future 
alliance. Founded in 2020, it consisted of a small number of core members and a 
wider network that reads about its work: almost 100 scientists and staff from the 
institute subscribe to its mailing list. The SFFi group comprised researchers at all 
career levels, with junior researchers representing the main group. It was also open 
to engineers, administration and science managers. SFFi members hosted a Youtube 
channel, participated in climate protests and gave talks, all formats providing an 
overview on climate-related topics in different forms, for example, as part of a train 
ride, or for the Youtube channel that was created during the start of the Covid-19 pan -
demic. The train talks even resulted in a cooperation with a local transport company 
hosting scientists who gave short talks as part of free tram rides. Some scientists, 
for example, Michael who accomplished long-lasting time series in the deep sea, 
were in favor of SFFi but did not necessarily participate in its activities. Others like 
Helena, Eva or Ulrike, participated in SFFi activities. All participating members I 
interviewed reported experiencing a similar emotional state when they thought of and 
talked about environmental changes:
You have to be careful not to sink into a depression. And you have to pull 
yourself out of it somehow. Fatalism is also involved. (Ludwig, senior scientist)
The marine scientists’ sadness reached a depressive moment and created fatalist men -
talities and cynicism in response to the stark environmental changes. Others indicated 
that helplessness or even fear were part of their emotional response to environmental 
changes. While the scientists at the institute mostly shared similar environmental 
concerns, the SFFi members and colleagues in favor of SFFi more clearly reported 
anxieties arising from the urgency of environmental changes. Their emotional states 
guided their commitment to care for  environmental change (Schrader 2015 ). The 
collective caring also opened up a coping possibility similar to other extracurricular 
1 3105
S. M. Schönbaueractivities (see e.g. Schönbauer 2020 ) as the members were among like-minded peers. 
Ulrike, for example, framed her SFFi involvement as “a little bit liberating” since she 
could express her political concerns as a scientist. The SFFi collective thus created a 
space in which the scientists can release their emotions and can care for  activities that 
create awareness. It also symbolizes a care which is dedicated to “maintain, continue 
and repair ‘our world’ so that we can live in it as well as possible” (Tronto 1993 : 103).
Importantly, however, the SFFi group became part of the institute and its agenda. 
A main grounds for integration into the institute was SFFi’s efforts to communicate 
science in addition to existing science communication formats. For example, SFFi 
has been granted the institute’s prize for science communication in 2020, a prize 
which provided the members with a small budget for projects. SFFi activities were 
also featured on the institute website, including pictures from scientists holding ban -
ners during global climate strikes when being in the Arctic during fieldwork. And 
activities were featured on the SFFi’s X account and Youtube channel. This institu -
tionalization is also tangible in the plan to grant PhD students credits for their stud -
ies if they present their work in the SFFi Youtube channel. Additionally, a member 
explained that he was allowed to integrate SFFi activities as part of his work routine. 
This integration was possible since the group started to allocate small funds for orga -
nizational tasks. He spent a calculated period of his work time on SFFi projects. The 
official allowance to work on SFFi agendas provided the scientist with the possibil -
ity to reconcile work and environmental concerns. In so doing, scientists were able 
to reconcile work activities and interests that exceed traditional interpretations of 
work. This does not necessarily mean that all SFFi activities were considered part of 
scientific work. Nevertheless, SFFi meetings could, for example, take place during 
lunch time, and thereby become part of work schedules, an indication of the daily 
characteristics of collective caring.
The institutionalization of SFFi’s environmental care also mirrored a potential 
larger transformation in the marine science community. As described in the introduc -
tion to this paper, some marine scientists started to talk about protest at conferences. 
Similarly, the director of the marine institute under study was verbal about the need to 
not only care about  but actively care for  environmental changes (a distinction made 
by Schrader 2015 ). The director frequently appeared in TV formats, was interviewed 
for numerous podcast and radio interviews and more. In all of these interviews, the 
director spoke about the importance of researching and also acting on environmental 
changes, thus signifying that an integration of traditional scientific work arenas, such 
as the laboratory, with other societal arenas, such as protest, were needed. I argue that 
the institutionalization of environmental care indicates a community that is currently 
changing. Careful engagements have always existed in the marine community, exem -
plified historically, for example, by the awareness and worries of marine scientists 
that have been raised at the end of last century based on pollution and overfishing 
(e.g. Rozwadowski 2018 ). However, the current environmental care more explicitly 
connects local and global domains –– care for the unknown other (Pulcini 2017 ) 
–– and simultaneously a care for local belongings, such as the affiliation with local 
protest groups. While this might be specific to the marine science community, a com -
munity which is intricately connected with its areas of study, this development most 
likely also happens in other scientific communities, exemplified by the diversity of 
1 3106
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…scientists speaking out on environmental changes (see e.g. Science Rebellion). The 
collective caring in protest and its institutionalization indicates a care that is deeply 
relational and does not discriminate between activities considered outside science 
and largely emotion-driven, and in contrast scientific ones (see Druglitrø 2018  for a 
comparison).
The institutionalization of environmental care was also mirrored in another case. 
Tim and Ulrike’s research on plastic had transformative effects in the institute. Their 
research interests had to be acknowledged by the director and integrated into the 
5-year research agenda framing in advance of its execution. They strategized with 
the institute’s director, who became fond of their research and allowed the scientists 
to make room for their concerns. By getting environmental plastic on the institute’s 
research agenda, the scientists created broad external and internal attention for their 
research. The internal reception was important for their institutional positioning. Tim 
stated that colleagues started to appreciate their work and engagement: “it was a 
stroke of luck, because for the perception in the institute it makes a difference” (Tim, 
senior scientist). He noticed a change in “how colleagues see you” based on the suc -
cess with research on plastic. Similarly, Ulrike experienced an increase in requests 
for bachelor and master theses based on the “hype” (Ulrike, senior scientist) sur -
rounding her project. Students requested to work with her because of her research 
focus, with some even making decisions about their studies based on environmental 
concerns. The institutionalization of a research focus on plastic thus highlights the 
enabling conditions of care, a care which can be considered “concrete work of main -
tenance with ethical and affective implications” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 : 5). The 
maintenance and enabling conditions of environmental care is thus predetermined by 
institutional structures and predispositions (Hauskeller 2020 ).
Yet the scientists’ care and specifically their involvement in protest activities 
was not left without critique. Hannes, a senior scientist working on plastic in the 
environment, recalled a story from a colleague whose funding was cut due to his 
engagement for the German branch of Scientists for Future. Hannes recalled that the 
colleague stated how he lost support in the scientific community because of his politi -
cal involvement. He added that “if you are too political, it can also be detrimental 
to your career” and that this circumstance is based on a science funding regime that 
creates dependencies between applicants and reviewers. Similarly, in a New York 
Times  opinion piece, Dr. Rose Abramoff, an earth scientist from Oak Ridge National 
Laboratories, described being fired because of speaking up about climate change3. 
The threat to a career posed by environmental activism does not remain anecdotal but 
has potential consequences. While the threat to scientific careers and positions is not 
necessarily new (MacKendrick 2017 ), the involvement of scientists in environmental 
activism displays a strong linkage of worries and discomfort with knowledge produc -
tion in potentially new ways. It also shows that the reception of the scientists’ envi -
ronmental care is not always positive nor neutral. Environmental care is embedded 
in power structures, institutional dynamics and hierarchies. This becomes evident 
when environmental care is positively received, such as when SFFi was granted the 
3  Abramoff, Rose. 2023. I’m a Scientist Who Spoke Up About Climate Change. My Employer Fired Me. 
Opinion. New York Times. Published online January 10 2023.
1 3107
S. M. Schönbauerinstitute’s prize for science communication. This also becomes evident when envi -
ronmental care leads to tensions, such as when it has potential negative effects for a 
career in science. Environmental care in this case showcases a care that needs to be 
understood in its complexity and along its situated interpretation.
Discussion and Conclusion
I started this paper by asking: How do scientists care for environmental changes? And 
what are the social and epistemic impacts of their care? I have presented examples of 
the scientists’ environmental care mediated in different times and places, from field -
work and expeditions to research choices and protest activities. Following Murphy’s 
definition of the interpretation of care (2015), the marine scientists in this study are 
emotionally attached to their research; they look after and hold themselves account -
able to study environmental changes; they attend to and are concerned with the 
changes; and they are troubled by them individually and collectively. The empirical 
examples above offer insights into the diversity of care and its social and epistemic 
effects.
First, I have shown how marine scientists care individually. Their care, as initi -
ated by emotional attachment, turns from admiration for the enchantedness of their 
remote fieldsites into sadness and profound worries about the environmental changes 
they observe in the places they study. They narrate their emotional relationship as 
one of the reasons they study changes and choose projects, organize outreach activi -
ties and even build novel institutional frameworks for research. This emotional work 
has been previously documented (see e.g. Brunet 2022 ; Mitroff 1974 ; Parker and 
Hackett 2014 ) but arrives with a different twist along the prominent and potentially 
irreversible changes that occur in the marine sector. Marine scientists are not simply 
concerned with environmental changes; rather, they (re-)orient their work along such 
changes, and even build careers based on environmental changes. This is also tan -
gible in the uneasiness that scientists often experience and the responsibility they take 
on when researching environmental changes. The scientists care for exploring oth -
erwise unseen topics, such as plastic pollution or the deep sea, research topics with 
far-reaching political effects. Their care is, however, not innocent (see e.g. Martin et 
al. 2015 ). Some marine scientists not only re-orient their research choices but – with 
regard to unstable work positions – are concerned with research success and creat -
ing attention for their work. As Latour and Woolgar’s credibility cycle has taught us 
(1986 ), researchers earn credit for their scientific data production that they can invest 
for new research. Instead of attending to the specificities of this model, which others 
have done so carefully (see e.g. Hessels et al. 2019 ), I argue that the marine scientists’ 
care also needs to be contextualized into the inner workings of science, such as needs 
for self-presentation, creating a nichè and visibility and gaining institutional career 
security. Their care for environmental problems displays an emotional affectedness, 
cautious attention and responsibility for research interests as well as self-care for 
career stability.
Second, I have attended to the marine scientists’ collective caring. Similar to the 
first example, the marine scientists’ emotional involvement provides grounding for 
1 3108
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…their participation in protest activities. The institute-based Scientists for Future group 
(SFFi) allows the scientists to share environmental concerns and collectively cope 
with their anxieties. Importantly, SFFi activities are being institutionalized. Other 
examples exist too, such as research initiatives for topics of initially only marginal 
interest. This maintenance work highlights not only the preparation of care but also 
what needs to be done for its stabilization (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ). Through this 
institutionalization and thereby stabilization of SFFi and specific research agendas, a 
collective way of caring and thereby commitment for care is established. The scien -
tists’ involvement in SFFi is, however, not without doubt and challenge. Some scien -
tists trade stories of harmful consequences for a career in science when participating 
in protest activities, or stories of criticism on the choice of institutionalized research 
agendas. Hence, there is critique from within the science community on what is con -
sidered suitable engagement and what is not. In line with this negotiation, Liboiron 
(2016 : 6) describes “radical” scientists as scientists that have become part of politics 
and that are “at the forefront of articulating novel forms of harm” (from plastics). 
The marine scientists that I portray in this study are not necessarily radical but rather 
engaged through their environmental care.
Where to go from here and what does Environmental Care allow us to understand?  In 
this paper, I have focused on what the marine scientists’ environmental care consists 
of and results in. I have attended to often unseen careful relationships between scien -
tists, their research and environmental concerns. I have also shown that the scientists 
care for  and about  environmental changes and that they do so in different times and 
places. I have highlighted that care relates different times and spaces and that care is 
indeed not naïve. Let me elaborate what this means for a conceptualization of envi -
ronmental care:
Environmental care offers insights into the complexities of caring in turbulent 
times with regards to potential catastrophic events lingering in the future and cases 
of destruction or variable harm that reside in the past and present. The stories I have 
curated for this paper show that care needs to be situated in different stories and expe -
riences of scientists. Care is also related with what Pulcini ( 2017 ) calls an unknown 
other, for example, a potential environmental harm. In contrast to Pulcini, I find that 
the marine scientists that I portray are highly committed to studying and acting com -
passionately on geographically distant events, be it changes in Arctic and Antarctic 
areas or global events such as effects related to climate change. Thus, environmen -
tal care goes beyond local interactions (e.g. de Bont 2009 ) or innovation-dependent 
changes in the marine science sector (Helmreich 2009 ). The marine scientists stay 
with the trouble (Haraway 2016 ) in different times (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ) and 
care for more-than-human ecologies (e.g. Eidenskog 2021 ; Druglitrø 2018 ; Schrader 
2015 ) in research and beyond, in protest. In fact, their care also creates institutional -
ized spaces, when they transform research agendas of the institute or when a protest 
group becomes an addition to a research institute. Furthermore, junior and experi -
enced senior scientists care in similar ways. While early career scientists are certainly 
more dependent upon success in their careers, their emotional relationship with the 
landscapes they experience through fieldwork, and also their perceived responsibility 
1 3109
S. M. Schönbauerto respond to environmental change in general, are similar. Based on this, I want to 
allow thinking about a form of care which is not necessarily always specific, located, 
or directed towards one place and one singular care time. Instead, environmental care 
can open up a scientific culture, its norms and values, that might be changing along 
the current drastic environmental changes.
Meanwhile, the scientists’ care is not innocent. A focus on environmental care 
helps to understand the inner workings of care, such as selective attention to specific 
topics, an attention that needs to be troubled and unsettled in order to create construc -
tive ways of moving and acting in times of ecological harm (Martin et al. 2015 ). I 
find it important to analyze how care for environmental problems works and how 
this care, too, follows competitive and representational parameters or mirrors nor -
mativities in its practice. Normative underpinnings came to the forefront, for exam -
ple, during the worldwide “Science Marches” taking place in 2017, an initiative to 
support scientific research and policymaking that is science-informed. “Believe the 
scientists” or “listen to the scientists” already became catchphrases back then, with 
normative underpinnings of what scientists ought to fulfill (Penders 2017 ). In order 
to demystify the normative interpretation of what environmental scientists ought to 
serve, and to challenge underlying technocratic visions, I emphasize what many STS 
scholars have already proposed: to situate scientists and knowledge production and to 
reflect on the forms and formats of their care. We need to analyze the different times 
and spaces in which care is enacted as social and professional commitment for envi -
ronmental changes. But we also need to attentively experiment with futures in sci -
ence that allow us as STS researchers to collectively “maintain, continue and repair 
‘our world’ so that we can live in it as well as possible” (Tronto 1993 : 103). And we 
need to ask how it might be possible to create spaces in academia that mirror what 
“all scholars have been promised upon entering the university: the time and space to 
think, to work together, and to rethink what might be possible” (Lindén and Lydal 
2021 ). Environmental care of marine scientists as addressed in this paper might help 
to start this conversation and sensitize STS researchers to the different dimensions of 
care in practice and its different formats. I argue that it is imperative to create further 
analyses that pay close attention to different times and places in which scientists care, 
and understand the complexities and practices of this care.
Acknowledgements  This research was made possible first of all through the marine scientists who gen -
erously agreed to talk to me and allowed me to accompany their work. I would like to thank the editors 
of Minerva and the reviewers for their generous and constructive comments. I also thank my colleagues 
for their thoughts and invaluable comments on the manuscript among them Niki Vermeulen, Fiona Kin -
niburgh and Marc Strotmann. I would also like to thank Mallory James who helped me edit the piece. And 
I thank the Austrian Science Fund that granted me with an Erwin Schrödinger Fellowship which provided 
this unique opportunity for research.
Funding  The data acquisition and analysis was funded by the Austrian Science Fund with an Erwin 
Schrödinger-postdoctoral grant “Choreographies of Environmental Engagement”.
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
1 3110
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use 
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/ .
References
Ahmed, Sara. 2010. The Promise of Happiness . Durham: Duke University Press.
Albrecht, Glenn et al. 2007. Solastalgia: the distress caused by environmental change. Australasian psy -
chiatry  15(sup1). https://doi.org/10.1080/10398560701701288 . S95-S98.
Blazek, Matej, Fiona M. Smith, Miroslava Lemešová and Petra Hricová. 2015. Ethics of care across pro -
fessional and everyday positionalities: The (un) expected impacts of participatory video with young 
female carers in Slovakia. Geoforum  61: 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.02.017 .
Brunet, Lucas. 2022. Transposing emotions to conserve nature? The positive politics of the metrics of eco -
system services. Science as Culture  33(1): 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2022.2151426 .
Carrigan, Mark, and Katy Jordan. 2022. Platforms and institutions in the post-pandemic university: a case 
study of social media and the impact agenda. Postdigital Science and Education  4(2): 354–372. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42438-021-00269-x .
Czarniawska, Barbara. 2004. Narratives in social science research . SAGE. https://doi.
org/10.4135/9781849209502 .
Charmaz, Kathy. 2006. Constructing grounded theory . London: Thousand Oaks. CA: Sage.
Coopmans, Catelijne, and Karen M. McNamara. 2020. Care in translation: Careful research 
in medical settings. East Asian Science Technology and Society  14(1): 1–14. https://doi.
org/10.1215/18752160-8193729 .
Daston, Lorraine. 2003. Die wissenschaftliche Persona. Arbeit und Berufung. In Zwischen Vorderbühne 
und Hinterbühne: Beiträge zum Wandel der Geschlechterbeziehungen in der Wissenschaft vom 17. 
Jahrhundert bis zur Gegenwart , ed. Theresa Wobbe. Bielefeld: Transcript.
De Bont, Raf. 2009. Between the laboratory and the deep blue sea: Space issues in the marine 
stations of Naples and Wimereux. Social Studies of Science  39(2): 199–227. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312708097325 .
Dickel, Sascha, Sabine Maasen, and Andreas Wenninger. 2020. Nachhaltige Transformation der Wissen -
schaft? Soziologie und Nachhaltigkeit  6(1): 1–20. https://doi.org/10.17879/sun-2020-2732 .
Druglitrø, Tone. 2018. Skilled care and the making of good science. Science, Technology, & Human Values  
43(4): 649–670. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243916688093 .
Eidenskog, Maria. 2021. Careful place: Matters of care built into the sustainable city district. Nordic Jour -
nal of Science in Technology Studies  9(1): 26–38. https://doi.org/10.5324/njsts.v9i1.3439 .
Fochler, Maximilian, and Sarah de Rijcke. 2017. Implicated in the indicator game? An experimental 
debate. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society  3: 21–40. https://doi.org/10.17351/ests2017.108 .
Haraway, Donna. 2016. Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press.
Hauskeller, Christine. 2020. Care ethics and care contexts: Contributions from feminist philosophy. 
East Asian Science Technology and Society: An International Journal  14(1): 153–161. https://doi.
org/10.1215/18752160-8234663 .
Head, Lesley, and Theresa Harada. 2017. Keeping the heart a long way from the brain: The emotional 
labour of climate scientists. Emotion, Space and Society  24: 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
emospa.2017.07.005 .
Helmreich, Stefan. 2009. Alien ocean: Anthropological voyages in microbial seas . Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Hessels, Laurens K., Thomas Franssen, Wout Scholten, and Sarah de Rijcke. 2019. Variation in Valuation: 
How Research Groups Accumulate Credibility in Four Epistemic Cultures. Minerva  57: 127–149. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-018-09366-x .
Hochschild, Arlie Russel. 2003. The managed heart: Commercialization of human feeling.  With a new 
afterword. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Illouz, Eva. 2007. Cold Intimacies: The Making of Emotional Capitalism . Oxford: Polity.
1 3111
S. M. SchönbauerJerak-Zuiderent, Sonja. 2015. Accountability from somewhere and for someone: Relating with care. Sci-
ence as Culture  24(4): 412–435. https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2015.1050368 .
Jerak-Zuiderent, Sonja. 2020. How to care for our accounts? In The Routledge Companion to Actor- Net -
work Theory , eds. Anders Blok et al. Routledge.
Kaldewey, David. 2018. The grand challenges discourse: Transforming identity work in science and sci -
ence policy. Minerva  56(2): 161–182. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11024-017-9332-2 .
Kohler, Robert E. 2002. Landscapes and Labscapes: Exploring the Lab-Field Border in Biology . Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Latour, Bruno. 2004. Why has critique run out of steam? From matters of fact to matters of concern. Criti -
cal Inquiry  30(2): 225–248. https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/421123 .
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. 1986. Laboratory Life . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lee, Jieun. 2016. Placental Economies: Care, Anticipation and Vital Matters in the Placenta Stem Cell Lab 
in Korea. BioSocieties  11(4): 458–75. https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2016.8 .
Lehman, Jessica. 2018. From ships to robots: The social relations of sensing the world ocean. Social Stud -
ies of Science  48(1): 57–79. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312717743579 .
Liboiron, Max. 2016. Redefining pollution and action: The matter of plastics. Journal of Material Culture  
21(1): 87–110. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359183515622966 .
Lindén, Lisa, and Doris Lydahl. 2021. Care in STS. Nordic Journal of Science and Technology Studies  
9(1): 3–12. https://doi.org/10.5324/njsts.v9i1.4000 .
MacKendrick, Norah. 2017. Out of the labs and into the streets: Scientists get political. Sociological 
Forum  32(4): 896–902. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12366 .
Mahony, Martin, and Mike Hulme. 2018. Epistemic geographies of climate change: Science, space and 
politics. Progress in Human Geography  42(3): 395–424. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132516681485 .
Martin, Aryn, Ana Viseu, and Natasha Myers. 2015. The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies 
of Science  45(5): 625–641. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073 .
McCormack, Derek. 2012. Geography and abstraction: Towards an affirmative critique. Progress in 
Human Geography  36(6): 715–734. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132512437074 .
Mitroff, Ian I. 1974. Norms and counter-norms in a selected group of Apollo moon scientists: A case 
study in the ambivalence of scientists. American Sociological Review  39: 579–595. https://doi.
org/10.2307/2094423 .
Mol, Annemarie. 2008. The logic of care: Health and the problem of patient choice . London/New York: 
Routledge.
Mol, Annemarie, Ingunn Moser, and Jeannette Pols, eds. 2010. Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, 
Homes and Farms . Bielefeld: Transcript.
Moser, Ingunn. 2011. Dementia and the limits to life: Anthropological sensibilities. STS interferences, and 
possibilities for action in care. Science, Technology, & Human Values  36(5): 704–722. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0162243910396349 .
Murphy, Michelle. 2015. Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health 
practices. Social Studies of Science  45(5): 717–737. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715589136 .
Oreskes, Naomi. 1996. Objectivity or heroism? On the invisibility of women in science. Osiris  11: 87–113. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/368756 .
Parker, John N., and Edward J. Hackett. 2014. The sociology of science and emotions. In Handbook of the 
Sociology of Emotions: Volume II , eds. Jan E. Stets and Jonathan H. Turner. Springer.
Penders, Bart. 2017. Marching for the myth of science: a self-destructive celebration of scientific excep -
tionalism. EMBO reports  18(9): 1486–1489. https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201744935 .
de la Puig, María. 2010. Ethical doings in naturecultures. Ethics Place and Environment  13(2): 151–169. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13668791003778834 .
de la Puig, María. 2011. Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social Studies of 
Science  41(1): 85–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312710380301 .
de la Puig, María. 2012. Nothing comes without its world’: Thinking with care. The Sociological Review  
60(2): 197–216. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.2012.02070.x .
de la Puig, María. 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies 
of Science  45(5): 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851 .
de la Puig, María. 2017. Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds . University of 
Minnesota Press.
Pulcini, Elena. 2017. What emotions motivate care? Emotion Review  9(1): 64–71.
Rozwadowski, Helen M. 2018. Vast expanses: a history of the oceans . Reaktion Books.
1 3112
Environmental Care: How Marine Scientists Relate to Environmental…Schönbauer, Sarah M. 2017. How biologists ‘meet’. In Methodological Reflections on Practice Oriented 
Theories , eds. Michael Jonas et al. Cham: Springer.
Schönbauer, Sarah M. 2020. From Bench to Stage: How Life Scientists’ Leisure Groups Build Collective 
Self-Care. Science as Culture  29(4): 524–545. https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2020.1713077 .
Schrader, Astrid. 2015. Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: How (not) to care about deformed 
leaf bugs in the aftermath of Chernobyl. Social Studies of Science  45(5): 665–690. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715603249 .
Shapin, Steven. 2008. The Scientific Life. A Moral History of a Late Modern Vocation . Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet Corbin. 1998. Basics of qualitative research. Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory . Thousand Oaks/London/New Delhi: Sage.
Sullivan, Walter. 1961. Assault on the Unknown: The International Geophysical Year . New York: McGraw 
Hill.
Swallow, Julia, and Alexandra Hillman. 2019. Fear and anxiety: Affects, emotions and care practices in the 
memory clinic. Social Studies of Science  49(2): 227–244. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312718820965 .
Thompson, Richard C. et al. 2004. Lost at sea: Where is all the plastic? Science  304(5672): 838–838. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1094559 .
Tronto, Joan C. 1993. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . London/New York: 
Routledge.
Vanderpool, Christopher. K. 1983. Marine Science and the Law of the Sea. Social Studies of Science  13(1): 
107–129. https://doi.org/10.1177/030631283013001006 .
Vermeulen, Niki. 2013. From Darwin to the census of marine life: marine biology as big science. PloS one  
8(1). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054284 .
Weingart, Peter. 2002. The moment of truth for science. EMBO reports  3: 703–706. https://doi.org/10.1093/
embo-reports/kvf165 .
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
1 3113
