 
Everyday Agri-  Environmental 
Governance
Revitalising the way the social sciences question agri-  environmental 
governance, this book introduces “the everyday governance approach” 
as a means to improving the sustainability of agriculture and food 
systems.
The “everyday” refers to localised practices, specific networks, 
and practical norms that emerge in a process of interaction, transla -
tion, and reinterpretation. The authors build this approach on assem -
blage thinking and theory, which focuses on the collective production 
of the social through complex sets of connections. For this reason, 
assemblage thinking becomes a particularly productive guide in 
exploring how everyday governance is co-  produced in the interaction 
between numerous social processes involving a diversity of actors and 
instruments. The authors navigate between original and contrasting 
case studies from Switzerland, Indonesia, and the European Union in 
order to reorient attention to the transformative nature of governance, 
which they locate along four different dimensions of the everyday: (1) 
the interdependence of instruments within a wider governance assem -
blage; (2) the uncertainty and unpredictability of effects in agri-  
environmental governance; (3) the distributed nature of agency and its 
implication for power relations; (4) the importance of capacities in the 
transformation of agri-  food systems. This book calls for a redesigning 
of agri-  environmental governance that should move away from the 
setting of fix and precise objectives and solutions, and rather aim for 
a consolidation of sound foundations on which desirable futures can 
emerge.
The book will be an essential read for students and scholars 
interested in sustainable agriculture and food systems, governance 
modes and approaches, and sustainability more broadly.   
Jérémie Forney  is a Full Professor at the Anthropology Institute of 
the University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland. He is the co-  author of Agri-  
environmental Governance as an Assemblage  (Routledge, 2018).
Dana Bentia  is an Associate Researcher at the Anthropology Institute 
of the University of Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
Angga Dwiartama  is an Associate Professor in Biomanagement in 
the School of Life Sciences and Technology at the Institut Teknologi 
Bandung, Indonesia. 
Routledge Focus on Environment and Sustainability
Urban Resilience and Climate Change in the MENA Region
Nuha Eltinay and Charles Egbu
Global Forest Visualization
From Green Marbles to Storyworlds
Lynda Olman and Birgit Schneider
Sustainable Marketing and the Circular Economy in Poland
Key Concepts and Strategies
Anita Proszowska, Ewa Prymon-  Ryś, Anna Kondak, Aleksandra Wilk 
and Anna Dubel
Risk Management for Water Professionals
Technical, Psychological and Sociological Underpinnings
Anna Kosovac
Climate Perspectives from the Congo Basin
Bila-  Isia Inogwabini
Everyday Agri-  Environmental Governance
The Emergence of Sustainability through Assemblage Thinking
Jérémie Forney, Dana Bentia, and Angga Dwiartama
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routle  dge.com/  Routle  dge- 
Focus-  on- Envi  ronm  ent- and- Sus tain abil ity/ book-  ser ies/ RFES  
 
Everyday Agri-  
Environmental 
Governance
The Emergence of Sustainability 
through Assemblage Thinking
Jérémie Forney , Dana Bentia ,  
and Angga Dwiartama  
First published 2025
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Jérémie Forney, Dana Bentia, and Angga Dwiartama
The right of Jérémie Forney, Dana Bentia, and Angga Dwiartama to be identified  
as authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78  
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
The Open Access version of this book, available at www.taylor  fran cis.com , has been  
made available under a Creative Commons [Attribution-  Non Commercial-  No Derivatives 
(CC-  BY- NC- ND)] 4.0 license.
Funded by Swiss National Science Foundation
Any third party material in this book is not included in the OA Creative 
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. 
Please direct any permissions enquiries to the original rightsholder.
Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without  
intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-  in- Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-  1- 032- 22132-  8 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-84324-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-  1- 003- 27126-  0 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/  9781003271260
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Newgen Publishing UK  
Contents
Preface and acknowledgement  viii
 1 Everyday agri-  environmental governance and the 
assemblage perspective  1
 2 Heterogeneous governance assemblages: mapping 
the cases  23
 3 Unpredictability of effects in agri-  environmental 
governance  49
 4 Power, agency, and desire in everyday governance  71
 5 Reframing change in governance assemblages:  
properties, capacities, and basins of attraction  92
 6 Governing emergence towards the transformation 
of agri-  food assemblages  119
Index  139  
Preface and acknowledgement
This book emerges from multiple encounters and relations that 
develop around long research engagement with agri-  environmental 
governance (AEG). The three authors shared an equal passion for 
food and agriculture matters, and a similar conviction that the answers 
provided by our societies to achieve sustainable food futures are often 
pushing in the wrong directions. AEG has become a tentacular, poly -
morphous, penetrating, and sometimes alienating entity of control 
and surveillance, too often losing sight of its fundamental objectives 
to concentrate on control and measurements per se . With these pre -
occupations in mind, Jérémie Forney launched, at the University of 
Neuchâtel in 2015, the project “New directions in agri-  environmental 
governance: re-  assembling food, knowledge and autonomy”, which 
was funded generously by the Swiss National Sciences Foundation. 
The authors want to acknowledge and say thank you for this important 
support. Dana Bentia joined the project in 2016 and contributed to 
its development, together with two PhD students, Ismaël Tall and 
Thomas Vetter. The excellent spirit animating the research team 
has been inspirational, as well as each one’s deep engagement with 
the everyday of a concrete example of AEG. Many great scholars 
contributed to the thoughts and discussions developed in Neuchâtel. 
Angga Dwiartama was one of them and he also joined the team for 
an extension of the research project engaging with AEG and digit -
alisation. But many more have nurtured our work with their critical 
comments and insightful suggestions. We want to thank, in particular, 
Michael Carolan, Hugh Campbell, and Terry Marsden for their long-  
lasting and stimulating partnership developed in the context of the 
project. Thanks also to Nadine Arnold, Ronan Le Velly, Damian 
Maye, Katja Neves, Christoph Oberlack, Katrin Prager, Rikke Stotten, 
Gisela Welz, Michael Winter, and Steven Wolf for their participation   
Preface and acknowledgement  ix
in the workshops and colloquium associated with the project. Finally, 
Jérémie Forney wishes to also thank the team of the Anthropology 
Institute at the University of Neuchâtel, particularly Ellen Hertz and 
Marion Fresia. Their friendly support has been crucial for this book to 
have the possibility to emerge, and their contributions have been more 
influential in the process than they might think. newgenprepdf
 
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-1
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.1  Everyday agri-  environmental 
governance and the  
assemblage perspective
Introduction: the messy processes of agri-  environmental 
governance
From its early stages, questions about the impacts of modern agricul -
ture on political stability, national defence, or natural-  resource man -
agement and conservation have been constantly raised. In response, 
governments, private actors, and civil society have followed up with 
answers to address the faults or fragilities of what has been seen 
as a strategic and problematic sector. Modern agriculture has since 
become a field of intense interventions by which several actors seek 
to steer its evolution towards what they see as a better and more desir -
able future. The emergence of the “environment” as a political object 
in the second part of the twentieth century (as signified by Carson’s 
Silent Spring, 1963 ), together with the establishment of “sustain -
able development” as a leading concept ( Brundtland, 1989 ), both for 
public policy and private business strategy, have partly reshaped the 
way these interventions were imagined and designed. Governance 
interventions have grown in number and diversified in nature to address 
issues relating to food, agriculture, and the environmental dimension 
of sustainability, in a context of deregulation and re-  regulation often 
associated to neoliberal inspirations (e.g. Bain et al., 2005 ; Lockie & 
Higgins, 2007 ; Potter & Tilzey, 2007 ).
Since the 1980s, the governance of agriculture and food systems has 
gone through an “ecologisation” turn ( Lamine, 2011 ) in many countries 
and at the global level too, with a progressive integration of the framing 
of sustainability into national policies, international regulations, and 
private-  based instruments such as certification schemes and standards 
(see Hatanaka et al., 2005 ). This turn followed diverse paces and 
degrees of integration, depending on country-  specific political and  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
2 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
economic contexts, while other agendas remained prominent and even 
antagonistic to environmental objectives. Agri-  environmental govern -
ance (AEG), understood as a “broad framing that encompasses the 
multiple actions, which aim to implement change in the food system 
and address environmental issues related to agricultural production” 
(Forney et al., 2018 : 2), has become a major field of intervention for 
a growing number of actors, at a large variety of scales, and through 
numerous modes of action.
However, despite the multiplication of actions, regulations, and 
initiatives, environmental issues related to food production, pro -
cessing, and consumption have not disappeared. On the contrary, our 
knowledge of the problems has continuously deepened, pointing to, for 
instance, the fundamental role of agriculture in the dramatic decline of 
biodiversity, notably through the destruction of habitats ( CBD, 2014 ), 
and in climate change, through the emission of greenhouse gases 
(IPCC, 2019 ). At the same time, food and agriculture are certainly 
among the sectors most exposed to the consequences of these envir -
onmental changes, which manifest by menacing soil fertility, access 
to water and other natural resources, and other ecosystem services that 
are essential to their good functioning. While complex and globalised 
food systems become structurally exposed to crises at the global and 
local scales ( Lang, 2010 ), the diagnosis of this failure ( Rosin et al., 
2011 ) becomes obviously related to a failure of environmental gov -
ernance, not limited to food systems ( Arnouts & Arts, 2009 ). Such a 
statement stresses the utmost importance of rethinking how govern -
ance is done in practice and thought of in theory, while also supporting 
new ways of understanding change and building solutions. This is the 
difficult task that we engage with in this book.
One of our starting points builds on the statement that, while we 
understand governance as the various ways development objectives 
are pursued, power is exercised, and changes are planned through an 
act of governing, we overlook the messy processes underlying how 
governance is made and immersed into the everyday lives of people 
who are influenced by it. From meeting rooms and computer software 
to paddocks and farms, governance in agriculture, food, and the envir -
onment involves many elements that interfere and collaborate in pro -
ducing what becomes governance, when considered beyond simple 
narratives of change and instead as a complex set of relations.
To capture the complexity of AEG, we acknowledge the authori -
tative literature on governance brought by Michel Foucault (1979)   
 
 
  
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  3
through the idea of governmentality. Governmentality is understood 
as the art of governance, or ways in which one (government, indi -
viduals, corporation) exerts control over others through apparatuses, 
tactics, and procedures. Tania Li’s book The Will to  Improve  (2007b)  
expands the notion of governmentality into the context of develop -
ment, environmental governance, and forest conservation in her case 
of Indonesia. In her book, Li demonstrates the messy process of gov -
ernance that goes a long way in history through the involvement of 
multiple actors, including the state, academics, experts, NGOs, and 
international donor agencies.
In governmentality, Foucault argues for distinctive modes of gov -
ernance across history, from sovereign, disciplinary, to the current 
neoliberal form of governmentality, which is dictated by market 
mechanisms, liberal democracies, and the de-  centring of power. In 
reference to this, Rose (1996)  also sees neoliberal governmentality 
as a form of advanced liberal way of governance, whereby the state 
transforms its governing strategies from welfare approach into choices 
of individual citizens, therefore narrowing down the role of the state 
and the collective role of society. This view is later criticised by 
Stenson and Watt (1999) , who posit the idea of hybrid governance. In 
their view, even within the neoliberal approach to governance, the role 
of the “social” is not necessarily diminished, but instead reformulated 
through an assemblage of rationalities. Higgins and Lockie (2002)  
further elaborate on this through their case of natural resource man -
agement and AEG in Australia, wherein the distinction between neo -
liberal and other modes of governance is no longer visible. Here, 
the authors offer a more nuanced form of environmental governance 
calling for an analytical lens that would be better equipped to speak 
of the blurry and messy nature of governance, beyond fixed and pre-  
existing categorisations.
At the basis of a new way of engaging with governance, we propose 
the concept of everyday governance as an answer to: the limitations 
of classical approaches to governance; an implicit understanding of 
social change as linear which fails to answer the unpredictable nature 
of change; an artificial and ideological split between public policies 
and private governance; the unresolved tensions between explanations 
drawing on structural power relations and others emphasising the role 
of subjectivity and agency. We set the scene of AEG as a major issue 
for the future of more-  than-  human societies—  which means new ways 
of living and thinking human societies with non-  humans. 
 
 
  
4 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Governance practices are often based on assumptions and more or 
less idealised visions of how things should be and how to get there. 
Many approaches to and credos about how to make things change 
can be found: new technologies, consumers’ responsibility, farmers’ 
education, regulation or deregulation, etc. We call for better articu -
lation between narratives opposed to this projective understanding 
of governance. We assert that governance results from the encounter 
of diverse instruments and localised sets of daily and concrete 
interactions. The notion of everyday governance allows us to analyse 
the outcomes of governance practices beyond ideas of success and 
failure, and therefore leaves room to explore the multiplicity and com -
plexity of processes by looking at governance in its daily social pro -
duction. In addition, an everyday-  governance perspective adopts the 
points of view of the actors. This results in a discussion and problem -
atisation of the categories usually used in analyses of AEG in diverse 
geographical and political contexts.
Supporting such an approach requires us to find a theoretical 
framework to engage with messiness and complexity across the usual 
boundaries and categories. We found in assemblage thinking a fer -
tile ground on which we can sow and cultivate concepts that would 
capture what is at stake in governance from an everyday perspective. 
The seminal work of Deleuze and Guattari (1988)  has inspired many 
developments and translations in more recent literature (e.g. Bennett, 
2010 ; Buchanan, 2021 ; Callon, 2017 ; DeLanda, 2016 ). Assemblage 
thinking and assemblage theory have already penetrated diverse 
fields of research related to AEG, such as the anthropology of glo -
balisation (e.g. Ong & Collier, 2005 ), critical development studies 
(e.g. Li, 2007a ), or agri-  food studies (e.g. Forney et al., 2018 ; Rosin 
et al., 2017 ; Loconto, 2015 ). In this book, we propose to build on this 
existing literature, along with diverse empirical examples, to carve 
paths that could lead us out of some of the dead ends which AEG 
seems to be locked in.
Exploring the everyday dimension of AEG
How should we engage with the everyday dimension of AEG? To 
begin with, let us imagine three hypothetical situations, or stories , 
which are inspired by our empirical work on AEG, in which everyday 
governance is enacted through practical encounters, conflicts, negoti -
ations, dilemmas, agreements, and reflections.  
   
 
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  5
Story 1: Nicolas,1 navigating the Swiss AEG assemblage
Nicolas is a farmer in the lowlands of Switzerland. On his farm, 
he raises a few beef cattle. Besides the pastures, grassland, and 
a few hectares of corn used to feed the cows, he cultivates crops 
of wheat, spelt, and rapeseed certified under the IP-  Suisse label. 
Today, Nicolas has sown wheat on a field that he sprayed with 
a herbicide a few days ago. This “cleaning” of the weeds is the 
only chemical intervention allowed by the label and the agri-  
environmental scheme for an “extensive” wheat production he 
subscribed to and for which he will get state money. The combin -
ation of the premium price paid for the label and the subsidies 
received, interestingly, compensates for the loss in productivity. 
And he saves the cost of the additional chemicals and the petrol 
for the tractor he would have incurred for further treatments. 
At the side of the field, a hedgerow and a few piles of stones 
supposedly offer a beneficial environment for biodiversity. They 
are part of the IP-  Suisse biodiversity programme. The hedgerow 
is also registered in the regional “ecological network”, 
which unites biodiversity infrastructures installed on all the 
neighbouring farms: another programme supported by the agri -
cultural policy. Driving home, Nicolas passes by the sloping plot 
of land on which he planted 50 trees last year under a scheme 
supporting agroforestry practices. Since he left dairy production 
eight years ago, when he took over the family farm, the pas -
ture has not been in much need. Given the crash of milk prices 
that followed the dismantling of the state-  based quota system, 
quitting the dairy industry was certainly a good move. All this 
makes him think of Olivier, his friend who remained a passionate 
dairy farmer, but has found himself stuck on his too-  small farm 
with no access to additional land and little flexibility to par -
ticipate in similar programmes. Olivier needs all of his land to 
feed his cows, but this prevents him from compensating for the 
low milk prices with the money from additional environmental 
schemes. Nicolas thinks that he himself has found a nice balance 
between the push for more environmentally friendly agricultural 
practices and his fundamental motivation to produce food for 
the people.   
6 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Story 2: Novelina and Harbin, telling agents in the soybean  
assemblage
A group of twenty people are visiting a soybean field at an agro -
nomic research institute in Western Switzerland. Novelina and 
Harbin are the two seed varieties being tested this year. They have 
grown well despite rather dry conditions during spring, and many 
innovative adjustments in their cultivation proved beneficial for 
their development. These seeds have been adapted for the last fif -
teen years to be able to ripe naturally without desiccation. The 
basis of these breakthroughs is research that received national 
support in the 80s, at a time when “it was quite mad to begin 
because very few people were aware of this delicate and versa -
tile plant”. There is thus reason to celebrate that currently, many 
farmers, seed breeders, and various industries and businesses 
from across Europe seek to integrate these and other varieties of 
soybeans in their plans and actions. Yet change is difficult, as there 
are many barriers along the way, markets are competitive, costs 
are high, trust is low, there are clashing arguments over standards 
being either too high or not high enough, and there is this sense 
that Europe is struggling at the policy level. At the same time, 
there is evidence from many countries that national plans support 
legume development and its various qualities needed in terms 
of its use for soils, feed, oils, and food. Enthusiasm grows time 
and time again, when there is news of a powerful farming asso -
ciation deciding to use the new standard after taking five years 
to make this step, or when important advocates against deforest -
ation support the work being done for sustainable soy. Indeed, 
the momentum for change is here, and anything can happen, a 
dialogue between producing and consuming countries is emerging 
and Brazil even starts to imagine a possible switch and transition 
to organic soy production. During the lunch break, a Serbian soy -
bean farmer is checking his emails to be surprised by an invitation 
from the association he had recently become a member of to join 
a study trip to China, to learn about the roots of soybeans. He 
immediately decides to register and is so happy to have a special 
opportunity to visit the unique wild soybean seed varieties bank he 
always dreamt of seeing.  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  7
Story 3: Fitri and the messy assemblage of public governance
Fitri2 is a public civil servant working for a regional environmental 
agency in Indonesia. She oversees the applications for develop -
ment projects and the extent to which environmental compliance 
has been fulfilled. In a day, she receives hundreds of applications 
of that sort. Not only does she have to assess how companies plan 
their environmental management, Fitri also has to coordinate with 
other government agencies on how implementing those projects 
would compromise missed land potentials, be they related to agri -
culture, forestry, dwellings, road infrastructure, tourism, or nature 
preservation. In one instance, she argues with her colleague from 
the Agricultural Agency about the best possible way to utilise fallow 
land. Food security is indeed essential — and agriculture, there -
fore, should be a solution, but so should the protection of forests, 
watersheds, and wildlife in the surrounding area. The current spa -
tial plan has not seriously taken the environment into consideration, 
and Fitri wishes that there were a grand design for environmental 
planning that would be on top of every development plan in the 
region. While in Europe, for instance, a multifunctional agricul -
ture (one that integrates biodiversity and nature preservation) can 
become a beneficial scheme, Indonesia needs a stricter, top-  down 
solution to Fitri’ s dilemma: one purpose for one patch of land. 
The idea seems straightforward, but Fitri overlooks the complexity 
behind a simple environmental grand design — piling up data, spa -
tial plans, development goals, and project proposals one on top of the 
other, as well as connecting to a massive network of stakeholders. It 
would have been easier to let spatial planning do its work and focus 
on individual projects, assessing their environmental impacts and 
ways to mitigate these impacts. Yet, she knows that less economically 
appealing land-  use projects such as agriculture and food produc -
tion or nature reserves would have gone unnoticed amidst larger 
development projects such as mining, manufacturing, or real estate. 
So, a grand design for an environmental management plan makes 
sense. What Fitri and many like her in the environmental or planning 
offices are facing is a novel approach to agri-  environmental govern -
ance that may or may not work, but is (designed to be) profound and 
transformative nonetheless. 
  
8 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Everyday governance as framing
These snapshots from the daily lives of these two fictional human 
actors, Nicolas and Fitri, and the destiny of the non-  human soya bean 
Novelina  and Harbin , are illustrative of the many complex relations 
in which individuals (both humans and non-  humans) find themselves 
in the context of the governance of environmental issues within agri -
culture and food production. An everyday perspective on govern -
ance begins with this messiness of individual situations and the many 
relations that characterise them. Starting from a field of wheat, a soya 
bean, or lines on a map, uncountable ramifications connect the many 
actors and elements involved in the making of public policies, certi -
fication schemes, environmental plans, and other endeavours aimed 
at steering agriculture and food systems towards more sustainable 
and desirable futures. These intense sets of relations can be usefully 
understood as AEG assemblages, and this is one of the main points we 
will demonstrate in this book.
Diverse regulations, schemes, and actions come together and 
merge in the everyday. From these encounters, localised practices, 
specific networks, and practical norms emerge in the process of inter -
action, translation, and reinterpretation that has been called “everyday 
governance” by anthropologists such as Agrawal and Gibson (1999)  
and Blundo ( Blundo, 2002 ; Blundo & Le Meur, 2009 ). Consequently, 
an everyday perspective examines how AEG is produced through 
repeated interaction between diverse human actors and other elem -
ents constituting an AEG assemblage. From an everyday perspective, 
governance is a whole in which individuals are entangled and diverse 
categories are fused together. There is no clear separation between the 
everyday experience of public policy schemes and private standards; 
the connections that develop around soya traverse national and sec -
toral boundaries; the attempt to reorganise planning through data 
involves not only multi-  sectoral coordination but also inter-  regional 
governance. Here the everyday perspective rejoins “an emergent the -
orisation of assemblage [in the AEG literature]—  never fully defined 
and bounded, but always seeking to destabilise existing categories and 
constraints on the multiplicity of actors, power and process” ( Forney 
et al., 2018 : 10).
The original inspiration for this book can be found in the authors’ 
previous research on AEG practices that led to the identification of 
several weaknesses and limitations in the way our current societies  
 
   
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  9
develop answers to agri-  environmental issues and challenges. Drawing 
on long-  term fieldwork and research in Switzerland, we could, for 
instance, identify three issues in the current AEG panoply developed 
in this country, but also in a more global context: “an enduring dis -
connection between the main steps in the food production; the lack of 
new knowledge creation among the actors involved in the reality of 
agri-  environmental practices; and the lack of autonomy in a very con -
trolled food system” ( Forney, 2016 : 2).
By moving away from “classical approaches” to governance, this 
book argues that thinking through an everyday-   and assemblage-  
theory-  informed approach can help us, in a practical sense, solve 
issues around bureaucratisation, silo thinking, linear thinking, rigid 
goal-  oriented approach, and other recurring problems in governance 
(Ferguson, 1994 ). In Chapter 3  of this book, for instance, we dem  -
onstrate how unpredictability and uncertainty should be seen as an 
integral part of governance, which can be well comprehended and 
anticipated if we shy away from a linear way of thinking about cause 
and effect. Consequently, this leads us to rethink the very concept of 
change and transformation, as elaborated further in Chapter 5 . An 
everyday perspective takes us beyond the bureaucratic and command-  
control approach to governance, by understanding that agency and 
power lie not within the (powerful) actors but distributed across human 
and non-  human actors, as well as through their complex relations. In 
practice, this viewpoint enables us to comprehend the diverse ways 
governance is directed: top down, bottom up, sideways, and across 
sectors. Chapter 4  explores this in more detail.
While the everyday perspective enables us to start our investi -
gation into AEG from a different point of departure, we also need a 
different way of thinking about relations that build into governance. 
As mentioned earlier, our alternative comprehension of uncertain -
ties, agency, power, and change pivots around assemblage thinking, 
which opens new possibilities for thinking differently of problems and 
responses.
Reframing everyday governance as an assemblage
Assemblage has become a very popular word in academic writing for 
some years now. However, this often comes with a superficial level 
of engagement with what it could mean at the level of theory and 
how this theory can nurture practices and action in the “real world”.   
  
10 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Most of the time, “assemblage” or “assembling” is used to refer to any 
“collection of things”, and Buchanan (2021 : 3) pertinently questions 
the very point of using a concept for such a vague idea. Hertz (2016)  
also questioned this passion for fancy concepts in the literature, often 
hiding, indeed, quite simple ideas. However, both authors, in their 
ways, defend a more productive and useful activation of concepts. 
Buchanan sets out to defend the value of a theory of assemblage by 
engaging deeply with the work of Deleuze and Guattari. Hertz gives 
examples where concepts and theorisation are actually producing ana -
lyses that would be difficult to develop without them.
In this book, we are closer to Hertz’s take on the use of the 
concepts. Following a “pragmatic” conception of social theory as 
“a collection of generalizing tricks” ( Becker, 1998 : 12), we suggest 
moving the focus from a “theory of assemblage”—  even if we will 
draw on authors such as Buchanan, who actually engaged in funda -
mental theorisations—  to analytical explorations around the uses and 
efficacy of assemblage as a conceptual framing. From this perspec -
tive, theoretical constructs and concepts are not a goal or achievement 
in themselves, but only “something we need in order to get our work 
done” ( Becker, 1998 : 12). Concepts allow us to engage better with 
the messiness and complexity of the social, and “to come to more 
accurate, and not simply more interesting, accounts of the world we 
live in” ( Hertz, 2016 : 156). To build such a “pragmatic” assemblage 
approach is somehow counterintuitive, given the highly abstract and 
theoretical nature of the seminal work by Deleuze and Guattari ( 1988 ) 
on assemblage. Fortunately, many authors have contributed to the 
process and translated their seminal thoughts into more operational 
and structured propositions. This stance on theory is not that far away 
from what Deleuze himself says in dialogue with Foucault, where he 
calls theory a box of tools, emphasising its need to be useful and func -
tional (cf. Buchanan, 2021 : 7).
Let us consider that an assemblage describes an entity as a com -
plex set of lines and relations between heterogeneous elements, which 
are all interconnected. This assemblage has no real centre. Its elem -
ents are not hierarchically organised and often belong simultaneously 
to other assemblages. This assemblage is, therefore, connected to 
others through these multiple belongings. It crosses over scales and 
distances, as do the connections it is made of. It has no a priori geo -
graphical or institutional boundaries. In some ways, this assemblage 
has no definite beginning or end. As Anna Tsing (2015: 83)  puts it, an  
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  11
assemblage is “an open-  ended entanglement of ways of being”. At the 
same time, assemblage as a concept has to refer to irreducible wholes 
in order to replace more efficiently essentialising totalities, such as 
the state or the market ( DeLanda, 2016 : 11–  13). The irreducibility 
and the open-  ended nature that characterise assemblages are easier to 
combine than we might think at first. Indeed, there is no need to know 
precisely all the pieces of a whole to start exploring its properties. In 
fact, an assemblage approach is more interested in tracking lines of 
relations than in building boundaries or adding up all existing elem -
ents one by one.
Any assemblage consists of elements (humans and non-  humans) 
that are physically attached and held together. This is what Deleuze 
and Guattari refer to as a machinic assemblage. However, this 
machinic assemblage also intertwines with an expression of meanings 
and desires through the becoming of the assemblage, referred to 
as an assemblage of enunciation. To this, an assemblage approach 
repositions the question of what something or someone is as produced 
by its/  her/ his inclusion within a set of interactions and relations. In this 
sense, elements or individuals are expressions of multiplicities—  they 
are made of their multiple belongings. Equally, who or what someone/  
something “is” can be understood when we consider the multiplicities 
in which he/  she/ it participates. In Deleuze and Guattari’s words:
There are no individual statements, there never are. Every statement 
is the product of a machinic assemblage, in other words, of col -
lective agents of enunciation (take “collective agents” to mean 
not peoples or societies but multiplicities). The proper name ( nom 
propre ) does not designate an individual: it is on the contrary when 
the individual opens up to the multiplicities pervading him or her, 
at the outcome of the most severe operation of depersonalization, 
that he or she acquires his or her true proper name.
(1988 : 37)
This echoes the idea of emergence , which is central to what Urry 
calls the complexity turn to which assemblage approaches, and 
other Deleuzian theorisations, are related ( Urry, 2005 ). The proper -
ties of an assemblage are produced by the interactions between its 
parts and therefore are always more than the addition of the prop -
erties of its parts ( DeLanda, 2016 : 9). Connections and relations are 
unstable things. Therefore, assemblages need continuous effort to be   
12 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
maintained, stabilised, or “territorialised” (in the metaphorical sense 
used by Deleuze and Guattari, with no relation to geographical terri -
tories). Territorialisation  (which consists of a concurrent process of 
de-  and reterritorialisation) refers to a cognitive act of coordination, 
involving continuous weakening and reinforcing processes within an 
entity. In the book Anti-  Oedipus  (1983 ), Deleuze and Guattari refer 
to a territory as a conceptual environment (not necessarily a phys -
ical space) that facilitates stable social relations, but whose boundaries 
invariably change as an assemblage takes shape. An assemblage is 
therefore ephemeral and only being stable through “a continuous pro -
cess to create a quasi-  stable state” ( Dwiartama & Piatti, 2016 : 157).
For the same reason, assemblages are always prone to change 
and subject to transforming forces. Those forces are brought in by 
its elements that push and pull the whole assemblage along lines of 
flight  (and the concurrent lines of articulation ), creating “movements 
of deterritorialisation” (and reterritorialisation) ( Deleuze & Guatarri, 
1988 ), or by previously external elements that join the assemblage. 
In other words, an assemblage approach pays attention not only to 
how things are organised and connected but also, and maybe above 
all, to the processes of change and stabilisation at work. As Dittmer 
(2014: 388)  puts it, this dynamism “means that a range of contingent 
futures is always possible”. An assemblage is not only what is in the 
present time. It is also what it tends towards, what it might become. 
It is made of the whole set of forces trying to reshape it. In this sense, 
assemblages participate in an ontology of multiplicities and future 
possibilities.
Everyday governance: from instruments to assemblages
In order to operationalise the theoretical framing offered by assem -
blage thinking, there is a need for more empirical concepts. We suggest 
drawing on the political sociology of governance, inspired notably by 
a “tools approach” to public policies ( Salamon & Lund, 1989 ), and 
looking at AEG assemblages through the description and analysis of 
its instrumentation ( Lascoumes & Le Galès, 2007 ), expanding the use 
of the concept also to other types of governance practices, not only 
public policies. This means using a broad definition of governance 
“instruments” as organised sets of rules, good practices, metrologies, 
and procedures, articulated and developed in order to exercise 
social control over a targeted population and to influence practices.   
 
 
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  13
Approaching AEG assemblages through instruments means identi -
fying practices that form an identified instrument, while focusing on 
how it interacts with and connects to other governance instruments in 
a wider governance assemblage. Instruments are fractions of a gov -
ernance assemblage, they can be used as a necessary framing and 
focus to develop an analysis. They offer a starting point from which 
the multiple relations making the assemblage can be traced, and its 
complexity can be reconstructed. Nevertheless, these fragments are 
always understood as elements of a more abstract whole, through the 
lens of their relations with other instruments and actors.
While an assemblage follows no real boundaries and crosses over 
any pre-  accepted categories of governance, instruments are attached 
to institutions and tend to reproduce existing social categories, at least 
on the face of it. For example, a specific direct payment scheme is 
framed as a public-  policy instrument, as part of a state-  based agri -
cultural policy. However, looking at it from an assemblage perspec -
tive will probably reveal how it interacts with other governance tools, 
some offering obvious connections (other aspects of the same agri -
cultural policies) and others being more distant (e.g. environmental 
standards set by retailers), as well as integrating the role of multiple 
agents who help to translate an instrument into concrete practices.
The analysis of the instrument explores how its design and materi -
ality shape the interplay between the multiple agents, how those 
agents use it and reinterpret it in their daily practice, and how different 
socio-  economic and political logics develop through these multiple 
interactions. An instrument develops within a given network of actors, 
creating new ties and re-  establishing older ones, but its effects might 
spill over these limits. An instrument is generally developed for a 
specific task, with a specific goal, but as Lascoumes and Le Galès 
(2007 : 1) point out, “[instruments] produce specific effects, inde -
pendently of the objective pursued (the aims ascribed to them)”. The 
final objective cannot be to fully understand an AEG assemblage in 
its totality. Indeed, as we suggested, there are no real ways to define 
fixed boundaries, to delineate clearly an assemblage, as it is always 
moving and changing, and because the relations it is made up of are 
never really ending. Rather, looking at AEG assemblages through 
AEG instruments aims to reposition specific practices in their wider 
assemblage context. It offers a way to look at elements, while acknow -
ledging that they cannot be understood outside the relations they are 
made of. 
14 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Looking at what is happening within and beyond an instrument 
and its application from an assemblage perspective means acknow -
ledging a double movement: first, the diverse effects resulting from 
the application of an instrument are products of a wider assemblage 
and cannot be understood from the instrument perspective only. 
Second, instruments and their evolution affect the wider assemblage 
in which they participate in relation—  tensions, synergies, influences, 
etc.—  with other elements of this assemblage. These theoretical con -
siderations are of great importance at a more practical level of gov -
ernance: they imply that no isolated instrument will offer a solution 
to problems by itself. Innovations in the design of governance tools 
and instruments will certainly impact the wider governance assem -
blage, but will also be shaped and transformed by its insertion within 
a complex set of governance practices. Therefore, innovation in 
governance should include from the beginning this interactive, and 
context-  specific, dimension. Similarly, the expectations for changes 
and transformations resulting from the governance action should be 
distributed across a changing and evolving assemblage and not only 
focus on the one new practice that may be introduced.
Consequently, analysing and assessing the effects and outcomes 
of a specific instrument as part of a wider ever-  changing assem -
blage implies looking beyond direct and clear impacts and opening 
the perspective to more subtle, indirect, and sinuous lines of effects, 
for example in forms of small changes. A good way to do so is to 
adopt an empirical approach to governance from the perspective of 
the agents’ everyday lives within the governance assemblage. Human 
and non-  human actors experience the assemblage as a whole. Beyond 
individual instruments and their design and materiality, localised 
practices, specific networks, and practical norms emerge in a process 
of interaction, translation, and reinterpretation that anthropologists 
have called “everyday governance” ( Agrawal & Gibson, 1999 ; 
Blundo, 2002 ; Blundo & Le Meur, 2009 ). Such an approach is based 
on ethnographic methods used to understand holistically what gov -
ernance practices produce in real life. The objective has generally 
been to understand how transversal logics of governance develop in 
specific contexts and to pay more attention to how people play with 
rules, interpret and divert them—  in other words, how they engage 
with governance. In association with an assemblage perspective, the 
everyday governance becomes a way to anchor specific instruments 
within a wider governance assemblage. This grounded approach to  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  15
the governance analysis refers to a framing that considers governance 
more as actions rather than ideas. Looking at AEG practices through 
an assemblage lens means highlighting this openness and the embed -
dedness in wider assemblages; it means focusing not so much on the 
specificities of the elements but rather on the multiple connections that 
make them exist in the whole.
How we use case studies in this book
With this perspective in mind, it is therefore necessary for us to build 
our argument through empirical case studies based on an ethnography 
of everyday lives. Just as the three ethnofictions  given previously set 
the scene for an everyday engagement with different forms of AEG, 
we aim to mobilise three specific cases that illustrate how assemblage 
thinking may offer a different lens to how we normally perceive, and 
practice, governance. The three cases—  an agri-  environmental certifi -
cation scheme in Switzerland (IP-  Suisse), a large strategic programme 
towards soybean production in the Danube river basin (Donau Soja), 
and the introduction of a new environmental management plan in 
Indonesia (RPPLH)—  offer a broad range of geographies, scales, focal 
points, and typologies. For one thing, this diversity reflects one of 
the AEG practices currently implemented globally. Let us, however, 
make it clear that our cases by no means offer a generic pattern of 
governance, nor represent the globally diverse governance practices. 
They are also far from being seen as good practices, although some 
may prove to be more successful than others.
The rationale behind the choice of our case studies stems from 
our long-  term research work and ethnographic engagement with the 
farmers, government agencies, business sectors, technocrats, and 
grassroots movements that shape the whole stories of this everyday 
governance ( Forney, 2016 ; Forney et al., 2018 , 2023 ; Bentia & Forney, 
2018 ; Bentia, 2021 a, 2021b; Dwiartama, 2018 ; Forney & Dwiartama, 
2023 ). We reflect not only on their experiences and viewpoints but 
also on how they help us navigate between theory and empirics. In 
a way, these cases are partly illustrative of, but also the source of 
inspiration for, how we build our deeper understandings of assem -
blage thinking. Although previous studies use assemblage thinking 
to highlight some of the key aspects of our cases (path dependency, 
human–  nonhuman relations, Deleuzian society of control), it is in 
this book that we seek to build a rather comprehensive description of  
  
    
16 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
the governance assemblages and, by doing so, experiment with novel 
ways of working with assemblage theory.
What is also important to note here is that, as a methodological 
tool, assemblage thinking relies on “description” as a particular kind 
of “mapping”, as a cartographic exercise that directs our analysis to 
the elements and relations performed at a certain moment in time and 
in a particular context ( Anderson et al., 2012 ). In using assemblage 
as a descriptor , our cases demonstrate that, although we can always 
understand any entity through its relationality (and therefore as an 
assemblage), not all “relational understanding” can be claimed to 
represent assemblage thinking. For instance, we avoid seeing relations 
as necessarily stable, or that the parts constitute a whole—  a system, 
if you will (as with systems theory). When we talk about IP-  Suisse, 
Donau Soja, or RPPLH, we do not see them as examples of a homo -
genous or singular body of organisation that reinforces its bound -
aries, but instead as “the bringing together of heterogeneous entities 
into some form of temporary relation” ( Anderson et al., 2012 : 177). 
Insofar as we do not look at our cases as best practices, we are for -
tunate to capture a significant number of characteristics (messiness, 
unpredictability, non-  linearity, ephemerality of relations) that make a 
learning case for assemblage thinking, and can nurture, we believe, 
new ways of doing governance. This helps us to demonstrate how 
these characteristics participate in changing elements, relations, 
and processes, and also how they are essential to, and define, the 
“mechanics” of the assemblage.
This leads us to understand assemblage as ethos  (Anderson et al., 
2012 ; Adey, 2012 ). Assemblage thinking helps us to engage with 
governance in a specific way, one that brings practical implications 
too. Just like theories of care brought a turn towards the politics of 
care and non-  representation in feminist social theories ( Puig de La 
Bellacasa, 2015 ), there is a moral imperative about how AEG ought 
to be practised that brings an emancipatory turn to agency ( Stirling, 
2015 ). Assemblage thinking gives a voice to those everyday actors that 
are not so much “important” decision-  makers, but who do stretch and 
shape the boundaries of the governance assemblage nonetheless (see 
Chapter 4 ). It also enables us to move beyond a path-  dependent logic 
and embrace the unpredictability of outcomes as the norm, rather than 
the exception, in the current state of environmental governance. In 
Chapter 6 , we therefore bring that “ethos of engagement that attends 
to the messiness and complexity of phenomena” ( Adey, 2012 : 198) by  
 
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  17
shifting, among others, from an objective to relational measurement, 
from centralised to distributed responsibilities, and from prediction to 
unpredictability and ensuing reorientation to other governance targets.
Structure of the book
This book, therefore, synthesises our way of rethinking governance 
and transformation in the environment, agriculture, and food systems, 
through the lens of assemblage. While through our empirical cases we 
engage more deeply with the theory (thus using assemblage as a con -
cept and descriptor), our aim is to offer ways to mobilise our cases as 
a useful insight into how we can co-  construct the future of governance 
practices. In each of the empirical chapters (  chapters 2 – 5), we tell the 
stories of IP-  Suisse, Donau Soja, and RPPLH intertwiningly, while 
highlighting the convergence that leads to a certain aspect of assem -
blage thinking, but simultaneously the divergence that indicates how 
versatile and fluid an assemblage can be.
In Chapter 2 , we illustrate what our cases look like when we see 
them as assemblages. The chapter moves from a more structural 
depiction of the entities at the start of the chapter to a more fluid, 
boundary-  less set of relations among heterogeneous elements at the 
end. By unravelling these messy entanglements, we make our case 
that governance is not as strict and straightforward as it is too often 
perceived. While we build our case studies, we also reintroduce some 
of the language of assemblage thinking, including lines of flight, lines 
of articulation, territorialisation, and multiplicity.
Chapter 3  elaborates on the ontological consequences of employing 
assemblage thinking for our cases. Instead of focusing on the success 
and failure of a certain governance programme, we look at how the 
unpredictability of effects is an integral part of an assemblage. We use 
notions like lines of flight, overflows, and un-  intentionality to show 
that what emerges from governance practices goes far beyond their 
explicit goals, and that the question is not so much one of achievement. 
The cases illustrate how the unintended effects of an assemblage may 
help in bringing a new and emergent set of relations. When we look 
through the lens of assemblage, we may learn to anticipate unpredict -
able effects and be more adaptive to the ephemerality of a governance 
assemblage.
What is also critical in the use of assemblage thinking is how it 
offers a different lens for understanding agency and power. Chapter 4    
18 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
discusses this in more detail, shifting away from a structural (and even 
Foucauldian) sense of agency to the interplay between individual, col -
lective, and distributive agency. What connects this notion of power/  
agency is desire, emanating not only from human actors but also from 
non- human elements and even the assemblage itself. Desire drives 
elements to either cofunction or break away (or both). In our cases, 
not only does agency shape an assemblage, but the assemblage itself 
shapes how individual agency is manifested, such as through the 
power of a document, a label, meetings, or data.
Both the unpredictability of effects and the shaping of desires 
lead us to question what change is from an assemblage perspective. 
In Chapter 5 , we see change as a norm—  where stability is instead 
the exception. However, we do not see change (and transformation) 
through a unilinear path. We understand it in its diverse trajectories 
within a space of possibility, which emerges from the encounter of the 
properties, capacities, and desires characterising an assemblage. This 
helps us clarify what unpredictability means: while it is impossible to 
fully predict change, some level of anticipation is still possible as an 
assemblage does not follow randomly in any trajectory. Here, we raise 
the notion of attractor. An attractor guides change and the evolution 
of the assemblage in interplay with desires. Multiple attractors gener -
ally influence the course of change, forming a basin of attraction. Our 
cases thus show that by identifying these attractors, we may be able to 
partly anticipate the transformation pathway an AEG assemblage will 
follow in the future.
Our last chapter ( Chapter 6 ) serves as a pragmatic implication 
for using assemblage thinking and everyday governance. How can 
we mobilise all of this understanding of assemblage in the construc -
tion of future governance practices? Although we refrain from pre -
scribing a guideline, we identify four principles as points of departure 
for building a new form of governance. Here, we expand from the 
reflexive governance paradigm, as a very important basis, to propose 
a governance of emergence . This form of governance shifts towards 
redistributing responsibilities, embracing relational monitoring 
methods, experimenting with spaces of possibilities, and moving 
away from prediction to targeting attractors.
Our book seems to leave little doubt that the second decade of the 
twenty-  first century is marked by a wider awareness of the weighty 
dark shadow of past human actions. This realisation has created an 
impulse for action manifested in terms of eager planning for brighter  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  19
near futures: constellations for biodiversity (as shown in the case of 
IP- Suisse), for an alternate pathways in global agriculture (as in the 
case of Donau Soja), and for a new understanding of data and coordin -
ation (as in RPPLH). The present, though, is characterised by far less 
clarity of purpose and unequivocal action trajectories, where both the 
visible and invisible dynamics ensue. Assemblage thinking may help 
us navigate our everyday practices of governance through this uncer -
tain and unpredictable future.
Notes
 1 Nicolas and Oliver are fictional characters built on the basis of Swiss 
farmers’ real accounts and stories about their own experiences and lives.
 2 Likewise, Fitri is the personification of many government officials that are 
at the forefront of a transformation in the realm of environmental policies 
in Indonesia.
References
Adey, P. (2012). How to engage? Assemblage as ethos/  ethos as assemblage. 
Dialogues in Human Geography  2(2): 198–  201.
Agrawal, A., & Gibson, C. C. (1999). Enchantment and disenchantment: the 
role of community in natural resource conservation. World Development  
27(4): 629–  649.
Anderson, B., Kearnes, M., McFarlane, C., & Swanton, D. (2012). On 
assemblages and geography. Dialogues in Human Geography  2(2): 171–  189.
Arnouts, R., & Arts, B. (2009). Environmental governance failure: the “dark 
side” of an essentially optimistic concept. In B. Arts, A. Lagendijk, & H. 
van Houtum (Eds.). The Desoriented State: Shifts in Governmentality, 
Territoriality and Governance . Berlin: Springer.
Bain, C., Deaton, B., & Busch, L. (2005). Reshaping the agri-  food system: the 
role of standards, standard-  makers and third-  party certifiers. In V . Higgins 
& G. Lawrence (Eds.). Agricultural Governance: Globalization and the 
New Politics of Regulation  (pp. 71–  83). Abingdon: Routledge.
Becker, H. S. (1998). Tricks of the Trade: How to Think about Your Research 
While You’re Doing it . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.
Bentia, D. (2021a). Towards reconfiguration in European agriculture: ana -
lyzing dynamics of change through the lens of the Donau Soja organiza -
tion. Sociologia Ruralis  61(4): 663–  680. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
20 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Bentia, D. (2021b). Accountability beyond measurement: the role of meetings 
in shaping governance instruments and governance outcomes in food 
systems through the lens of the Danube Soy organization. Journal of Rural 
Studies  88: 50–  59.
Bentia, D., & Forney, J. (2018). Beyond soyisation: Donau Soja as assem -
blage. In J. Forney, C. Rosin, & H. Campbell (Eds.). Agri-  Environmental 
Governance as an Assemblage: Multiplicity, Power, and Transformation  
(pp. 177–  192). London and New York: Routledge.
Blundo, G. (2002). Editorial: La gouvernance, entre technique de 
gouvernement et outil d’exploration empirique. Bulletin de l’AP AD [En 
ligne]  23– 24: 2–  10.
Blundo, G., & Le Meur, P. Y . (Eds.). (2009). The Governance of Daily Life in 
Africa: Ethnographic Explorations of Public and Collective Services  (V ol. 
19). Leiden: Brill.
Brundtland, G. H. (1989). Global change and our common future. 
Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development  
31(5): 16–  43.
Buchanan, I. (2021). Assemblage Theory and Method . London/  
New York: Bloomsbury.
Callon, M. (2017). L’emprise des marchés: Comprendre leur fonctionnement 
pour pouvoir les changer . Paris: La Découverte.
Carson, R. (1962). Silent spring . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.
CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). (2014). Global Biodiversity 
Outlook 4 . Montréal: Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity.
DeLanda, M. (2016). Assemblage Theory . Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1983). Anti-  Oedipus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . 1972. Trans. Robert Hurley, Mark Seem, and Helen R. Lane. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guatarri, F. (1988). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . London: Athlone.
Dittmer, J. (2014). Geopolitical assemblages and complexity. Progress in 
Human Geography  38(3): 385–  401.
Dwiartama, A. (2018). From ‘disciplinary societies’ to ‘societies of control’: an 
historical narrative of agri-  environmental governance in Indonesia. In J. 
Forney, C. Rosin, & H. Campbell (Eds.). Agri-  Environmental Governance 
as an Assemblage: Multiplicity, Power, and Transformation  (pp. 91–  104). 
London and New York: Routledge.
Dwiartama, A., & Piatti, C. (2016). Assembling local, assembling food 
security. Agriculture and Human Values  33(1): 153–  164.
Ferguson, J. (1994). The Anti-  politics Machine: Development, Depoliticization, 
and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho . Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective  21
Forney, J. (2016). Blind spots in agri-  environmental governance: some 
reflections and suggestions from Switzerland. Review of Agricultural, Food 
and Environmental Studies  97(1): 1–  13.
Forney, J., & Dwiartama, A. (2023). The project, the everyday, and reflexivity 
in sociotechnical agri-  food assemblages: proposing a conceptual model of 
digitalisation. Agriculture and Human Values  40(2): 441–  454.
Forney, J., Dwiartama, A., & Bentia, D. (2023). Everyday digitalization in 
food and agriculture: introduction to the symposium. Agriculture and 
Human Values  40(2): 417–  421.
Forney, J., Rosin, C., & Campbell, H. (Eds.). (2018). Agri-  environmental 
Governance as an Assemblage: Multiplicity, Power, and Transformation . 
London and New York: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1979). “The birth of bio-  politics”–  Michel Foucault’s lecture 
at the Collège de France on neo-  liberal governmentality. Economy and 
Society  30(2): 190–  207.
Hatanaka, M., Bain, C., & Busch, L. (2005). Third-  party certification in the 
global agrifood system. Food Policy  30(3): 354–  369.
Hertz, E. (2016). Pimp my fluff: a Thousand Plateaus and other theoretical 
extravaganzas. Anthropological Theory  16(2–  3): 146–  159.
Higgins, V ., & Lockie, S. (2002). Re-  discovering the social: neo-  liberalism 
and hybrid practices of governing in rural natural resource management. 
Journal of Rural Studies  18(4): 419–  428.
IPCC. (2019). Summary for policymakers. In P. R. Shukla, et al. (Eds.). 
Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report on Climate Change, 
Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food 
Security, and Greenhouse Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems  (pp. 3–  36). 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Secretariate.
Lamine, C. (2011). Transition pathways towards a robust ecologization of 
agriculture and the need for system redesign. Cases from organic farming 
and IPM. Journal of Rural Studies  27(2): 209–  219.
Lascoumes, P., & Le Galès, P. (2007). Introduction: understanding public 
policy through its instruments—  from the nature of instruments to the soci -
ology of public policy instrumentation. Governance  20(1): 1–  21.
Li, T. M. (2007a). Practices of assemblage and community forest manage -
ment. Economy and Society  36(2): 263–  293.
Li, T. M. (2007b). The Will to Improve: Governmentality, Development, and 
the Practice of Politics . Durham: Duke University Press.
Lockie, S., & Higgins, V . (2007). Roll-  out neoliberalism and hybrid practices 
of regulation in Australian agri-  environmental governance. Journal of 
Rural Studies  23(1): 1–  11.
Loconto, A. (2015). Assembling governance: the role of standards in the 
Tanzanian tea industry. Journal of Cleaner Production  107: 64–  73. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22 Everyday AEG and assemblage perspective
Ong, A., & Collier, S. J. (Eds.). (2005). Global Assemblages: Technology, 
Politics and Ethics as Anthropological Problems . Malden/  Oxford/  
Victoria: Blackwell Publishing.
Potter, C., & Tilzey, M. (2007). Agricultural multifunctionality, environmental 
sustainability and the WTO: resistance or accommodation to the neoliberal 
project for agriculture? Geoforum  38(6): 1290–  1303.
Puig De La Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: technoscientific 
futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science  45(5): 691–  716.
Rose, N. (1996). Governing “advanced” liberal democracies. In A. Barry, T. 
Osborne, & N. Rose (Eds.). Foucault and Political Reason: Liberalism, 
Neo-  Liberalism and Rationalities of Government  (pp. 37–  64). Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rosin, C., Campbell, H., & Reid, J. (2017). Metrology and sustainability: using 
sustainability audits in New Zealand to elaborate the complex politics of 
measuring. Journal of Rural Studies  52: 90–  99.
Salamon, L. M., & Lund, M. S. (1989). The tools approach: basic analytics. 
In L. M. Salamon (Ed.). Beyond Privatization: The Tools of Government 
Action  (pp. 23–  50). Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.
Stenson, K., & Watt, P. (1999). Governmentality and the death of the social? 
A discourse analysis of local government texts in Southeast England. 
Urban Studies  36(1): 189–  201.
Stirling, A. (2015). Emancipating transformations: from controlling ‘the 
transition’ to culturing plural radical progress. In I. Scoones, M. Leach, 
& P. Newell (Eds.). The Politics of Green Transformations  (pp. 54–  67). 
New York/  London: Routledge.
Tsing, A. L. (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility 
of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Urry, J. (2005). The complexity turn. Theory, Culture & Society  22(5): 1–  14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-2
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.2  Heterogeneous governance 
assemblages
Mapping the cases
Introduction: instruments that hold things together and the 
importance of relations
Throughout history, people have been building and using instruments 
or apparatuses to govern, control, and discipline others. In the con -
text of contemporary agri-  environmental governance (AEG), these 
instruments can take many guises. They can manifest as regula -
tory decisions, scientific documents, organisations, or even tech -
nology, machinery, and crops. Actors such as governments, agencies, 
NGOs, and diverse organisations typically build these instruments 
in the expectation that other actors—  often farmers, businesses, or 
consumers—  will follow through and behave in ways that align with 
certain goals. It is often difficult to judge what the original funda -
mental intention was behind an instrument. Generally, instruments 
emerge from a diversity of intentions and motivations that shape the 
governance assemblage around them. These instruments can have 
different geographical scopes, from international programmes to local 
actions, depending on the actors involved in their development. They 
also vary in terms of the approaches and logics they rely on: regu -
latory frameworks, financial incentives, knowledge building, and 
accountability schemes, to name a few. The three cases that we dis -
cuss throughout the chapters in this book—  IP- Suisse in Switzerland, 
the Donau Soja project in the European Union, and the Environmental 
Management and Protection Plan (RPPLH) in Indonesia—  are 
assembled around such instruments.
However, despite narratives and visions of how they will address 
specific agri-  environmental issues, we have found that these 
instruments unfold something deep and rhizomatic. They open up  
  
24 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
complex relationships that were previously hidden or unmanifested, 
and bring a heterogeneity of actors—  human and non-  human—  in an 
interweaving of assemblages, leading to continuous negotiations, 
conflicts, and dynamics between actors. Instruments and apparatuses 
are key elements of a Foucauldian view of governance. Here, we shift 
our lens to a Deleuzian view—  one that looks at governance as an effect 
of heterogeneous elements that are constantly negotiating, so much so 
that it is something that is always becoming—  being both ephemeral 
and, at the same time, sedentary—  and whose effects are often uncer -
tain and unpredictable. We therefore pose a critical question in rela -
tion to each of our cases in response to the AEG practised in these 
cases: what will happen if we look at instruments through the lens of 
assemblage?
In exploring the three cases, this chapter looks at the diversity of 
“framings” of AEG, mapping the aims and scope of each case in rela -
tion to environmental issues in the countries/  regions concerned. We 
underline first that the three cases should not be seen as representing 
any categorisation of AEG, and they stand on their own as unique case 
studies amidst the diversity of AEG practices in different parts of the 
world. They do, however, share a common thread in the sense that 
what holds them together gravitates around different manifestations 
of environmental crises that actors in the three cases try to address. 
These crises provoked the actors into reacting, which then led to the 
introduction of new elements, approaches, or instruments in the ways 
they practised AEG. These instruments, as we later illustrate, work in 
unprecedented ways and unravel new relationships involving wider, 
heterogeneous, actors. This is what we refer to as heterogeneous gov -
ernance assemblages, and aforementioned is how the description of 
each assemblage unfolds.
An assemblage is not any grouping together of things, and it is 
not a static apparatus and neither is it a map that represents a terri -
tory. Assemblage is more a verb than it is a noun, and more like the 
grammar that creates a language. Assemblage thinking pays careful 
attention to how things are related, to connections, but more import -
antly, it concentrates on various dynamics and processes that tra -
verse the social. Assemblage thinking emphasises the constant efforts 
needed to make assemblages exist, evolve, or dissolve. Deleuze 
and Guattari use a rich vocabulary to underline the ever-  changing 
character of assemblages. In particular, metaphors such as “molar 
lines”, “molecular lines”, and “lines of flight” serve their intention  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  25
to evidence processes of composition (as well as decomposition) of 
assemblages and the dynamic interactions with the various elements 
at play. “Unlike a point, lines are always an articulation, bisection, 
boundary or breach of a wider field. They are compositional, implying 
relation and connection” ( Windsor, 2015 : 157). Indeed, Deleuze refers 
to molar lines as relations and sees them as defining assemblages in 
so far as these hold elements together. Molecular lines refer to those 
processes which allow assemblages to adapt and change. Lines of 
flight support processes of change but they act in a more transforma -
tive and radical manner.
In this first section we introduce our case studies and examples of 
AEG, starting from the molar—  what makes the assemblage cohere. 
We do so by organising the complex sets of actors we met during our 
fieldwork around specific instruments of governance. Thus, we start 
by delineating the assemblages we will explore in this book. We do 
this by highlighting how these assemblages came to be and progres -
sively formed around a farmer-  led certification scheme, a network of 
public actors committed to European soya production, and a state-  led 
environmental policy.
IP-​ Suisse: ​a​certification ​scheme​to​empower​farmers?
IP- Suisse is an abbreviation that refers to a type of agricultural 
approach—  integrated production—  and to a country—  Switzerland. 
This name was chosen by a group of farmers in the Canton of Bern, 
who in 1989 founded a new association with the objective of creating 
a label for environmentally friendly food production in Switzerland. 
The IP-  Suisse standard first developed around the notion of “integrated 
production”, which aims at reintegrating natural processes in agricul -
tural production, but in a more flexible way than the organic model. 
Integrated production is defined and standardised by Swiss law, and also 
inspired the environmental framing of the new agricultural policy at the 
end of the 1990s. Concretely, an “integrated production” approach seeks 
to balance production and economic goals with environmental aspects, 
notably in the use of chemicals (i.e. integrated pest management). IP-  
Suisse also focused its actions and communications around the pro -
motion of biodiversity on farms, a choice reflected in its logo, a red 
ladybird. In 2010, IP-  Suisse implemented a system based on “biodiver -
sity points” whose goal was to make the contributions to biodiversity 
on farms clearer—  to farmers themselves as well as consumers ( Birrer   
  
26 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
et al., 2014 ). This point system was developed in collaboration with the 
Swiss Ornithological Institute (a non-  profit foundation supported by the 
public). In order to accumulate points, IP-  Suisse farmers have to imple -
ment specific practices that foster biodiversity on their farms, such as 
building habitats for small animals (e.g. piles of stones, hedges); sowing 
old varieties (e.g. old breeds of potatoes); maintaining strips of flowery 
meadows between crops; etc. Another level of requirements is related 
to specific products that come under this label. Specifications vary 
from one product to another. For animal products, they mostly focus 
on animal welfare aspects and feeding systems (e.g. grass-  based dairy 
production). For crops, they generally limit the use of pesticides, growth 
regulators, and other chemicals. The strength of this limitation varies 
according to the type of crop, more vulnerable crops such as rapeseed, 
beetroot, or potatoes being allowed more interventions than others that 
are less sensitive to pests or disease. In 1993, the first products bearing 
the IP-  Suisse label were sold on the market. Today, the organisation 
gathers around 18,500 farmer members (out of a total of around 48,000 
Swiss farms). IP-  Suisse offers an alternative between conventional and 
organic types of production, which attracted several actors in the Swiss 
food system. As an illustration, around one-  third of the Swiss grain used 
for baking is IP-  Suisse certified.
This first introduction to IP-  Suisse as a rather successful instrument 
of AEG governance, both in terms of farmer participation and market 
share, is a fairly classical reflection of the model of a tripartite certi -
fication scheme ( Fouilleux & Loconto, 2017 ). IP-  Suisse is thus not 
only a farmers’ organisation but also a standard for agricultural pro -
duction and a label used on packaging. The certification is provided 
by a third-  party actor, ProCert, which itself is accredited. Obviously, 
the birth and development of IP-  Suisse are also part of the wider trans -
formation of the Swiss agri-  food system. The farmer organisation’s 
standard and practices evolved in constant interaction with other gov -
ernance practices and instruments led by the state, industries, and 
retailers. In this sense, it participated in and contributed to a reorgan -
isation and rearticulation of the governance of agriculture, and at the 
same time was shaped by this broader emerging AEG assemblage.
Donau​Soja:​a​network​for​rethinking ​soybeans?
Donau Soja (DS) is a multi-  actor organisation with its headquarters 
in Vienna, Austria. It was founded by a small group of like-  minded    
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  27
friends from across the agricultural soya bean sector (including farming 
associations, seed companies, businesses, etc.). It was established in 
2012 with the main goal of promoting the cultivation of soya beans in 
European regions that are favourable to it, such as the Danube river 
basin where soya was cultivated in much greater quantities in the 
past. This was seen as a way to contribute to the overarching goal of 
furthering the sustainable development of the European food system 
by reducing the dependency on supplies from other continents, along -
side reducing the environmental impacts of a range of agricultural 
practices which excluded a number of soya’s qualities. In designing 
the DS standard and certification as prime instruments in support of 
economic–  ecological goals, DS also made visible numerous and ver -
satile characteristics of this plant.
Soya beans are used as a legume crop in rotation with wheat or 
corn to support the fertility of soils; they serve as a cover crop to fix 
nitrogen in the ground; they are used as feed for livestock because 
of their rich protein content; and the oil extracted from soya beans 
is used by industries in a variety of food products. Throughout his -
tory, the fascination with the versatile characteristics of this crop kept 
growing, such that today, Europe is using 40 million tons each year 
to feed its pigs, fish, chicken, and cattle. Europe is the second-  largest 
importer of soya after China and relies on up to 94% of its supplies 
coming from the United States, Argentina, and Brazil. Numbers alone 
show their staggering growth: in terms of production volume, land 
use, and international trade, soya is among the most important crops 
in the world today. Over the past 60 years, soya-  bean production has 
increased by almost 1,000% ( Oliveira & Schneider, 201 6; WWF, 
2016 ), while the area of land cultivated with soya has more than 
quadrupled ( FAOSTAT, n.d. ; USDA, 2014 ). Globally, soya farms now 
cover 1 million km2— equivalent to the total area of France, Germany, 
Belgium, and the Netherlands combined ( WWF, 2016 ). In 2013, the 
world harvest amounted to 284 million tons gathered from 113 million 
ha (Profundo, 2015 ). Yet, such expansion has also produced massive 
overflows and, over the last two decades, businesses, farmers, and 
representatives of civil society have gradually become aware of the 
consequences of unlimited growth.
The group of 20 minds that came together to form the DS organ -
isation saw a range of possibilities for breaking with such destruc -
tive trajectories. Matthias Krön recalled the history of soya beans in 
Europe and the time when its cultivation was much more widespread   
  
  
28 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
in several European regions, and crop rotation much more present in 
agricultural practices than today. Indeed, his friend Rudolf Bühler, 
a pig farmer and founder of the rare-  pig- breeds initiative and the 
farmers’ association in Schwäbisch Hall, Germany, showed him 
how his business managed to rely only on non-  genetically modified 
soya supplies from Serbia. Thus, evidence kept calling for the right 
moment for the roots of soya beans in Europe to be unearthed. Experts 
in sustainable certification joined the group to reclaim the possibility 
of designing a standard for soya beans produced for the Danube river 
basin that was free from genetic modification, abided by strict land-  
use- change rules, banned the use of a number of herbicides for desic -
cation, and furthered fair labour conditions.
DS pioneers succeeded in enrolling an impressive number of the 
very diverse actors involved in the long value chain of soya beans all 
across Europe and beyond: from seed production to retailers, from 
ministries of agriculture to farmers, from multinational agro-  industries 
to research institutes. The diverse range of actors reflected efforts to 
design the infrastructural setup upon which new value chains could 
be built in ways that could enable the sustained uptake of soya bean 
cultivation in Europe.
However, in the case of DS, the process of unlocking the conven -
tional, well-  trodden circuits of “increasing returns” ( Arthur, 1989 ) 
and delusional unlimited extraction has been a bumpy road. Path-  
dependent processes created difficult conditions for change to break 
through and assert itself. Yet, the socio-  material traits of the crop have 
turned out to play a central role in steering the course the assemblage 
takes. Indeed, DS has set itself the goal to integrate the many benefits 
of soya into the emerging eco-  ecological market infrastructures in 
Europe. There are a number of elements that work in favour of soya 
with a European origin and for European uses.
RPPLH:​a​top-​ down ​instrument ​to​fix​the​governance ​of​the​environment?
Indonesia’s Environmental Management and Protection Plan ( Rencana 
Pengelolaan dan Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup  in Bahasa 
Indonesia , or RPPLH for short) is an instrument that helps to address 
the incongruences of Indonesia’s environmental governance. First 
introduced through the Environmental Management and Protection 
Act in 2009 ( UU 32/  2009 ), RPPLH is an ambitious government pro -
ject to formulate an all-  encompassing environmental management plan   
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  29
that subsumes all other forms of national and regional plans, including 
the widely referenced medium-  term development plans (RPJM) and 
regional spatial plans (RTRW), both of which serve as the foundations 
on which the government’s various development programmes and 
projects are established. The enactment of RPPLH also underpins the 
Indonesian government’s novel approach to the way in which business 
permits are issued. Put simply, every project proposal that poses a 
potential impact on the environment, be it public-   or private-  based, 
must be run through and assessed in reference to guidelines provided 
by RPPLH. This is a radical change to how environmental planning 
has often been conducted as, decades ago, a project proposal needed 
only a case-  by- case assessment through what is commonly known as 
an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
The establishment of RPPLH has been considered a breakthrough 
because it provides a more integrated approach to environmental gov -
ernance in Indonesia. It offers a presumably better alternative to the 
partial, fragmented, and reactive EIA, which often leads to conflicting 
and overlapping land-  use plans. To illustrate, it is not uncommon for 
an industrial development project that has passed an EIA and been 
given a project permit to, in fact, conflict with a plan to make use 
of the land as a strategic agricultural region or conservation forest. 
Comprehensive environmental planning, such as the one that RPPLH 
seeks to offer, would avoid that kind of conflict because, in theory at 
least, a region has first been assigned a function (as an agricultural, 
industrial, housing, mining, or conservation area, among others) based 
on its ecological, social, and economic characteristics. In a nutshell, 
a layperson would read an RPPLH document and find the environ -
mental properties of a single region (based on overlaid data, such as 
land cover, water capacity, type of soil, climate, population) and the 
purpose for which the region should be designated in order to main -
tain the ecological balance whilst serving a wider economic goal.
Currently, central and regional governments are developing their 
own RPPLHs. For the central government, the term is RPPLHN or 
national  environmental protection and management plan, which 
covers broad-  based planning for all the regions of Indonesia. It is 
intended as a general guideline for provinces and regencies to develop 
their regional-  level RPPLH (or RPPLHD, where D stands for Daerah , 
which literally means “region”). The Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry is the one responsible for coordinating these plans and pro -
viding technical assistance to the provincial and regional governments  
30 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
in formulating well-  rounded and scientifically rigorous RPPLHs. 
Regional governments are developing RPPLHs at different paces and 
the quality of their planning arguably varies too, although the central 
government has made serious efforts to ensure that quality standards 
for RPPLH are met—  workshops, technical assistance, and stringent 
validation processes are among prominent strategies to achieve this.
How RPPLH has unfolded as an imaginary of environmental gov -
ernance in Indonesia, and the many ways in which it gives rise to a 
new set of relationships, can be understood if one sees this not as a 
singular government project in which success is set in opposition to 
failure but rather as a complex assemblage of heterogeneous elements 
subject to diverse and sometimes antagonist forces.
Beyond isolated instruments: unfolding wider assemblages
The initial introduction of the three instruments around which we 
developed our analysis of everyday governance opens new lines 
of inquiry, new questions, and points to connections with other 
instruments and practices. The everyday perspective we adopt and its 
focus on the direct and lived experience of actors involved in govern -
ance mean looking beyond the instrument itself, which never exists in 
isolation and always participates in a broader governance assemblage. 
From this perspective, new AEG instruments, when introduced, lead to 
the articulation of new sets of relationships, in other words, the emer -
gence of new governance assemblages. Moreover, paying attention to 
the interactions between governance instruments and practices is of 
crucial importance to understanding not only the broader context in 
which an instrument unfolds but also, and crucially, how practices of 
governance are reciprocally influencing each other. Rather than situ -
ating an instrument in its governance context, the aim is to understand 
how governance as an assemblage is continuously emerging from the 
interaction between various governance practices, which in turn are 
being reshaped through these interactions with the broader govern -
ance assemblage.
In the following section, we resituate IP-  Suisse, DS, and RPPLH as 
specific instruments within broader governance assemblages. Doing 
so means, on the one hand, emphasising the spatialities and temporal -
ities that have provided the conditions for their emergence, and, on the 
other hand, showing the long chain of self-  reinforcing mechanisms that 
have shaped their development. Indeed, in order to fully understand   
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  31
how these assemblages unfold, we ought to look at how they emerged 
and shaped the configuration of actors. Looking back and retelling, 
from an assemblage perspective, the history of these three governance 
instruments requires us to move away from linear explanations and 
embrace the multiplicity of the narratives and processes that accom -
pany them across time. We are thus interested in the dynamics between 
the various elements that take part in the development of specific 
organisations, specific instruments, and particular crops because these 
underscore the fundamental dynamic nature of assemblages, namely, 
that change is the norm rather than the exception. In other words, we 
want to move away from a linear, fixed, and stable ontology of gov -
ernance, illustrating what a governance assemblage can be and how 
it looks in each of our case studies. This endeavour will allow us to 
exemplify three main features of assemblages, namely: the processes 
of change and the concept of lines of flight; the continuity in spite 
of change related to path dependencies and lock-  ins; and the internal 
tensions between antagonist forces.
Lines​of​flight​and​the​reterritorialisation ​of​AEG​assemblages
In the second half of the twentieth century, the combination of 
instruments supporting production maximisation and market con -
trol dominated AEG practices in Switzerland, as it did in most of the 
Global North. These guiding principles however met with resistance 
from key elements of broad AEG assemblages. First, the intensifica -
tion of agricultural production forced important but largely ignored 
non- human elements—  water, soil, biological life, carbon, and 
nitrogen, to name a few—  out of their own ecological trajectories. 
Second, the global flows of agricultural products stimulated by flows 
of money (subsidies) and circulation channels based on unequal 
power relations had a highly destructuring impact on agricultural 
economies and food politics around the globe. These fundamental 
tensions within AEG assemblages created fractures and instability. 
In other words, they drew traversing lines of flight1 that initiated a 
transformation of the elementary social and biophysical basis of agri -
culture and life on Earth. Those lines worked together to transform 
the Swiss AEG assemblage and reconfigure political alliances and 
priorities along logics of controlling the environmental dimension on 
the one hand, and a progressive market deregulation on the other. 
Thus, the Swiss agricultural policy discarded production subsidies to  
  
32 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
replace them with instruments that would supposedly produce fewer 
economic disturbances. Direct payments to farmers conditioned on 
compliance with environmental good practices became a key element 
in the governance of agriculture. Simultaneously, new traceability 
instruments emerged from a close collaboration between public and 
private actors. Standards and certification presented themselves as 
promising tools to regain control over disruptive non-  human elem -
ents, for instance the prion causing bovine spongiform encephalop -
athy. This microscopic entity offers a good example of the central 
role of non-  human elements in the transformation of governance. 
The prion started to run wild in the 1990s, destabilising agricultural 
production and raising suspicion and fears among consumers. The 
response was drastic, with the killing of thousands of animals, the 
regulation of feed practices, and the development of strict trace -
ability of animals under the control of the state. Finally, the progres -
sive disengagement of the federal state from market and value-  chain 
coordination provoked a deep reorganisation of AEG assemblages, 
allowing some actors to endorse new levels of responsibility and 
positions of power. Among other examples, the certification and label 
system implemented by coalitions of private actors, notably producer 
organisations and big retailers, started to blossom. The emergence of 
IP- Suisse as a farmer organisation, a label, and a governance prac -
tice was fully embedded in this reterritorialisation of a wider AEG 
assemblage.
As becomes apparent in this general presentation, the processes 
of transformation of the AEG assemblage in Switzerland followed 
multiple and diverse logics and lines of flights. This is not peculiar. 
As Ong and Collier (2005 : 12) put it: “an assemblage is the product 
of multiple determinations that are not reducible to a single logic”. 
This non-  linear, rhizomatic nature of assemblages is also reflected in 
the way elements engage within the assemblage. Assemblages are not 
organised along a master plan or a unified project. Even in the cases 
where a group of actors assembles around a shared objective, multiple 
expectations and divergent understandings of this objective coexist. 
Moreover, this core group of human actors needs to enrol other human 
or non-  human elements, which will bring in their own motives. Anna 
Tsing (2015 : 132) describes this ontological multiplicity of agendas 
well: “Participants come with varied agendas, which do their small 
part in guiding world-  making projects”. With this short but insightful 
comment she also points to the contribution of each element to the  
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  33
making of the assemblage as a whole, to its continuous recreation and 
reterritorialisation.
The group of farmers who founded IP-  Suisse in 1989 had under -
stood the dramatic change that lay ahead of Swiss agriculture. They 
grasped the emerging trend for a greener and market-  oriented gov -
ernance of food production that started to take shape both in inter -
national and national discussions. Anticipating radical changes in 
the national agricultural policy, they had chosen not to resist, but 
to try to make the best of a challenging situation by creating a tool 
that would allow them to get paid for their commitment to more 
sustainable farm practices. In addition, the aim was to create a plat -
form to nurture the required adaptation of both the structures of the 
value chains and the competences of the extension and advising 
institutions. On this basis, and following the tripartite certification 
model ( Loconto & Fouilleux, 2017 ), this new organisation needed 
to find allies in order to set up a standard and a control system. 
A major step was reached in 1997 with the partnership with Migros, 
one of the two major retail groups in the country. Migros foresaw 
its own interests in an emerging demand for environment-  friendly 
products in as early as the 1970s and the retailer developed its own 
M- Sano standard many years before this partnership. Close to the 
approach chosen by IP-  Suisse, this standard supported the principles 
of integrated production as a model for sustainable agriculture 
(Bocquet, 2013 ), and focused on reducing the use of chemicals and 
improving animal welfare. In the M-  Sano system, Migros controlled 
the standard as well as the whole value chain. By entering into part -
nership with IP-  Suisse, Migros changed its strategy, delegating the 
definition of the standard and its management to an external partner, 
IP- Suisse, as a farmer organisation. To understand this strategic  
U- turn, one can look at Migros’s main competitor, the retailer Coop, 
which engaged in a partnership with the organic food label Biosuisse 
in 1993. In parallel, the federal state decided to regulate the defin -
ition of organic farming. The Ordinance on organic farming came 
into force on 1 January 1998. These moves by other actors within 
the AEG assemblage exerted clear pressure on Migros’s self-  defined 
environmental standards, which appeared weaker in the new compe -
tition on the market for environment-  friendly products. At the same 
time, by referring to integrated production, both Migros and IP-  
Suisse found an alternative strategy and carved a third way between 
conventional and organic types of agriculture, as the latter had   
34 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
gained some support and visibility as an agricultural countermodel 
in the past decades.
As essential intermediaries in the value chain, food processors saw 
other benefits in joining the assemblage, notably in the coordination 
capacity offered by this new set of relations between partners within 
the certification scheme. The industrial baker Jowa and the grain 
industry offer a good illustration of how the implementation of a tri -
partite certification scheme such as IP-  Suisse is supported by parallel 
needs. Before the major reforms undergone by the agricultural policy, 
the federal state used to coordinate and control the Swiss production of 
grain in terms of both quantity and quality. The state’s withdrawal from 
market control created an urgent need for an alternative way of coord -
inating the quantity as well as quality of grain and flour provisioning. 
With its direct access to farmers and cross-  cutting dimension, the IP-  
Suisse assemblage offered a welcome potential to develop new ways 
of coordinating supply and demand in the value chain.
Path-  dependent processes and lock-  ins
Efforts to reassemble soya in the European imagination and European 
agricultural cultivation practice are intimately tied to the recent history 
of soya beans and their global career after World War II. The dominant 
use of this crop in economies of scale over the last seven decades has 
entangled soya into a web of material and symbolic relations which 
are proving hard to break out from. Indeed, stabilising territorialisa -
tion forces and lines of flight—  or deterritorialisation forces—  collide 
and compete in spacetimes where soya’s value is reclaimed in mul -
tiple ways.
Dominant understandings of soya as a cheap protein produced far 
away to feed Europe’s animal industry efficiently began to crumble 
at the dawn of the twenty-  first century. Non-  linear understandings of 
the indirect and unintended consequences of past actions among sci -
entific, political, and civil actors have begun to fuel the need for new 
narratives that rethink productivist models of agricultural governance. 
The largely unintended and overlooked consequences of the ubiqui -
tous and exponential use of soya amount to biodiversity loss, deforest -
ation, land grabs, environmental pollution, and intensive monoculture 
agriculture.
A constellation of political agreements and technological 
developments transformed soya into a lucrative pursuit for producing   
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  35
and consuming countries alike. The Blair House Agreement of the 
Uruguay Round in the early 1990s exempted soya beans from import 
tariffs imposed on other major crops such as wheat or maize. This 
decision enabled a chain of reactions that in time led to a gradual 
decrease in the cultivation of soya beans and legumes in Europe from 
4% to less than 2% of land devoted to this crop in the late 2000s. This 
in turn led to a European specialisation in wheat, with investment and 
research increasingly flowing in its favour, and to the marginalisation 
of legumes ( Magrini et al., 2016 ). This path was further reinforced 
with the advent of biotechnologies and the introduction, in 1994, of the 
Roundup Ready soya bean, the first genetically modified plant in the 
United States, also authorised for cultivation in Argentina and Brazil 
a few years later. Despite consumers’ resistance in Europe, genetically 
modified soya beans benefited from the European Union’s coexist -
ence policy (see Reynolds & Szerszynski, 2014 ) and rapidly sneaked 
through the back door of market regulation as an “embedded” food 
ingredient and feed compound. Today, 90% of soya beans imported in 
Europe are genetically modified.
The vocal reports (e.g. Profundo, 2015 ) released by NGOs in the first 
decade of the 2000s, exposing the dark side of soya’s success, provided 
wake-  up calls for many concerned actors in Europe. Switzerland was 
among the first countries to act. Fully embracing the non-  GMO (gen -
etically modified organisms) consensus, the country’s two dominant 
retailers developed action plans to promote sustainable soya bean 
imports. The result was the establishment of the Basler Criteria for 
Sustainable Soy guidelines ( 2004 ), which were to become a defining 
benchmark not only for the national but also the international creation 
of standards for soya beans. Those guidelines place deforestation-   and 
land-  conversion-  free soya as fundamental requirements, which were 
also endorsed in the DS standard. Subsequent agreements and declar -
ations came to strengthen these, such as the Brussels Soy Declaration 
(2012) whereby European soya industries support the non-  GM (gen -
etically modified) cultivation of soya beans in Brazil, the Roundtable 
for Sustainable Soy (2006), and the Berlin Declaration for a GMO-  
free Europe (2018). These different yet interrelated developments 
provided some solid anchoring points and a good degree of impetus 
for DS to launch its programmes.
This short history of soya explains the political and economic 
conditions in which Europe’s animal farming and meat industry 
gained traction and grew exponentially. Entrenched beliefs and  
 
  
36 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
practices as to the profitability of meat in the Global North and of soya 
in the Global South have established paths that are hard to reverse or 
reform. Flows of finance support research on grain in Europe, flows of 
overseas soya sustain the freight industries, and flows of convenient 
nitrogen fertilisers feed soils in Europe, rendering nitrogen-  fixing 
crops unattractive. Nowadays, Europe is still dependent on up to 94% 
of imported soya beans. The lack of adequate alternative sources 
of protein to feed the millions of chickens and pigs raised in highly 
concentrated and industrialised production units create a lock-  in situ -
ation compared to which all the efforts deployed by NGOs and other 
actors seem minor or even futile.
Internal tensions and centralisation forces
In order to comprehend why a seemingly simple instrument such as 
RPPLH could gain enough traction from multiple stakeholders, we 
need to understand how environmental issues in Indonesia were hidden 
in the background amidst the drive towards the Green Revolution 
in the 1970s and its ensuing industrialisation in the 1980s. During 
that period, many environmental problems ensued in Indonesia’s 
endeavours towards development. Pest outbreaks and soil degrad -
ation in most of the arable lands in Java only became obvious in the 
1990s, along with ENSO-  related droughts and floods ( Dwiartama, 
2014 ). Rapid deforestation has occurred steadily since the massive 
opening up of Indonesia’s natural forest to the timber industry in the 
1970s ( Tsing, 2005 ; Peluso, 1988 ), only to be followed by the rapid 
expansion of oil palm plantations in the 2000s ( McCarthy, 2012 ). 
Environmental degradation has, however, been mostly felt in Java, 
the country’s most populous island, as industry has started to take its 
toll on the watersheds and local residents across the island.
The instability and ephemerality of Indonesia’s environmental 
governance have been the subject of many social studies highlighting 
the incongruences, dissonance, and friction among actors in 
the assemblage ( Li, 2007 ; Tsing, 2005 ; Dwiartama et al., 2016 ; 
Dwiartama, 2018 ). This offers a counternarrative of fragility in gov -
ernance assemblages which lies in contrast with the examples of pro -
gressive and continuous processes of change or rigid and enduring 
configurations provided by the other two case studies, IP-  Suisse and 
DS. The story begins with Indonesia’s notable Environment Act, 
which was first enacted in 1982—  a simple document, merely seven  
 
  
 
  
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  37
pages long, which lays out every citizen’s rights to a clean environ -
ment and their responsibility to take care of their environment for the 
sake of everyone. As the environmental crisis grew more complex, 
Indonesia’s Ministry of Environment pushed for the enactment of a 
more comprehensive Environment Management Act in 1997. This 
new law detailed the role of the government to set environmental 
quality standards and thresholds, as well as obliged citizens to comply 
with those standards in every form of activity, including business. 
This was followed by the Environmental Management and Protection 
Act in 2009 , which mandated the central government, as well as the 
provincial and regional governments, to develop environmental man -
agement and monitoring plans that may provide strict guidelines and 
avenues for development, land-  use planning, and business activities.
This mandate complements the existing regulations on environ -
mental impact assessment ( Analisis Mengenai Dampak Lingkungan , 
AMDAL), with which every form of business and economic activity—  
industry, construction, mining, forestry, and agriculture—  must 
comply and put together a predevelopment plan to ensure that envir -
onmental impacts and risks are assessed and anticipated. AMDAL/  
EIA puts an emphasis on comprehensive data collection of environ -
mental indicators, which broadly consist of biodiversity, soil, water, 
and air quality, as well as the socio-  economic profile of the locale 
in which a project is expected to proceed. This is a process which 
requires not only the business entities but also consultants, local com -
munity groups, environmental activists, and local governments to 
agree upon the acceptable limit of the potential impact of the said 
project. In many cases, the tentative assemblage of all these humans as 
well as non-  humans (water, plants, animals, microbes, heavy metals, 
soil, and others) does not seem to hold together: business actors fail 
to comply with the regulations; environmental data do not show any 
positive impact on the environment; local communities clash with 
environmental activists due to the perceived risks and benefits of the 
project; etc. The many differing, or even conflicting, interests, desires, 
and perspectives, in other words, too many internal tensions and lines 
of flight and too few binding and attracting forces—  dissolve the 
assemblage before it can be territorialised.
It is due to this situation that the government is proposing a new 
logic to its environmental planning and policies. Instead of relying on 
localised data collection and risk assessment to respond to a certain 
development project, the national government—  with the support and  
38 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
collaboration of each of the 31 provincial governments and hundreds 
of regional governments—  would have to devise an encompassing 
environmental management and monitoring plan that highlights what 
sort of development project should and should not be implemented 
in a particular place. An environmental assessment and planning 
document, titled the National/  Regional Environmental Management 
and Monitoring Plan (RPPLH-  N/ D), would become the preferred 
document, surpassing any other planning documents—  including the 
Regional Spatial Plan (RTRW) and Long/  Medium-  Term Development 
Plan (RPJP/  M)—  which prior to this were key references for any 
regional development project. In short, the government tries to fight 
deterritorialisation of governance assemblages with centralisation, as 
a line of articulation.
Governance assemblages as multiplicities
Deleuze and Guatarri (1988 : 33) insisted on the importance of thinking 
multiplicity, which is not the same as the individual or the multiple and 
opens a new possibility to think beyond this misleading binary oppos -
ition. Multiplicities are simultaneously one and many. Assemblages 
are multiplicities: they are made up of multiple elements with various 
multiple properties, intentions, and desires, and are traversed by diver -
ging forces. But an assemblage is also one, a productive and creative 
whole, which is actually defined by what emerges from itself through 
the interactions of its multiple elements ( Buchanan, 2021 : 47). In this 
sense, the individuality of an assemblage is continuously produced 
and recreated, otherwise the assemblage will be deterritorialised, 
dissolved. It has to be noted here that, from an assemblage-  thinking 
perspective, the individual and the collective are not a question of 
scale. As DeLanda puts it:
As an ontological category the term “individual” has no prefer -
ence for any one particular level of scale. It is perfectly possible 
to speak of individual communities, individual organisations, indi -
vidual cities. Similarly, we can, without invoking any undesirable 
connotations, speak of individual atoms, individual molecules, 
individual cells, and individual organs. All of these entities are 
assemblages, their defining emergent properties produced by their 
interacting parts, and therefore contingent on the occurrence of 
the requisite interactions. The historicity and individuality of all  
 
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  39
assemblages forces us as materialists to confront the question of the 
historical processes which produced or brought into being any given 
assemblage. We may refer to these as processes of individuation .
(DeLanda, 2016 : 140)
In this sense, assemblage thinking offers a complex and nuanced 
framing for thinking of the individual and the collective. In this section 
we engage with the dual nature—  one and many—  of the governance 
assemblages we studied, as multiplicities.
Multiplicity as diversity of reasons to assemble
Creating opportunities for premium prices, securing a leading pos -
ition and good image in retail, reinventing the coordination of the 
value chain, those are just a few examples of the diverse agenda that 
motivated actors to engage in the IP-  Suisse assemblage. This multipli -
city of agendas and motivations combines in the assemblage and helps 
to constantly produce, reproduce, and transform it. As already shown, 
the synergies with the environmental schemes under the federal agri -
cultural policy and the marketing strategy of Migros contributed to the 
success of IP-  Suisse. As acknowledged by the actors themselves, most 
of the actions required by the IP-  Suisse standard are also integrated 
in and rewarded by the federal agricultural policy. For farmers, this 
produces a double incentive resulting in both flows of public money 
through the direct payment system and premium prices for their 
products. Both the state policy and the label become more attractive 
for farmers, thanks to this complementarity. BioSuisse, the national 
association for organic farmers, also played an essential if indirect 
role in the shaping of IP-  Suisse, both as a model and a competitor. 
At the same time, the partnership with a farmers’ owned and certified 
standard was confirmed as the dominant model. Here also, what IP-  
Suisse became is totally embedded in this reorganisation of markets 
and economic relations in the food system. The partnership with 
Migros not only served the retailer, who could claim its commitment 
to sustainable Swiss food production, it also obviously contributed 
to the rapid confirmation of IP-  Suisse as a leading food label on the 
Swiss market. Simultaneously, however, retailers have been very 
active in developing their own sustainability brands and standards, 
using their strategic position to impose quality standards on their eco -
nomic partners, notably farmers.   
40 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
Many other elements contributed to the general evolution of the 
Swiss agricultural sector, notably actors in the agricultural knowledge 
system, including extension services, agricultural schools, universities, 
and research centres. In sum, IP-  Suisse emerged and is still developing 
in a context of deep reterritorialisation of a wider AEG assemblage. 
What IP-  Suisse became and the outcomes of its development—  what 
it produced—  cannot be understood correctly if we ignore this embed -
dedness. And this statement is also valid for any of the aforemen -
tioned governance practices that have been developing within this 
assemblage: each of them is inevitably shaped by its relations with the 
others, and shapes them in turn. From an assemblage perspective, it 
makes no sense to look at any of these AEG instruments or practices 
in isolation. In other words, IP-  Suisse as an assemblage emerges from 
the convergence of these multiple elements and forms a multiplicity. 
Remove one of them and IP-  Suisse would be something else.
Multiplicity as diversity of imaginaries
Given the favourable winds encountered by the initiators of DS, the 
making of the standard took off quickly. A variety of actors became 
participants in this endeavour. Within a few years, it developed into a 
transnational poly-  centred network of like-  minded agricultural experts 
where each regional or national chapter is steered by consultants, 
researchers, or business people from 25 countries. DS has 316 members 
including civil-  society bodies, businesses and entrepreneurs, govern -
mental and non-  governmental organisations, and members from most 
of the sectors of the value chain, such as seed-  breeding companies, 
soya producers, traders, soya bean processors, feed and food indus -
tries, and many of the largest retail companies in Europe. This hetero -
geneity of actors reflects the long and complex value chain of soya. 
The socio-  material relations forming around soya came to reveal a 
multitude of interrelations between the various stages of production 
and processing and, as such, also a range of possible points of inter -
vention in the soya market.
The spatial arrangement of the soya bean crop across Europe and 
the distinctive elements included in the standard, certification, and 
labelling system brought to light a series of related tensions that DS 
confronted head-  on. It started with the awareness that the operation of 
the standard and the certification was closely linked to the availability 
of seeds of levels of quality that differed from those in the dominant   
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  41
market. This sparked the search for public and private seed-  breeding 
research and development institutions across Europe devoted to non-  
GM markets. It also led to a careful strengthening of relations with the 
largest non-  GM seed bank in China—  as the cradle of soya beans—  
and the setting up of partnerships (agreements of understanding) with 
the Chinese Academy of Sciences, meant to safeguard the variety of 
seeds as a basis for biodiverse ecosystems. Thus, the development 
and implementation of the standard proved to be a constantly growing 
field not only of facts but also of concerns, resulting in new relations 
that have expanded the assemblage across values chains and geo -
graphical boundaries.
The socio-  technical possibilities afforded by the instrument 
led DS to engage in growing the network of actors in a variety of 
domains and locales dedicated to promoting certain qualities of soya. 
But socio-  technical possibilities rarely play out in a linear and pre -
dictable manner. As different groups of actors enter the governance 
arena, distinct social imaginaries of soya’s value for Europe come to 
be articulated and these do not always converge in a single vision for 
soya. As a result, DS is confronting and engaging with different—  
often clashing—  imaginaries of soya and, consequently, with diverse 
visions of what DS should do and become. Each of these imaginaries 
and visions would, by itself, lead the whole assemblage towards a 
different future. As long as the assemblage coheres, though, they all 
work together and set a direction that results from this diversity.
Pálsson and Rabinow (2005: 94) highlight the role of assemblage as 
a concept that enables us to understand “a specific historical, political, 
and economic conjuncture in which an issue becomes a problem”. The 
interplay of the diverse social imaginaries of soya is thus framing the  
construction of concerns and the identification of problems within 
the DS assemblage. This internal discussion on matters of concern 
(Latour, 2004 ) lays the ground on which the potential to transform, 
reconfigure, or disrupt wider assemblages to which DS is connected 
can emerge. In the process of building the standard, soya has turned 
into a network of relations that go well beyond the boundaries of a 
technical and agronomic problem. DS’s concern with the infrastruc -
tural elements of soya and the interdependent relations that make up 
its circulation and use shows that a variety of responses is necessary 
in order to enable the desired transformation not just of the culti -
vation and circulation of one crop, but of the food systems that the 
crop is part of. The organisation does more than build and mobilise a  
42 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
complex set of actions and understandings, it equally raises very high 
stakes in respect to politics, the environment, and the economy. The 
stakes are high because aims and actions involve changing policies on 
issues—  notably the dependency on imported protein—  that have not 
been addressed over the past 40 years. In addition, they respond to 
imperatives of change posed by the looming climate crisis in relation 
to the production of soya on deforested land and a still-  growing global 
meat industry, and therefore they confront dominant markets. Last 
but not least, and maybe more fundamentally, these stakes involve 
revisiting a set of engrained beliefs and understandings around this 
one specific crop that is soya.
Multiplicity as a messy process
RPPLH is a grandiose yet bureaucratic-  utopian project. For one thing, 
it is built on the basis of a comprehensive set of data that no regional 
government has ever successfully compiled. On paper, the idea of 
RPPLH is relatively straightforward: governments need to overlay 
different forms of spatial data upon their territories, be they land use, 
land cover, climate, water potential, flow and use, geological data, 
soil types, ecosystem types, forest cover, biodiversity, oil/  coal/  mineral 
deposits below ground, agricultural/  forestry/  livestock/  fishery potential, 
waste production, population density, demography, economic activ -
ities, health facilities, cultural diversity, and basically anything that can 
be digitised and superimposed on a map. Data will be populated by 
different sectoral offices and agencies. So, for example, the Forestry 
Agency will be responsible for collecting and reporting on forest cover, 
type, and potential. The Agricultural Agency will then fill in the regional 
agricultural production (arable land, soil type, land suitability, crops 
grown, productivity, and many other variables). The Regional Planning 
Agency is in charge of coordinating this data collection with more than 
20 agencies and offices to provide a rather complete set of spatial data 
for the RPPLH. These overlays of spatial data are then interpreted and 
translated into scores by first weighting each of the datasets. Experts 
will mainly be called in to make such judgements. After the weight of 
each set of data is agreed on, its score is established on a specific spatial 
grid, and a distribution of colour-  coded grids shows what sort of devel -
opment project can and cannot be carried out in a specific area or region.
In practice and from an everyday perspective, however, the RPPLH 
instrument is the epitome of far more messy and complex processes.   
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  43
The document brings together different government agencies and 
sectors in ways that have never been tried before. Each RPPLH—  
there is one national RPPLHN and many more provincial and regional 
RPPLHDs—  is formulated by a working group, most often led by 
the Regional/  National Planning Agency, but in some provinces and 
regions the Environmental Agency plays much of this role. A con -
sultant is usually present to gather and analyse data, but the working 
group has a more active role in deciding the type of strategies to be 
implemented for a given set of data. Discussions have never been 
easy. Each office attempts to influence the spatial configuration of 
data, to ensure that its own data is the one that speaks the loudest 
in the layering of information on a map. To illustrate, the settlement 
office would bring population data to the table and argue that the need 
for housing should be given more weight in an area’s development 
priorities. The Agricultural Agency would then counterargue that 
the area is instead better suited for food production, considering the 
soil quality, water availability, and food demand in the surrounding 
area. Negotiations and decisions on spatial planning have become 
more complicated. Prior to RPPLH, decisions were mostly made by 
the Planning Agency on the basis of what the president, governor, or 
regent aimed to achieve over the next five to ten years. With RPPLH, 
the materiality and subjectivity of data play a more central role in 
providing guidance on how development needs to be planned out. In 
other words, the instrument fundamentally changes the internal pol -
itics of planning.
The process of formulating RPPLH can take longer than expected 
because of this situation. It is not uncommon for the leadership role 
to shift from one agency to another due to unresolved conflicting 
interests. Lines of articulation—  efforts to bring all together—  are most 
often accompanied by lines of flight—  disagreement among govern -
ment agencies that stall the formulation of the environmental manage -
ment and protection plans. Disagreement on how to proceed with the 
structure of the document and standard means of analysis has left even 
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry—  the very body responsible 
for putting together a standardised RPPLH document—  befuddled. In 
some cases where a province or regency has successfully drawn up 
a complete document and all agencies have agreed upon its content, 
other actors such as legislatures, businesses, NGOs, and community 
representatives will also have to support the plan in order for RPPLH 
to play out as an instrument that really holds things together. Since  
44 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
RPPLH became a legal instrument in 2009, there has been no province 
or regency that truly implements its development plans on the basis of 
this document due to the dynamics occurring within this complex set 
of assemblages.
The messy process of negotiating an assemblage like RPPLH 
cannot be separated from the messiness of data itself. Data, at least 
in the case of RPPLH, has gone beyond a mere part of an instrument. 
It is in itself a complex and messy assemblage. To borrow Latour’s 
idea of a black box, data is singular (in the sense that everyone talks 
about “the data” in reference to the scientific bundle of numbers and 
figures to be used as the basis of environmental planning), but at 
the same time plural and multiple (in that it is composed of still-  life 
portraits of various phenomena, each representing a “dividual” aspect 
of reality; see Deleuze, 1995 ). How data is understood as an abstract 
materiality ( Kitchin, 2014 ), which is perceived, engaged with, and 
politicised differently by different actors, has led to data being more 
than just a “bundle of figures”. It too has become a (non-  human) actor 
that territorialises in a way that brings a certain dynamic to the wider 
assemblage. The effectiveness of RPPLH as an instrument to hold cer -
tain actors together (or break them apart) depends on the configuration 
of data as a multiplicity and how one part speaks to another. Data on 
population density, when superimposed with waste-  production data, 
brings different results to the assemblage as compared to when it is 
linked to food production. In what way should the human actors then 
make use of the data? It seems that there is no certainty as to who owns, 
collects, and nurtures data, and how data is meaningful to one but not 
another. Data in general, but particularly in the context of RPPLH, 
adds a sort of messiness to the assemblage that leads an environmental 
management plan to never truly take shape—  it is always becoming, 
and one added set of data always creates a new version of RPPLH and 
the wider assemblage associated with it. This messiness of data thus 
translates into the messiness of the wider assemblage.
Concluding remarks: assemblages highlighting the complex 
dynamics of governance
In this chapter we have introduced the reader to an assemblage 
approach to AEG. To do so, we have mobilised three contrasting 
examples of governance instruments that serve as an entry point to 
broader governance assemblages. IP-  Suisse as a certification scheme   
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  45
opens up a complex network of actors across value chains and public 
policies. Donau Soja, as a standard and certification programme 
and a wider-  reaching plan to rethink agricultural practices in their 
interrelated workings, expands the range of questions, problems, and 
solutions beyond the borders of the organisation and the instrument 
as such. Finally, the Indonesian RPPLH boils down to a data caul -
dron of seemingly endless possibilities to reorganise environmental 
planning.
This exploration of the three assemblages has allowed us to high -
light key features of assemblage. Assemblages are dynamic because 
they are traversed by lines of flight that attract the element that con -
stitute them, towards diverging paths and assembling forces, and 
therefore produce forces of destabilisation or deterritorialisation 
of the whole. At the same time, forces of cohesion—  or lines of 
articulation—  deployed in the assemblage work to hold things together 
and either perpetuate the current configuration of the assemblage or 
stabilise new formations in a process of reterritorialisation. Under cer -
tain circumstances, assemblages may also be strongly territorialised 
by forces anchored in the path carved by their progressive evolution. 
Governance interventions share the same dual nature. In the end, the 
balance between forces of change and those of stabilisation is at the 
focus of attention in any assemblage framing.
Another feature of assemblage highlighted through the presentation 
of our case studies relates to the notion of multiplicity. Assemblages 
are multiplicities, are one and many at the same time ( Deleuze & 
Guatarri, 1988 ). This multiplicity is reflected in the diverse motiv -
ations and projects that animate the elements joining in the assem -
blage and the sometimes divergent imaginaries of what could be the 
future and how to reach it. Assemblages are therefore messy, full of 
internal tensions and ambiguities. Thinking with assemblages requires 
“an ethos of engagement that attends to the messiness and complexity 
of phenomena” ( Anderson et al., 2012 : 175). Governance practices 
that might look stable are not what they seem. Acknowledging this 
messiness leads to a better understanding of what governance is from 
an everyday perspective. It is also important to build future govern -
ance actions that are not based on an illusion of order and control. 
The value of anticipating messiness lies indeed in the fundamental 
unpredictability of the outcomes of the governance practices applied 
on complex issues, such as agri-  environmental problems. How to 
understand this unpredictability and its ramifications in terms of   
46 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
intentionality, desirability, and integration is the subject matter of the 
next chapter.
Note
 1 Deleuze and Guatarri define lines of flight as “movements of 
deterritorialisation and destratification” (1987: 3). DeLanda offers this 
complement: “lines of flight, marking the direction in which an assemblage 
can become deterritorialized” (2016: 109).
References
Anderson, B., Kearnes, M., McFarlane, C., & Swanton, D. (2012). On 
assemblages and geography. Dialogues in Human Geography  2(2): 171–  189.
Arthur, W. B. (1989). Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-  in 
by historical events. The Economic Journal  99(394): 116–  131.
Birrer, S., Zellweger-  Fischer, J., Stoeckli, S., Korner-  Nievergelt, F., Balmer, 
O., Jenny, M., & Pfiffner, L. (2014). Biodiversity at the farm scale: A novel 
credit point system. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment  197: 195–  203.
Bocquet, A.-  M. (2013). L’engagement environnemental de l’entreprise: quelle 
responsabilité envers quelles parties prenantes? Les cas Migros et Coop sur 
le marché agroalimentaire suisse. Management & Avenir  64(6): 35–  55.
Buchanan, I. (2021). Assemblage Theory and Method . London/  
New York: Bloomsbury.
DeLanda, M. (2016). Assemblage Theory . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University  
Press.
Deleuze, G. (1995). Negotiations 1972–  1990  (Translated by Martin Joughin). 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guatarri, F. (1988). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . London: Athlone.
Dwiartama, A. (2014). Investigating Resilience of Agriculture and Food 
Systems: Insights from Two Theories and Two Case Studies . Doctoral 
Dissertation. New Zealand: University of Otago.
Dwiartama, A. (2018). From ‘disciplinary societies’ to ‘societies of control’: An 
historical narrative of agri-  environmental governance in Indonesia. In J. 
Forney, C. Rosin, & H. Campbell (Eds.). Agri-  environmental Governance 
as an Assemblage: Multiplicity, Power, and Transformation  (pp. 91–  104). 
London and New York: Routledge.
Dwiartama, A., Rosin, C., & Campbell, H. (2016). Understanding agri-  food 
systems as assemblages. In R. Le Heron, H. Campbell, N. Lewis, & M. 
Carolan (Eds.). Biological Economies: Experimentation and the Politics of 
Agri-  food Frontiers  (pp. 82–  94). London and New York: Routledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Heterogeneous governance assemblages  47
FAOSTAT (Food and Agriculture Organization Statistics Division). (n.d.). 
Crop Production STAT Calculators . Rome: FAO
Fouilleux, E., & Loconto, A. (2017). V oluntary standards, certification, and 
accreditation in the global organic agriculture field: a tripartite model of 
techno-  politics. Agriculture and Human Values  34(1): 1–  14.
Kitchin, R. (2014). Big Data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts. Big 
Data & Society  1(1): 2053951714528481.
Latour, B. (2004). Why has critique run out of steam? From matters of fact to 
matters of concern. Critical Inquiry  30(2): 225–  248.
Li, T. M. (2007). Practices of assemblage and community forest management. 
Economy and Society  36(2): 263–  293.
Magrini, M. B., Anton, M., Cholez, C., Corre-  Hellou, G., Duc, G., Jeuffroy, 
M. H., Meynard, J.M., Pelzer, E., V oisin, A. S., & Walrand, S. (2016). Why 
are grain-  legumes rarely present in cropping systems despite their environ -
mental and nutritional benefits? Analyzing lock-  in in the French agrifood 
system. Ecological Economics  126: 152–  162.
McCarthy, J. F. (2012). Certifying in contested spaces: private regulation in 
Indonesian forestry and palm oil. Third World Quarterly  33(10): 1871–  1888.
Oliveira, G., & Schneider, M. (2016). The politics of flexing soybeans: China, 
Brazil and global agroindustrial restructuring. The Journal of Peasant 
Studies , 43(1): 167–  194.
Ong, A., & Collier, S. J. (Eds.). (2005). Global Assemblages. Technology, 
Politics and Ethics as Anthropological Problems . Malden/  Oxford/  
Victoria: Blackwell Publishing.
Pálsson, G., & Rabinow, P. (2005). The Iceland controversy: reflections on 
the transnational market of civic virtue. In A. Ong, & S. J. Collier (Eds.). 
Global Assemblages. Technology, Politics and Ethics as Anthropological 
Problems  (pp. 91–  103). Malden/  Oxford/  Victoria: Blackwell Publishing.
Peluso, N. L. (1988). Rich Forests, Poor People, and Development: Forest 
Access Control and Resistance in Java . New York: Cornell University.
Profundo. (2015). Mapping the Soy Supply Chain in Europe . A research paper 
prepared for WNF. www.profu  ndo.nl/  page/  show/  the mes/  p718#_  _ 2015  _ _ 
p- 718. (Accessed 9 July 2017).
Reynolds, L., & Szerszynski, B. (2014). The post-  political and the 
end of nature: the genetically modified organism. In J. Wilson & E. 
Swyngedouw (Eds.). The Postpolitical and Its Discontents  (pp. 48–  67). 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Tsing, A. L. (2005). Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection . 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tsing, A. L. (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility 
of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
48 Heterogeneous governance assemblages
Undang-  Undang Republik Indonesia No. 32. (2009). Tentang Pengelolaan 
dan Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup ( Law on Environmental Management 
and Protection ).
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture—  Foreign Agricultural 
Service). (2014, July). Oilseeds. World Markets and Trade. https://  fas.usda.
gov/ data/  oilse  eds- world-  mark  ets- and- trade  [Accessed on 19 April 2022].
Windsor, J. (2015). Desire lines: Deleuze and Guattari on molar lines, 
molecular lines, and lines of flight. New Zealand Sociology  30(1): 156–  171.
WWF (World Wildlife Fund). (2016). Soy Scorecard: Assessing the Use of 
Responsible Soy for Animal Feed . Gland, Switzerland. 
 
 
  
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-3
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.3  Unpredictability of effects 
in agri-  environmental 
governance
Introduction: the unpredictable nature of governance
The heterogeneity of elements and process-  making of agri-  
environmental governance (AEG) assemblages points to their com -
plexity and the difficulties in anticipating the real effects of governance 
instruments and actions in everyday life. Unexpected and side effects 
of governance practices are too often overlooked because monitoring 
developments and progress is usually focused on the assessment of 
success or failure and their causes. An everyday perspective on AEG, 
on the contrary, embraces the multiplicity of effects of governance and 
sees their unpredictability not as a failure or a limitation, but as the 
result of the inescapable nature of complex assemblages. Unexpected 
effects are not considered as problems anymore, instead they define 
what an AEG assemblage actually creates. Indeed, as phrased by 
Buchanan (2021 ), assemblages are actually defined by what emerges 
from them and by what they do.
In this chapter, we highlight the multiplicity of the effects of gov -
ernance practices in our case studies, with a focus on the unexpected 
and the unwanted, as well as ways in which actors anticipate and 
make do with this. In order to do so, we shift attention from the main 
instruments that are intended to govern, to other ordering devices that 
shape the course of action. We raise a few fundamental and defining 
questions: What is being governed? What do the actors aim to solve? 
Is there any “side effect” from the solution? What else is actually 
happening? What are the things considered a failure or success? What 
effects does this failure/  success provide? And is there any “new” 
instrument that people look into, in addition to the main instruments? 
 
  
50 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
The three case studies that we examine in this book exemplify how 
we question and engage with the effects of governance. A traditional 
view of governance will commonly start from the explicit objectives 
of the instruments and mobilise indicators to assess success or failure. 
In the best cases, a few collateral aspects might be monitored as well. 
However, how governance practices contribute to the transformation 
or stabilisation of a broader assemblage is rarely explored. This way 
of thinking effects and outcomes is linear and follows a logic based on 
anticipation and expectation. It derives directly from a linear problem-  
solving conception of governance based on schematisation and sim -
plification, assuming rather simple mechanisms. As Scott ( 1998 : 6) 
critically points to what he sees as the inescapable failure of this kind 
of governance: “Designed or planned social order is necessarily sche -
matic; it always ignores essential features of any real, functioning 
social order”, which is always complex and multiple.
Indeed, as history shows, governance practices only rarely reach 
all—  and only—  the results announced and expected. The impossibility 
of predicting the evolution and developments of complex “systems” 
is repeatedly mentioned in the literature ( Capra, 1996 ; Levin, 1999 ; 
Law & Mol, 2002 ), and particularly in relation to sustainability 
matters. Many factors mingle and render social–  ecological trans -
formation unpredictable: hidden abodes, external interventions, for -
tuitous interactions and events, as well as diverse forms of resistance 
(e.g. V oß & Kemp, 2006 ). Because of these difficulties that are met 
in achieving explicit goals, Miller and Rose (1990)  speak of the idea 
of “government” as a “congenitally failing operation”. Consequently, 
they claim, the “will to govern” needs to be understood “in terms of 
the difficulties of operationalising it”, as the unruly nature of social 
life can never be fully captured by any form of knowledge that informs 
governing programmes ( Miller & Rose, 1990 : 10–  11). Therefore, as 
Walker and Shove (2007)  argue for sustainability, contingencies and 
ambivalences in the pursuit of governance objectives have to be seen 
as “a normal rather than a pathological state”.
The unpredictable nature of outcomes of policies has been discussed 
by V oß and Kemp (2006)  in relation to the concept of reflexive gov -
ernance. The authors identify three characteristics of sustainable 
development that are also valid for AEG:
… first, the heterogeneity of elements, which precludes relying 
on disciplinary expert knowledge; second, the impossibility of  
  
 
 
 
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  51
predicting system developments and the effects of interventions, 
which makes errors unavoidable; and third, the irreversibility of 
social development, which embeds a strong path dependency in 
decision making.
(V oß & Kemp, 2006 : 10)
This also aligns with what James Ferguson asserts in his book, 
The Anti-  Politics Machine  (1994) , on the side effects of the failure 
of development projects. Although Ferguson mainly criticises the 
failed attempt to understand the anthropological context that underlies 
development, he also argues that focusing on the technical aspect of 
failures is not enough; we should also embrace the complexity and 
unpredictability of effects of any development project.
We assert that this unpredictability is inherent to the nature of 
assemblages itself, its heterogeneity, complexity, and emerging nature. 
This complexity of assemblages builds into discrepancies between 
stated objectives and outcomes, which are apparent when one adopts 
an everyday perspective ( Forney & Dwiartama, 2023 ; Bentia, 2021 ). 
From this everyday perspective, AEG emerges in the dynamics and 
tensions between governance actions, anticipation of outcomes, strat -
egies to control them, inevitable overflows of unintended/  unexpected 
outcomes, and the manifestation of new actions.
Here, we need to clarify what we mean by unintended, unpre -
dictable, and unwanted. We refer to philosopher Frank de Zwart 
(2015) , who calls to attention the distinction between unanticipated 
and unintended consequences, and the fact that sociology has mostly 
conflated the two concepts. He argues that unintended consequences 
have largely been used to address the unwelcome effects of policy 
and this has had the detrimental effect of obscuring the unantici -
pated outcomes produced by any social action. In this sense, he 
recalls Alejandro Portes’s 1999  presidential address to the American 
Sociological Association, in which he described sociology as the ana -
lysis of the unexpected (thus paying homage to Merton’s pioneering 
research from 1936). In reference to this, we use the concept of the 
unintended as something that is not part of a planned objective, 
but can potentially be anticipated and may lead to good outcomes 
too. Something unwanted, on the other hand, implies negative and 
undesirable effects. The two merge in the idea of unpredictability, 
which acts as a starting point for why reflexive actors try to regain as 
much control as possible. 
  
  
52 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
In addition to this, we then look at assemblages as being more 
than just unpredictable, resulting also in multiple outcomes. 
AEG assemblages, in this sense, are traversed by many heteroge -
neous processes that happen simultaneously. The heterogeneity of 
assemblages and the multiple effects it produces opens our analysis 
to a reflection on and assessment of a range of emergent governance 
processes that emphasises the diversity of possible (governance) 
outcomes and, connected to this, a questioning and search for “what” 
(ontology) is being governed.
In the following sections, we look into this unpredictability of effects 
as it relates to various touching points stemming from our cases. In the 
case of RPPLH, we look into what we termed “a  productive failure”, a 
new trajectory emanating from the ruins of an AEG assemblage. In the 
case of IP-  Suisse, the emphasis is on this multiplicity of intended and 
unintended processes and outcomes, which opens up new possibil -
ities. In the case of Donau Soja (DS), we highlight  the agency of non-  
human actors in creating multiple pathways within the assemblage 
and ways in which human actors attempt to anticipate these effects by 
piggybacking on this unpredictability of effects.
A productive failure emerging from the unpredictable 
assemblage effect
Messy assemblages that paved the way for a failed governance
In Chapter 2 , we highlighted that in the case of RPPLH in Indonesia, 
a complex set of data has been instrumental in making a new environ -
mental governance assemblage. Data becomes something that is plural 
(it consists of different forms of data—  numerical, categorical, spatial, 
tabular—  and comes from various sources—  environmental, agricul -
tural, settlement, transportation, public work, forestry, and others), but 
also singular (a form of Latourian black box). We illustrated how the 
complexity of data leads to a complex assemblage of actors.
This chapter further investigates the extent to which this complex 
assemblage leads to frictions, flights, and reassembling of actors that 
go beyond what was originally planned (what is deemed as failure). 
Indeed, as a regulatory and planning document, RPPLH is far from 
being an accommodative instrument for all whose stakes are at risk, 
let alone being used effectively as an environmental guideline for 
development programmes. However, it was through the impasses,  
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  53
confusions, convolutions, intricacies, and, to an extent, conflicts that 
actors began to weave new relations and connections that resulted in 
unintended effects, whilst opening up new ways of governance.
West Java, the most populated province in Indonesia, illustrates 
this point. West Java Provincial Government, or to be precise, its 
Environmental Agency, has been mandated by the governor to lead the 
development of the province’s RPPLHD since 2016. It was among the 
first provinces to initiate the project. It is also, unfortunately, the one 
arguably facing the most challenges in running it. At the beginning of 
the process, the West Java province had already been the subject of 
various mega-  development projects: Southeast Asia’s first high-  speed 
railway that will connect two of the largest cities in Java; Jatigede, 
Indonesia’s second-  largest hydroelectric dam; West Java’s inter -
national airport in Majalengka; and a massive network of highways 
connecting different cities on the island. The Government of Indonesia 
is also determined to achieve food security by designating hundreds of 
thousands of hectares of agricultural area on the north coast of West 
Java as “permanent agricultural regions”. This is in contradiction with 
the ever-  growing residential development in the same area due to its 
proximity to Jakarta, Bekasi, and Cirebon, three of the largest cities on 
the north coast of Java. All of these conflicting development projects 
occurred while Jakarta was, and still is, experiencing land subsidence, 
sea- level rise, and climate-  related events threatening agricultural 
production in those strategic regions; erosions, landslides, and river 
pollution are happening in almost all large river basins; and air quality 
is at its worst, particularly in the cities of Jakarta, Bekasi, Bandung, 
and Cirebon.
This illustration should provide a good-  enough context to how 
“wicked” the environmental conditions in West Java really are. When 
the Environmental Agency took a lead in complying with the national 
mandate to establish a regional RPPLH, they were faced with nothing 
less than perplexity. The agency invited a team of academics to con -
sult on ways to move forward with the planning. Data was collected, 
and scenarios were modelled. A working group was established, 
consisting of different agencies that were responsible for particular 
sets of data and sectoral issues. Conflicts, of course, were unavoid -
able. The Agricultural Agency, for instance, urged for the protection 
of the said permanent agricultural regions due to the fact that popu -
lation growth in West Java has been quite exponential while arable 
lands have been declining rapidly. The Settlement Agency begged to  
54 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
differ. Urbanisation in West Java has been occurring at an accelerated 
rate as industrial developments have attracted more people to the 
cities and the surrounding areas. The Irrigation and Water Resource 
Agency claimed that although water supply in general is sufficient to 
cater for domestic, agricultural, and industrial needs, its distribution 
is uneven. This means that catchment areas need to be protected to 
ensure that the supply of water can be regulated, while at the same 
time, infrastructures such as dams should also be built in strategic 
areas to evenly distribute this flow of water across the province.
Facing this situation, the actors again returned to data, in a pro -
cess of simplification of the assemblage through “rendering technical” 
its otherwise unruly nature ( Li, 2007 ). The academic team developed 
several models to predict environmental conditions in the province 
over the next 30 years. On the basis of population growth and dis -
tribution, the models predicted the carrying capacity of each region 
in terms of food, water, waste, and pollution. This resulted in a set 
of priorities of the environmental plans and agenda for the specific 
regions, depending on the type of ecosystem services provided and the 
potential environmental pressures in those regions. So, for instance, 
because the ecosystems on the northern coast of Java have a strong 
potential as food providers that outweighs pressure from projected 
population growth, the region’s strategic environmental priority is to 
“reduce the environmental pressure of food producing ecosystems” 
by “conserving and protecting the productive agricultural areas in the 
region” and “controlling the rate of land conversion from agriculture 
to non-  agriculture” (Dinas Lingkungan Hidup Provinsi Jawa Barat, 
2019 : 179). In West Java’s provincial RPPLH document, this priority 
is set specifically for 14 (out of 25) regencies/  municipalities, which 
contain the specific food-  producing ecosystems, particularly on the 
northern coast of West Java. What this then means is that for these 
regencies, the priority to protect their agricultural areas should also be 
explicitly stated in their regency-  level RPPLHD.
However, the planning and development priorities that were set up 
in RPPLHD did not align well with other interests. Due to the complex 
issues involved, deadlocks between agencies, and a lack of clear policy 
implementation in support of RPPLH, the establishment of RPPLH as 
a planning tool created a loophole for the state and private sectors to 
find their way into the development planning process. One official at 
the provincial level, for example, lamented the fact that the Jakarta–  
Bandung high-  speed railway and the hydroelectric dam projects still  
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  55
proceeded even with the existence of RPPLH and other environmental 
instruments. On the one hand, she observed the potential of RPPLH, if 
and when established and taking effect, to change how environmental 
governance worked (which would strongly benefit the environment). 
This then pushed the task force to accelerate their process, in the hope 
that the sooner the RPPLH was completed, the less damage develop -
ment projects would cause to West Java’s landscapes. However, on the 
other hand, she was also sceptical whether it would indeed have such 
an effect, considering that development projects were often strongly 
backed by officials at the national level and big businesses. This scep -
ticism would prove to be correct as years later, Indonesia’s President 
Joko Widodo pushed a new law that would enable national strategic 
projects to go above and beyond the existing planning. This will be 
further examined in Chapter 5 .
The unintended effect of a productive failure
At this stage, if taking a traditional view of governance, RPPLH can 
perhaps be seen as a failed project on so many levels. At the concep -
tual level, the idea of replacing the existing environmental planning 
schemes with RPPLH is a little too stretched. RPPLH requires an 
almost entirely new way of planning, with social and ecological data 
being used as the basis for regional and spatial plans. However, these 
data ranges have not been fully agreed upon, with academics ana -
lysing and interpreting them in different ways. Every method of ana -
lysis would result in a different basis for planning. For example, one 
geographer suggested that the analysis be made using a spatial grid 
(0.9 × 0.9 km2) as the smallest unit (RPPLHD Jawa Barat, 2019).  
This grid contained layers of spatial data, from soil characteristics, 
population, and forest coverage to infrastructure. An ecologist, on the 
other hand, would focus on an ecological region (eco-  region) as the 
unit of analysis, in which all development plans would be adjusted 
to the ecological characteristics stretched and the ecosystem services 
provided. The two approaches conflicted with each other because the 
resolutions at which the data were taken resulted in different ways of 
understanding the ecological phenomena in hand and, consequently, 
the planning strategies formulated.
From an organisational point of view, RPPLH necessitates inten -
sive coordination not only between sectors (agriculture, forestry, 
environment, mining, etc.) but also across hierarchical levels (central,   
56 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
provincial, and regional). During the Soeharto regime (prior to 1998 ), 
this complex coordination might have been possible, thanks to strong 
top- down control from the central government. However, after the fall 
of Soeharto, the discrepancies between Java and the outer islands as 
well as the regional dynamics triggered a push towards decentralisa -
tion ( Talitha et al., 2020 ), where provincial and regional governments 
have a range of rights and the authority to govern their own terri -
tories. This includes, among others, public health, housing, agriculture 
and food security, environment, as well as development and spatial 
planning (Law Number 23 of 2014 on Regional Autonomy, Article 
12). In this regard, the central government would only provide advice, 
assistance, and monitoring to ensure that regional development is 
beneficial to the wellbeing of the population. This brings a certain 
dilemma to the implementation of RPPLH, partly because while cer -
tain aspects of environmental governance stay within the authority 
of the central government, the way these aspects inform regional 
development planning is in the hands of the provincial and regional 
governments. In its current state, the coordination process undergone 
in order to formulate RPPLH seems too messy and complex to be 
successful, let alone implement it to safeguard and monitor national 
and regional development programmes.
What looks to be a failed governance scheme, however, has led 
to something unintended and, one may argue, productive. This pro -
duction, intended or not, is actually what defines the assemblage 
(Buchanan, 2021: 47). The messy entanglement of actors in this pecu -
liar process of planning and managing the environment brings forth 
novel ways of coordinating and making sense of data. Government 
agencies anticipate the use of a broader spectrum of data for their deci -
sion support system. Negotiation and compromise processes, rather 
than a top-  down hierarchical coordination, begin to take shape. At 
the same time, the failed project also opens up ways for the public 
to know more about RPPLH, the way it works, and how monitoring 
and planning can be further democratised. Universities and research 
centres hold training courses for professionals wanting to acquire 
new knowledge and skills related to RPPLH. Although RPPLH as 
a whole does not work, parts of it (particularly the environmental-  
assessment bits) remain one of the prominent tools to use in various 
environmental compliance measures. For example, the initial part of 
formulating RPPLH is to determine the carrying capacity (the extent 
to which natural resources can support human activities) and load   
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  57
capacity (the extent to which the environment can withstand pollution 
and burdens), which is currently a well-  known concept that is often 
used in companies’ environmental impact assessment (EIA) and the 
government’s strategic environmental assessment (SEA). The latter 
is a transitional instrument for environmental assessment (supposed 
to be integrated with RPPLH) which is now used as a prerequisite for 
spatial and development planning.
Notwithstanding the fact that strategic national projects such as a 
high-  speed railway, nickel mining for electric vehicles, and hydro -
electric dams can still proceed without any environmental planning, 
public scrutiny is now at play, and with new ammunition to support 
their cause for that matter. In the province of West Papua, environ -
mental NGOs pushed the provincial government to declare theirs as 
a Green Province, accompanied by a collaboratively crafted RPPLH 
document that functions not necessarily as a planning document per 
se, but as a strong statement made towards the central government to 
stop massive economic development in the region and instead shift 
to green economy in the form of carbon trade, habitat offsetting, and 
ecotourism. Public consultation, which is a necessary stage in the for -
mulation of RPPLH, is also a venue that opens dialogues between 
community groups, NGOs, the private sector, and the government in 
regard to environmental planning. For NGOs and community groups 
alike, the event is particularly important in channelling their concerns 
about their local environmental issues, which need to be integrated 
into the planning document. Thus, although RPPLH is a work of mul -
tiple actors within the bureaucracy, when brought to the wider public, 
it pushes other actors to rethink how environmental management and 
protection are supposed to be done.
The multiplicity of intended and unintended processes
Unintended but desirable outcomes of IP-  Suisse
In the case of IP-  Suisse, we observe how the unpredictability of an 
assemblage resulted in not one but a multiplicity of consequences and 
novel trajectories. When IP-  Suisse entered the Swiss AEG assemblage, 
it initiated and stimulated several processes ( Forney, 2021 ) which led 
to a diversity of outcomes, some of which were perfectly aligned with 
the objectives of the participating organisations, others were unin -
tended but acceptable to the actors, while others still were unwanted  
 
  
58 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
and unanticipated. The point here is not so much to decide what was 
(or was not) planned, intended, and anticipated, as it is to highlight the 
diversity of what emerges from an assemblage and the uselessness of 
assessing governance only through the lens of achievements.
Since its inception over two decades ago, IP-  Suisse has grown 
to become a key player in the Swiss agricultural sector. More than 
18,000 farm businesses are members of the organisation, which 
represents about 20% of all Swiss farms. Among them, around 10,000 
are certified with the IP-  Suisse label. In several key industries, the 
IP- Suisse standard covers a large part of the production, including 
wheat where around 40% of the market carries the ladybird label. 
Farmer members seem to engage enthusiastically in the promotion of 
biodiversity on their farms, totalling far more points (40% more on 
average, according to the IP-  Suisse website1) than what is required 
by the standardised point system (see Chapter 2  for a more detailed 
explanation of this system).
All these indicators are producing a narrative of unquestionable 
success. But is it really the right way to think of the outcomes of the 
label’s development? Does this interpretation give a true account of 
the complex processes that are going on in the Swiss AEG assem -
blage? If we engage seriously with the everyday experiences of the 
actors involved in the assemblage, we soon discover that there is 
never just one, but many stories to be told, which reflect the multiple 
faces of everyday AEG. These many stories do not necessarily align 
with one another. They are expressions of coexisting processes and 
tensions that animate the Swiss AEG assemblage and in which IP-  
Suisse, as an organisation, a food label, and a certification scheme, 
plays diverse roles. More particularly, looking at the everyday gov -
ernance points to stories that remain untold because they touch upon 
outcomes that were unanticipated and unwanted. Often those effects 
of governance practices remain overlooked as they are not reflected 
in the usual indicators mobilised for assessing the success of policies 
and strategies.
Alongside and beyond the success story of the rapid growth of 
IP- Suisse (as based on quantitative indicators such as number of 
members or biodiversity points cumulated), other processes have 
deployed around IP-  Suisse and the related web of relations. The 
assemblage reveals its capacities to serve an experimentation field. 
Actors engage with others, adjust their practices, and explore new 
ways of interacting, all this creating the dynamics of the assemblage   
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  59
and producing processes that go well beyond the explicit objectives of 
the governance practice.
For individual farmers, or at least some of them, IP-  Suisse certainly 
offers a place to build new involvements and dynamics around more 
environmentally friendly practices. One farmer explained how, for 
him and his brother, joining IP-  Suisse was part of a process of learning 
to farm differently. He learned not only about some of the sustainable 
methods used in farming and pest management but also about the care 
for the crops, which led him to observe, learn, and know about nature 
in a way that differed from what his father had known before.
This story also tells us that labels and organisations are not the 
alpha and omega of farmers’ learning processes. Farmers might be 
encouraged by premium prices or stimulated by an existing com -
munity of practice, but they do not stop at standards. Often, they do 
more and differently. IP-  Suisse appears here to be a milestone in a 
longer journey and arguably an easier step that allows for a progres -
sive onward move. This desire to learn and experiment is not limited 
to farm practices. As an example, another farmer member built on 
the IP-  Suisse network to develop Swiss production of quinoa. The 
process was largely facilitated by the use of the levers offered by the 
organisation to convince retailers, find mills and collecting centres and 
other producers, and finally set up a new value chain. As it happens, 
IP- Suisse farmers are often presented as dynamic and proactive, 
displaying some kind of pioneering spirit. This is reflected in the 
image of the organisation as reactive and open to experimentations.
A dense network, direct access to farmers, readiness to try, and flexi -
bility are qualities that IP-  Suisse’s partners value greatly. However, 
beyond short-  term market ventures, IP-  Suisse also plays a more cen -
tral and structural role in collective experimentation and knowledge 
creation. As a representative of a large industrial baker presented it, 
“IP- Suisse is our agricultural department, so to speak”. He illustrated 
this by mentioning the example of trying to launch Durum wheat pro -
duction in Switzerland, which had never been done before. As the 
baker put it, all are not “pure success stories”. However, the various 
connections developing around the IP-  Suisse organisation and actors 
of the assemblage—  farmers, processors, retailers, etc.—  create an 
environment that facilitates collective experimentations, notably 
around the development of new productions and value chains.
Another example shows how this experimentation space 
developing around IP-  Suisse has some potential for stimulating a  
60 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
deeper transformation of the food system. As the use of pesticides 
in Swiss agriculture was being intensely debated in the run-  up to 
a popular vote on a potential ban ( Finger, 2021 ), with most of the 
farmers’ organisations being against this ban, IP-  Suisse was contacted 
by a middle-  size industrial baker who wanted pesticide-  free wheat for 
its flour. IP-  Suisse took up the challenge and launched a call among its 
members. In less than 30 hours, the organisation could secure quotes 
for the required 3,000 tonnes of pesticide-  free grain.
As we can see here, the IP-  Suisse assemblage does produce many 
different processes of learning: about collaborating between partners, 
how to farm differently, how to grow new kinds of crops, how to build 
value chains based on ideas of sustainability, etc. Through the many 
collaborations and joint experimentations, actors engage together in a 
cumulative process of learning, which includes cross stimulations and 
synergies, and foster a dialogue around sustainability in food systems, 
by means of a pragmatic approach.
The unwanted side of IP-  Suisse
Looking at governance practices from the perspective of the wider 
governance assemblage in which they are located allows us to iden -
tify and understand better some of their unexpected results. The gov -
ernance assemblage produces its own processes and dynamics that 
traverse the governance practice. These wider processes influence 
greatly what emerges. As a modern democracy, the Swiss state builds 
on a massive bureaucratic apparatus. As we have seen, agriculture 
is an important political sector which redistributes huge amounts of 
money through a complex system of payments to farmers associated 
with environmental standards as well as specific schemes. Such 
policies are organised around bureaucratic instruments of account -
ability that are deployed to register and control farmers’ claims for 
state money.
In the IP-  Suisse assemblage, those instruments are very influ -
ential. As already said, there is strong concordance between policy 
standards and some IP-  Suisse standards. The direct payments (and the 
biodiversity point system) are designed in a way that gives farmers 
little room for manoeuvre, leaving only the choice between a selec -
tion of practices related to payments or points. The system is not made 
for testing, experimenting, and learning. As bluntly put by a civil ser -
vant from the Federal Office for Agriculture (FOAG), when asked    
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  61
about the role of farmers in the agri-  environmental policy, farmers 
are simply expected to implement what has been set by the standards.
However, “to implement” means not only to do agriculture differ -
ently. In order to participate in state-  policy programmes or certifica -
tion schemes, farmers primarily have to fill out a long list of forms 
and registers. Before mastering the agronomic challenges of agri-  
environmental practices, they have to understand the administrative 
system set up by those programmes; to invest time in paperwork; 
and to strictly record their practices in registers and forms. Farmers’ 
organisations have repeatedly denounced the overload of work caused 
by administrative tasks. The bureaucratic instruments of governance 
that are used seem to not only encourage farmers to implement more 
sustainable practices but also—  and mostly—  help turn good farmers 
into good bureaucrats.
From a farmer’s point of view, the problem lies not in the volume of 
work but its nature. Paperwork is generally despised by farmers as not 
being real work, at least not farmers’ work. Many farmers struggle to 
carry out these tasks that have become central to the economic balance 
of their farms. A significant proportion of farm revenues depends on 
them, first of all through the direct payment system but also if they 
want to benefit from premium prices related to a certification. An IP-  
Suisse farmer, who seemed to navigate this administrative maze com -
fortably, still expressed his worries for some of his colleagues who 
had to face this dramatic increase in administrative and desktop work.
Administrative skills, such as general computing skills, but also 
the ability and discipline to scrupulously record specific actions, to 
decipher the AEG jargon, to identify the synergies between different 
schemes, and develop strategies that optimise gains in relation to the 
implementation of a given farming practice, become essential for 
being a successful farmer in this AEG assemblage. In addition, rules 
and criteria are regularly evolving in all the schemes, and farmers 
have to keep themselves updated and adapt. A comparative study on 
psychosocial risks in agriculture, including Switzerland, identifies this 
continuous change in rules as a factor of insecurity and anxiety for 
farmers who are under constant fear of failing ( Droz et al., 2014 ).
Pressures on farmers are of course related to the checks that are 
central to building trust and accountability in the system. And, indeed, 
every year farmers are financially sanctioned for not complying with 
the rules. For instance, in a statement to the media, the FOAG said 
that, in 2016, 16% of Swiss farms had been sanctioned by the state   
62 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
with deductions from their direct payments, which amounted to a 
total of CHF 8.4 million. Interestingly, however, real misbehaviour 
seemed to be the exception, with most of those sanctions being given 
for “unimportant things, for instance forgetting to fill in a form”. This 
statement was confirmed in an interview with the private certifier. In 
other words, farmers and other actors in the food chain get sanctioned 
mostly for failures in the accountability system related to misreporting 
and declarations in the official forms and documents, and not so 
much for failing to observe the actual environmental requirements. 
In the practice of checks, this focus on the bureaucratic foundation of 
accountability systems is reflected in the fact that inspectors will first 
of all check the multiple documents and forms sitting in the farmer’s 
office or kitchen, and spend very little time and effort to look at the 
farm, the field, as the concrete results of the farmer’s work.
Those who ride the unpredictability of governance practices
Materiality and socio-  technical devices
In the case of DS, we want to unravel the many facets of heterogen -
eity as well as turn our attention anew to materiality and non-  human 
actors. We look at how everyday governance provides insight into 
the non-  linear, open, and fluid nature of assemblages (see also, e.g. 
Briassoulis, 2019 ). The key points here are the role of documents 
(non-  human agency) in shaping the agendas and mobilising soybeans 
as part of an emerging protein transition for Europe; the role of events 
in circulating the documents (and knowledge) beyond the boundaries 
of specific scientific expertise; and the unexpected effects shaped by 
the assemblage at the level of policy-  making experts in aligning the 
aims and actions of DS with the policy community.
We refer to Suchman (2012) , who argues that a plan reveals relations 
between ordering devices and the contingent labour through which 
it is produced and made reflexively accountable to ongoing activity. 
She further stresses that such an approach goes against naturalising 
plans as representations existing prior to, and determining, action. 
Henceforth, we use documents as devices that constitute multiple 
actions and which participate in the creation of the architectural 
design for soy in Europe. Attention to documents and their circula -
tion in different spheres of action points us to a new archaeology of 
knowledge that not only rewrites the goals and trajectories of action  
 
 
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  63
but also redefines the role of soy in the governance assemblage as 
well as the place of socio-  technical devices, such as standards, in the 
organisation’s agendas of change.
To start with, we look into how the scientific research project 
“Legume Futures” was supported by the European Union as a way 
of proofing against unintended consequences should an expansion 
of soya cultivation in Europe be pursued. This positioning of inten -
tion was welcomed by the project leader who underlined that if such 
research had been carried out 50 years ago, many of the environmental 
costs could have been avoided. In other words, the story is about how 
actors deal with the unpredictability of governance outcomes, both 
by trying to limit unintended consequences and, at the same time, by 
taking things as they come.
DS unearthed many of the socio-  material properties of soya as the 
organisation designed a standard (known as the Donau Soja standard) 
to be used as a main instrument of intervening in Europe’s soya 
market and of effecting changes in its agricultural practices. These 
include, for instance, the recognition of soya beans as legumes and the 
wider family of crops used as important sources of protein in farming 
systems, as well as their significance in crop rotation in those same 
systems. These characteristics came to be integrated into a knowledge 
coproduction process nourished by the diverse human actors involved 
in the science, business, and political decision-  making around this 
crop. The documents, events, and actions that kept this knowledge 
process unfolding and evolving came to shape the trajectories the DS 
organisation was to take. It shaped agendas, planning, and results.
These informed the internal workings of the assemblage and the 
interactions between socio-  technical, spatial, and political dimensions 
laid out by the DS project. Within a few years, DS established itself 
as an important player in the soya market in Europe. Not only was the 
design of the standard and the gradual uptake of the certification and 
label by numerous actors an indicator thereof, DS also demonstrated 
its contribution to the doubling of soya cultivation in the European 
Union, and to a further significant increase in quantities within five 
years through flows of soya from European countries outside of the 
European Union. Graphics presented at every DS assembly and con -
ference and in research outputs testified to this, without obscuring the 
long road lying ahead for covering half of Europe’s soya needs by 
2025 as planned by DS. The latter conjures up a whole set of other 
changes that go beyond the techno-  economic spheres required in  
64 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
the wider soya assemblage in order for a deeper transformation to 
take place.
A leading document was produced to delineate soya’s role and sig -
nificance for the wider political and agricultural landscape of Europe. 
The DS vision drew upon the so-  called Theory of Change in eco -
nomics to design a sustainable soya architecture for Europe with a 
long-  term vision in mind. This is “The European Protein Transition”,2 
which was finalised in 2018. It lays down five core lines of action 
which need pursuing in order to address the Protein Challenge and are 
required for a European Protein Transition to take hold:
1 Sustainable and responsible imports—  whereby the global dimen -
sion of the Protein Challenge is signalled.
2 Increased production of grain legumes in Europe—  underlined here 
are not just benefits to ecosystems but also far-  reaching benefits to 
other crops used in rotation, as well as spatial changes in the flows 
of soya from Eastern to Western Europe.
3 Improved use of existing and new protein sources—  this underscores 
the role of plants as the most important primary sources of protein.
4 Increased efficiency of protein use—  feed management being the 
target here.
5 Healthier diets—  this last pillar directs attention to the disconnect 
between official meat-  consumption recommendations and the 
actual overconsumption of meat.
What DS did was to come up with a “summary of the future”, as 
one of the main contributors to DS ingeniously put it. In this sense, 
once the long-  term visions were set, the architecture itself came to be 
built “backwards” by searching for the preconditions that would be 
necessary for the achievement of long-  term goals. For the short term 
(1– 5 years), the aims are to raise production standards and switch to 
100% certification, stimulate alternative value chains, and incentivise 
more precise protein feeding. For the medium term (1–  10 years), what 
is required is “bottom-  up” innovation tailored to local circumstances; 
more research and systematic translation at European, national, and 
local levels; and, most importantly, policy measures to drive diversity 
of cropping and improve on-  farm biodiversity. For the long-  term (1–  
20 years), it is the improvement of plant breeding along with public 
support for it, and the development of new value-  chain infrastructures, 
such as East–  West trading within Europe.  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  65
This action plan represents the most recent document that 
crowns a whole series of previous steps, research projects, thinking 
processes, consultations, market research, networking with hundreds 
of regional and national actor groups, etc. Between 2012 and 2017, 
within the short period of five years, a substantial amount of research 
was compiled under many formats, such as books, articles, research 
proposals, reports, and public talks. Many revolve around agronomic 
knowledge regarding the environmental benefits of legumes, but 
many others speak to the policy community and thus also articulate 
much broader interrelations that can be drawn from such research.
This work informed the design of the organisation’s instruments 
and practices of governance, shaped its ethos and the narratives of 
change mobilised by it, and also drove actions for political change 
at the national and supranational level. These two streams of actions 
for building the organisation and building scope for wider political 
change are held in tension by efforts to demonstrate the business 
opportunities in respect to the growth momentum that soya presents 
in Europe, which is sustained by hundreds of members and industries 
as well as by efforts to flag momentum for wide-  reaching change in 
European agriculture. This latter effort requires acknowledgment and 
participation from members of civil society, farmers, and scientists. 
Such a tension is further amplified by the following facts: first, a 
radical solution in the form of banning soya is not an option due to the 
stark dependency on soya in Europe’s animal production, which has 
seen exponential growth especially over the last 10–  20 years; second, 
readymade models found in global soya networks cannot be replicated 
in Europe; third, a simple focus on replacing soya with alternative 
plants would have a limited impact while also placing responsibility 
extensively on farmers and consumers. Yet, the piecing together of 
distinctive possibilities coming from research and practice has led to 
the development of instruments such as standards and certifications 
that include GMO (genetically modified organisms)-  free soya, a ban 
on using certain herbicides, the enrolment of mid-  chain actors, and the 
development of infrastructures.
The​logics​of​change​and​unexpected ​realignments
The theoretical framings that we draw upon inspire our probe into 
the logics of change transpiring from the co-  constitutive knowledge 
and practices that drive governance in particularly transformative   
66 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
ways, and lead us to think further about the ways in which social 
sciences conceptualise actual and emergent transformation processes. 
Geels and colleagues ( 2015 : 7) underline the importance of paying 
“attention to adoption and adjustments in existing systems and the 
realignments between multiple new and old elements” in order to 
understand the ways in which system architectures are reconfigured 
rather than look in a more linear manner for the single drivers coming 
from niche innovation.
Two research documents point us to the complementary dynamics 
in support of a reconfiguration process in the way these seek to build 
an alignment between the aims and actions of DS and the policy 
community (which would thus form a “governance arena for radical 
change”; see, Delemarle & Larédo, 2014 ). “Legume Futures”, 
a research report finalised in 2014 ( Legume Futures, 2014 ), and 
“Legume Transitions”, a research proposal submitted in 2016, were 
instrumental in creating visibility at the level of the European Union. 
Common to both is that they not only provide economic and agro -
nomic data and analyses based on a variety of tools and methods, 
they also point out some of the limitations of the current policy 
environment which are not conducive to change. The reports advo -
cate for currently marginal practices in agriculture, propose the seeds 
of several actions (some of which DS came to embrace), and, last 
but not least, respond to the topic du jour  in European agricultural 
discourses. There are thus multiple intersecting fields of meaning 
that are used to transform the “treadmill politics” ( Overdevest, 
2005 ) of agriculture.
We have presented some of the intersections between a series 
of documents that draw to the surface two distinctive movements, 
one which builds the DS ethos and the other which creates spaces 
and framings for policy advocacy. These two movements are co-  
constitutive. The research carried out in “Legume Futures” and 
“Legume Transitions” shaped the formulation of the European Protein 
Transition programmatic document and the composition of the Donau 
Soja Declaration,3 while the latter two shaped some of the processes 
of translation and framing that went into the former. Some of the 
effects and indirect outcomes of the two projects we described earlier 
became visible in 2018. That year proved to be auspicious with respect 
to two milestone developments: a new EU project called “Legumes 
Translated”4 awarded to DS in October 2018, and an event organised 
by the Digi-  Agri Directorate of the EU Commission, namely, the EU  
  
 
 
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  67
High-  level Meeting on Protein Plants organised in November 2018 in 
Vienna.
Our exploration of logics of change as articulated by the DS 
organisation has led us to emphasise how interactions between het -
erogeneous elements unleash new understandings of sustainability, 
and how these emerge through governance practices that pull away 
from the expectations that come with the development of socio-  
technical means via standards and certifications and into the political 
constellations formed by processes of reconfiguration. The methodo -
logical paths we embraced led us to address how a micropolitical ana -
lysis of documents as devices allows us to situate emerging properties 
and capacities of the assemblage, or what we referred to as unexpected 
and indirect outcomes, in a meso-  level cross-  cutting inquiry into 
reconfiguration. The agency of the unexpected is to be found in those 
spaces where things do not develop as planned ( Bentia, 2021 : 15). 
Therefore, we argue for conceptualisations of reconfiguration that are 
attentive to the agency emerging from the unexpected, and further of 
reconfiguration as both process and effect.
Concluding remarks: breaking with failure and success
This chapter has discussed ways in which the messiness of assemblages 
may lead to unintended consequences and unpredictable trajec -
tories which go beyond simple success or failure. For example, we 
demonstrated how in Indonesia vested interests, lack of coordination, 
and conflict between regional environmental planning and national 
strategic projects did not translate into linear, predictable outcomes for 
RPPLH. It gave rise to distrust, which in the end brought about novel, 
unanticipated, ways of enacting AEG in Indonesia. What seems to be 
a failed project, we later argued, paved ways for a more productive 
governance.
In Switzerland, the joint emergence of a multifunctionality turn 
in agricultural policies and the blossoming of certification schemes 
and food labels have deeply converged in a well-  structured AEG 
assemblage, where private and public instruments work in synergy. 
However, while assessments of the environmental efficiency of this 
entanglement of certification schemes and public agri-  environmental 
schemes are mixed, the production of a strong bureaucratisation of 
AEG, also supported by an emerging digitalisation of governance 
tools, becomes obvious.  
68 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
DS’s plans to tackle a path-  dependent system in Europe based on 
soya bean flows from overseas has led to the creation of a standard-   
and certification-  based agenda aimed to ensure an increase in the cul -
tivation of soya beans in Europe. More regional and European soya 
bean value chains would not only decrease dependency on other 
continents but also significantly enhance environmental benefits and 
agricultural practices, as they encourage rethinking of livestock feed, 
seed breeding, and crop rotation methods. A turning-  point develop -
ment emerged with the framing of soya beans as part of a more com -
prehensive protein-  plan strategy for Europe.
Looking from an assemblage perspective, we understand that 
failure is a “  ‘necessary consequence of incompleteness’ and of the 
inability to establish and sustain complete control of the complex 
assemblages involved in any such system” ( Malpas & Wickham, 
1995 : 39–  40). The use of complexity and assemblage thinking should 
enable us to break with a dualistic way of thinking of “system” and 
its “failures”, and instead look at chaos and order as interconnected 
features of any system, in processes of emergence highlighted in the -
ories of complexity and assemblage ( Urry, 2005 ; Buchanan, 2021 ). 
Failure, therefore, may open pathways to different spaces and possi -
bilities, which we need to anticipate.
This is what Buchanan (2021 : 124–  125) refers to when speaking 
of “wild policy”, which is always in the making, filling in the gap 
left between what the policy proposes and what it actually delivers. 
DeLanda (2006)  notes that this is mostly understood when we look 
at governance beyond intention and more in terms of desire (which 
belongs to both human and non-  human actors) instead. By better 
understanding desire, we may unravel the agency and power that lead 
to the multiplicity of assemblage and the unpredictability of outcome. 
In the next chapter, we look into this very aspect.
Notes
 1 www.ipsui  sse.ch/  fr/ miss ion- b/ , last accessed 09.06.2022.
 2 This document presents the programmatic agenda of the DS organisation. 
It can be found on the website of the organisation: www.donaus  oja.org/  wp- 
cont ent/ uplo ads/ 2022/  06/ DS_ Prot ein- Strat  egy- for- Eur ope- 26072  018.pdf , 
last accessed 29.09.2023.
 3 See www.donaus  oja.org/  organ  isat ion/ donau-  soja-  and- eur ope- soya-  decla  
rati ons/ , last accessed 29.09.2023.
 4 See www.legume  stra nsla ted.eu/  , last accessed 29.09.2023. 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Unpredictability of effects in AEG  69
References
Bentia, D. C. (2021). Towards reconfiguration in European agriculture: ana -
lysing dynamics of change through the lens of the Donau Soja organization. 
Sociologia Ruralis  61(4): 663–  680.
Briassoulis, H. (2019). Governance as multiplicity: the assemblage thinking 
perspective. Policy Sciences  52(3): 419–  450.
Buchanan, I. (2021). Assemblage Theory and Method . London/  
New York: Bloomsbury.
Capra, F. (1996). The Web of Life: A New Synthesis of Mind and Matter . 
London: Flamingo.
de Zwart, F. (2015). Unintended but not unanticipated consequences. Theory 
and Society  44: 283–  297.
DeLanda, M. (2006). A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage Theory and 
Social Complexity . Bloomsbury: London.
Delemarle, A., & Larédo, P. (2014). Governing radical change through the 
emergence of a governance arrangement. In S. Borrás & J. Edler (Eds.). 
The Governance of Socio-  Technical Systems  (pp. 159–  186). Cheltenham/  
Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Dinas Lingkungan Hidup Provinsi Jawa Barat. (2019). Rencana Pengelolaan 
dan Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup Daerah (RPPLHD) Provinsi Jawa 
Barat . Bandung: Pemerintah Provinsi Jawa Barat.
Droz, Y ., Miéville-  Ott, V ., Jacques-  Jouvenot, D., & Lafleur, G. (2014). 
Malaise en agriculture: Une approche interdisciplinaire des politiques 
agricoles France-  Québec-  Suisse . Paris: Karthala.
Ferguson, J. (1994). The Anti-  politics Machine: Development, Depoliticization, 
and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho . Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Finger, R. (2021). No pesticide-  free Switzerland. Nature Plants  7(10):  
1324–  1325.
Forney, J. (2021). Farmers’ empowerment and learning processes in account -
ability practices: an assemblage perspective. Journal of Rural Studies  
86: 673–  683.
Forney, J., & Dwiartama, A. (2023). The project, the everyday, and reflexivity 
in sociotechnical agri-  food assemblages: proposing a conceptual model of 
digitalisation. Agriculture and Human Values  40(2): 441–  454.
Geels, F. W., McMeekin, A., Mylan, J., & Southerton, D. (2015). A critical 
appraisal of Sustainable Consumption and Production research: the reformist, 
revolutionary and reconfiguration positions. Global Environmental Change  
34: 1–  12.
Law, J., & Mol, A. (2002). Complexities: an introduction. In J. Law & A. Mol 
(Eds.). Complexities: Social Studies of Knowledge Practices  (pp. 1–  23). 
Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
70 Unpredictability of effects in AEG
Legume Futures. (2014). Legumes Futures –   Legume-  supported Cropping 
Systems for Europe . General report.
Levin, S. A. (1999). Fragile Dominion: Complexity and the Commons . 
Reading, MA: Perseus Books.
Li, T. M. (2007). Practices of assemblage and community forest management. 
Economy and Society  36(2): 263–  293.
Malpas, J., & Wickham, G. (1995). Governance and failure: on the limits 
of sociology. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Sociology  
31(3): 37–  50.
Miller, P., & Rose, N. (1990). Governing economic life. Economy and Society  
19(1): 1–  31.
Overdevest, C. (2005). Treadmill politics, information politics, and public 
policy: toward a political economy of information. Organization & 
Environment  18(1): 72–  90.
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve 
the Human Condition have Failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Suchman, L. A. (2012). Human–  Machine Reconfigurations: Plans and 
Situated Actions . 2nd edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Talitha, T., Firman, T., & Hudalah, D. (2020). Welcoming two decades 
of decentralization in Indonesia: a regional development perspective. 
Territory, Politics, Governance  8(5): 690–  708.
Urry, J. (2005). The complexity turn. Theory, Culture & Society  22(5): 1–  14.
V oß, J.-  P., & Kemp, R. (2006). Sustainability and reflexive govern -
ance: introduction. In J.-  P. V oß, D. Bauknecht, & R. Kemp (Eds.). Reflexive 
Governance for Sustainable Development  (pp. 3–  28). Cheltenham, UK/  
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Walker, G., & Shove, E. (2007). Ambivalence, sustainability and the gov -
ernance of socio-  technical transitions. Journal of Environmental Policy & 
Planning  9(3–  4): 213–  225. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-4
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.4  Power, agency, and desire 
in everyday governance
Introduction: of power, agency, and desire
Power
Governance is intrinsically related to the exercise of power, as it 
aims to change or steer the action of others. In the context of agri-  
environmental governance (AEG), many actors exert, on diverse 
other actors, multiple forms of power that coexist and are articulated 
in the experience of the everyday. In the previous chapter, we have 
highlighted the multiplicity of processes resulting from assemblages. 
This coexistence, within the same assemblage, of diverse processes 
that do not align brings to the fore the role of power in their articula -
tion and their balancing. Processes are supported or resisted by elem -
ents, or groups of elements, of the assemblage. They emerge from 
a balance of power and are shaped by tacit or explicit negotiations. 
Acknowledging these multiple processes does not suffice to under -
stand what actually emerges from an assemblage.
An everyday perspective on AEG also needs to engage with a the -
orisation of power. In a Foucauldian sense, power is relational and 
dispersed. It is somewhat an effect generated by a collective agency 
in the form of knowledge, a regime of truth, and institutional values. 
It governs society so that it behaves in certain ways ( Foucault, 1977 ). 
A Deleuzian way of understanding power, however, goes a bit further. 
It sees power as something immanent within an assemblage. Power 
is not separated from the entity that exerts it, rather it is shaped by 
the interactions of actors—  human and non-  human—  through their 
desires and agency ( Rolli, 2016 ). Power, in this sense, comes from 
the relationality of the assemblage, which is exerted by the actors  
 
 
 
  
72 Power, agency, and desire
and elements of the assemblage through coordinations and tensions 
in such a way that the assemblage holds together, as stated by Allen:
Power, as I understand it, is a relational effect of social interaction. 
It may bridge a gap between here and there, but only through a 
succession of mediated relations or through the establishment of 
a simultaneous presence. People are placed by power, but they 
experience it at first hand through the rhythms and relationships of 
particular places, not as some pre-  packaged force from afar and not 
as a ubiquitous presence.
(2011 : 1– 2)
It is therefore interesting to see how power has both shaped the assem -
blage and is shaped through the assemblage. Approaches and theories 
influenced by assemblage thinking have underlined power in terms 
of power of association. Actor–  network theory points to the role of 
centres of calculation ( Latour, 1987 ). Practice theory highlights the 
power that practices themselves hold by simply coordinating and 
orchestrating relations ( Bourdieu, 1977 ). In a more general vein, the 
assemblage approach shifts attention to the non-  representational (and 
more-  than-  representational) dimensions that constitute the fabric of 
social life and thus offers the possibility to reconsider the emphasis 
given to the agency of representations, of individuals, and of scale by 
other traditions of thought. In this way, it lends weight to spatial, tem -
poral, and affective (lived, embodied, practised) relations that glue the 
elements of the assemblage together in ways that shape its trajectories.
Agency: individual, distributive, and collective
An assemblage is traversed by multiple streams of power. Elements of 
the assemblage have to navigate those streams in order to reach their 
own objective. For Tania Li (2007 : 264), “assemblage flags agency” 
as “the hard work” needed to create and maintain connections des -
pite many tensions. However, assemblage thinking also questions 
agency at the level of the individual, by highlighting the distributive 
nature of agency. Acting always depends on others. This statement 
questions the usual understanding of agency as the individual capacity 
to act autonomously. In assemblage, power at the individual level 
becomes the capability not to decide for others but to influence and 
steer the directions of processes of change. Similarly, agency becomes   
 
 
  
Power, agency, and desire  73
collective and distributive, highlighting the essential role of inter -
dependencies and alliances in the realisation of individual desires. 
Adding onto Tania Murray Li’s phrase, we can say that assemblage 
flags distributive  agency.
This engagement with the complexity of agency aims at a fine-  
grained understanding of how power works in governance. As Li 
(2007 : 264) noted, answers to “how” questions deserve more attention 
in the study of governance. Such questions—  how power is exerted in 
assemblages, how elements are unevenly impinging on the trajectory 
of the assemblage, or how interdependencies influence agency—  are 
essential at least from three different perspectives. From a demo -
cratic perspective, it should help to design more equitable and demo -
cratic governance practices. From an environmental perspective, it 
should contribute to identifying more ecologically efficient solutions. 
From a social perspective, it affects the cohesive quality of human 
relationships, drives mobilisation and engagement, and encourages 
collective responsible actions.
We should, however, emphasise that the power and distributive 
agency that are embedded within an assemblage do not mean that 
the assemblage is, in itself, autonomous and self-  regulating. This 
way of thinking would leave us trapped in depoliticising AEG and 
strip away any deliberate actions to achieve a more sustainable food 
system. Buchanan (2021 : 120–  121) warns us of Bennett’s (2010)  
conception of distributive agency, where he argues that “without any 
sense of how [elements of an assemblage] are interconnected, … we 
are condemned to go on untangling and following threads literally 
forever without being ever able to decide ‘this is it!’  ” We concur, 
and instead argue for the contrary: assemblage thinking enables us 
to envision resistance following a status quo, which Deleuze and 
Guattari refer to as “lines of flight”, being in opposition to “lines 
of articulation” (see also Dwiartama & Piatti, 2016 ). In this book, 
we therefore propose a discussion on power and agency that is more 
than just individual, collective, or distributive (such as what Bennett 
argues; see Bennett, 2010 ), but a complex relationship between the 
three forms of agency.
Desires
Elements of an assemblage come together with desires and 
intentionalities. Desire  is an element of the assemblage which can    
  
74 Power, agency, and desire
explain and demonstrate how different practices are “glued” together 
across scales and sectors in ways that significantly define the spe -
cificity of particular assemblages and the courses of actions taken. 
Deleuze and Guattari ( 1987 : 296) argue that desire is infrastructural 
and of the order of production. This argument is a strong statement 
in favour of the agency and power of desire. It brings for our ana -
lysis understandings as to the consequential nature of desire for the 
practice of governance in the way in which it both steers as well as 
changes actions and activities. Indeed, research underlines its out -
reach and indicates where desires can be captured and situated. Desire 
is an overflow that is never fully captured by the turbines of definable 
interests ( Windsor, 2015 : 157). Desires collectively shape the future 
direction of the assemblage. While never separated from the other 
two dimensions of agency and desire in assemblage (individual and 
distributive), the collective acquires a certain autonomy in the pro -
cess of ongoing assembling and reassembling. The collective dimen -
sion is formed and enacted through activities and practices that bring 
different actors, different forms of knowledge and governance goals 
together with the aim of communicating and sharing the ethos of an 
organisation.
Desires and agency matter because they shape the processes 
developing in the assemblage, while being the assemblage itself. 
Encounters and the partial alignment of desires can result in alliances 
around processes of change. Multiple agendas can align for a shared 
purpose, but with potential future divisions. Diverging desires can also 
work to destabilise the assemblage. Therefore, to be an agent is not 
something that has to be thought of as individual, but as a capability 
of influencing the wider assemblage on the basis of interrelations 
and interdependencies, with allies who can be humans, institutions, 
machines, skills, or ideas.
Assemblage also entails capacities, which is assemblage that has yet 
to materialise, but drives actors to do so by condensing and attracting 
desire. Capacity is an accumulation of desires that mobilise an assem -
blage towards a particular trajectory—  in the case of AEG, towards 
the sustainability that we aim to achieve. We further reflect this in our 
cases. In relation to IP-  Suisse, for instance, we question how power 
relations are characterised by a high level of interdependency—  both 
strong dependency on one retailer and counter-  power through renewed 
alliances. 
  
Power, agency, and desire  75
Building power and agency through alliances and 
interdependencies
The synergies within the IP-  Suisse assemblage described in Chapter 2  
are not a tale of harmony and egalitarian collaboration for a common 
good. They are made much more of tensions and conflicts than of 
shared interests. For instance, farmers, industries, and retailers have 
diverging interests in terms of price formation for every step in the 
value chain. Collaborations in the certification scheme are motivated 
by a diversity of underlying objectives. The sustainability officer of 
a meat-  processing company spoke of expanding its capacity to reach 
farmers and influence their practices in order to mitigate the envir -
onmental impact of its employer. A farmer spoke of his taste for 
new challenges and will to leave behind what he considered to be 
bad practices. A representative of IP-  Suisse talked about securing 
added value for the commitment to environmental actions done on 
farms; the marketing officer of a supermarket chain commented 
positively on the good balance between sustainability branding and 
still- accessible prices. The fact that the IP-  Suisse assemblage con -
tinues to grow successfully does not mean that all these tensions are 
somehow neutralised, but it makes obvious the role of power within 
the assemblage. Power relations are obviously essential dynamics that 
at the same time result from the coming together of the elements of 
the assemblage, and shape how the elements of the assemblage stick 
together.
While other approaches tend to clearly identify power relations and 
dominant positions, the multiplicity of relations that characterise the 
assemblage complexifies the question of power. The way a dominant 
position leads to the actual possibility of controlling or shaping the 
assemblage is not clear. Let us take the example of the decision of the 
big retailer, who clearly holds power, to impose pesticide-  free produc -
tion for all the wheat flour used for the bread it sells. This decision was 
made possible only because IP-  Suisse already experimented with grain 
production without any chemical in partnership with another, smaller, 
industrial baker. Similarly, all the actors involved in seed selection in 
the past decades made available wheat varieties that are adapted to the 
Swiss context and quite resistant to many diseases. The state subsidies 
paid for pesticide use reduction made the new standard more econom -
ically viable for farmers, who could feel in public debates and political 
decisions that they would anyway have to move progressively away   
76 Power, agency, and desire
from the use of products that are damaging to health and the envir -
onment. Also, wheat and its specific property could be included in 
this programme, while other, more vulnerable crops, such as rapeseed, 
would not fit. We could continue with this list for many pages, but the 
point is already clear.
One could say that the retailer decided unilaterally on this ban on 
pesticides and that the whole IP-  Suisse assemblage was forced in one 
direction by one dominant actor, and it is a fact that not any actor 
could have such an influence on the assemblage. However, at the 
same time, ignoring the many efforts made by a multitude of actors 
is quite unfair. It would actually make us blind to the complexity of 
acting, and therefore, blind to the distributive nature of agency in 
assemblages. Indeed, a relational understanding of power recalls the 
concept of distributive agency that characterises assemblage thinking 
(see Chapter 2 ). As you may remember, Bennett (2010)  uses the meta  -
phor of the bicycle on a gravel road: the precise trajectory results 
from the action of many elements. Building on this, elements of a 
governance assemblage might well have their individual plans, but 
what results and actually happens depends on the actions of many. 
From an assemblage perspective, no one can govern alone, not even a 
very dominant supermarket chain. The most powerful elements of the 
assemblage still need the others to act and cannot totally control what 
emerges from this joint action.
The assemblage is defined not by the addition of its elements or 
by the relations that constitute it, but by what it produces. And what it 
produces is the result of the accumulation of those multiple agendas 
and agencies. This means that none of the elements of the assemblage 
can decide alone what the whole will become. Elements are dependent 
on others to achieve their goals, and their goals and actions are them -
selves influenced by those of others. Of course, some actors have a 
stronger influence within a specific assemblage, but none can control 
all of its productions. The agency of the assemblage is distributive. 
As in the image used by Bennett (2010) , although someone can hold 
a bike’s handlebars, all the pebbles on the road, the wind, and other 
road users will still influence its trajectory. Annemarie Mol’s decon -
struction of the statement “I eat” exemplifies well that actions—  which 
we usually think of as individual—  are always made possible by the 
action of others, humans and non-  humans. As she concludes, such a 
relational engagement with action “suggests a model of doing that 
does not just elude centralised control but also defies individualism”  
Power, agency, and desire  77
(Mol, 2021 : 77). This distributive agency of the assemblage results 
from the complex accumulation of multiple agendas—  or, from our 
perspective, desires—  and agencies. “Distributive” in this sense means 
a set of interactive, consequential, encounters, convergent processes 
(e.g. deliberative governance), colliding forces (e.g. different goals of 
governance), or interdependent actions. This is what could be called 
the “context” of power and that which shapes the collective dimen -
sion of the assemblage. This ultimately circumscribes the co-  creative 
and co-  constitutive processes which animate the life force of assem -
blage. In other words, Deleuze and Guattari invite us to understand the 
organising logics that define assemblages. Concepts such as desire, 
attractors, and the collective dimension conjure up its dynamics. 
Acknowledging the agency of numerous elements of the assemblage 
does not erase or minimise the question of power, it makes it even 
more complex. Not only power is always relational and depends on 
the agency of others to be exerted, actors too are entangled in multiple 
relations of power.
The power exerted by the federal state and its capacity to intro -
duce new agri-  environmental policies sparked the idea itself of cre -
ating IP-  Suisse in the minds of its founding members. The alliance 
with supermarkets that hold a dominant position in the food systems 
has been a core axis of the certification strategy. In other words, the 
assembling of the IP-  Suisse certification scheme was built on the 
combination of two separate streams of power. Of course, there was a 
price to pay in this alignment with the already most powerful actors, 
which would expand their capacity to weigh in on and influence the 
IP- Suisse assemblage. In such a situation, alliances and conflicts are 
blurred categories and not easy to differentiate. Large retailing groups 
have concentrated in their hands a good share of the power in current 
food systems, and this is certainly true in the case of Switzerland. The 
partnership between the retailer Migros and IP-  Suisse started from 
the very beginning. This means that the whole organisation of the 
label and certification has been shaped by this partnership. In fact, 
the Migros group does not only buy 80% of the wheat but also a large 
share of all the other products certified by IP-  Suisse. At the same time, 
IP- Suisse has been involved at the core of Migros’s sustainability 
strategies for Swiss food products. The farmer organisation is deeply 
integrated in several value chains supplying Migros supermarkets, 
with key roles in quality and quantity management. Migros also owns 
the processing facilities through which those products transit. The   
78 Power, agency, and desire
retailer is therefore a significant gatekeeper controlling access to the 
market. Still, the farmer organisation also controls access to farmers 
and this central role is acknowledged by actors in the food industry. 
This is suggested by Clapp and Fuchs’s (2009)  model of corporate 
power in food systems. In addition to the control over infrastructures 
and markets, retailers exert considerable power on the narratives 
and images that accompany products. A good illustration of this dis -
cursive power was the use for more than 20 years of Migros’s own 
brand, “Terrasuisse”, imposed on IP-  Suisse-  certified products. Until 
recently, the retailer refused to use the official brand and logo of IP-  
Suisse (the ladybird). Interestingly, Migros and IP-  Suisse announced 
jointly in 2020  that they would strengthen their partnership and that 
this would also include the use of the ladybird on the packaging 
instead of the label Terrasuisse. In fact, the brand Terrasuisse was 
never seen as very successful and the increase in the fame of the 
ladybird, notably thanks to a new partnership with another retailer 
(i.e. Denner), most likely played an important part in this reversal in 
Migros’s communication strategy and capability to keep control over 
these important symbols.
The concentration of instrumental, structural, and discursive power 
in the retailing sector ( Clapp & Fuchs, 2009 ) seems to also be a reality 
in the IP-  Suisse assemblage. This power would not exist without the 
action and participation of many elements of the assemblage, actors 
in the value chains, consumers, policies. The certification scheme 
itself contributes to the centralisation of power over retailers, not -
ably through the implementation of a strict unidirectional traceability 
paradigm. This traceability is based mostly on the identification of 
the products and actors, on the collection of samples at every step 
of the chain, and on the precise documentation of the circulation of 
goods through the food chain so “we can track down”—  in the words 
of a certifier—  products from the package in the supermarket to the 
farm, across every step of the value chain. The whole process seems 
to be oriented upstream, focusing the attention on possible failures 
happening on the way to the shop. Targeted checks—  beside the usual 
random checks conducted under the certification scheme—  are gen -
erally activated on the initiative of the retailer. The whole assem -
blage seems to create attention and controls that always look to the 
production side of the chain, as we later also explain similarly in the 
case of Donau Soja (DS). The few errors made in the supermarket 
shops we heard from were tolerated, whereas mistakes by farmers or  
  
Power, agency, and desire  79
intermediaries led to financial sanctions. The logic of the certification 
reflects well the double movement of power in the assemblage, where 
power relations shape the assemblage at the same time that the assem -
blage produces power relations. If the power of the retailer results 
from the concerted actions of many actors, the same can be said for 
counter-  power developing in the assemblage. Alliances are made 
and new actors are brought in the assemblage reconfiguring power 
relations, as we have seen, for instance, with the arrival of the hard 
discounter Denner.
Obviously, state policies exert a major influence on the IP-  Suisse 
assemblage, setting the legal and political frame that defines the govern -
ance instruments and their fundamental logic. So do the retailers, who 
mobilise certification in developing new markets and building their 
environmental legitimacy. Less directly, the certification agencies, as 
long-  term partners, influence the development of IP-  Suisse’s standard 
in dialogue with the farmers’ organisation, translating general propos -
itions into schemes and measures that are compatible with the logics 
of certification. The same goes for all the elements of the assemblage. 
Simply by existing in the assemblage, and then by trying to follow the 
course of their desires and finding allies, they collectively build their 
agency, which is never fully individual.
One question, however, lingers: if power and agency are never 
fully individual, and if power is exerted through a continuous process 
of becoming among complex assemblages of actors, then what makes 
a certain form of power (in this case, one that seems to be dominated 
by a single actor, i.e. the retailer) stable and not others? In many 
literatures, power/  control is most often unidirectional. It is seen as 
something exerted from the top down or from the centre towards the 
periphery. Even when we talk in a Foucauldian sense, the relationality 
of power implies that the sovereign/  disciplinary institutions are those 
that gain the most benefits from the power relations.
However, we argue that, in an assemblage approach, not only is 
power relational and multidirectional, it can also be transient. Of 
course, in strongly territorial assemblages, power relations can be fairly 
stable, as shown in the case of the IP-  Suisse assemblage. However, 
as power is always in the making, there are cases where power can 
be manifested differently in response to the changing arrangements 
and alignments of actors within an assemblage. It can be at once 
centralised and stable, and yet, through these changes, transformed 
into an entirely new form. In the case of Indonesia’s RPPLH, we look  
80 Power, agency, and desire
at the ephemerality of power as an encounter within new assemblages 
(Faier & Rofel, 2014 ; Huang, 2020 ).
Encounters of power and ephemeral assemblages
As asserted in Chapters 2  and 3, RPPLH is seen as a device that emerges 
from the central government’s attempt to build legitimacy on environ -
mental governance over the regional and local governments. Whether 
this instrument works is yet to be ascertained. What seems clear is 
that the introduction of RPPLH as a component of the environmental 
governance assemblage created a moment where power dissolved and 
re- emerged in a novel form. In documenting this distributed power, 
we once again look at the way in which West Java’s Environmental 
Agency pushed the RPPLH that they led to build it into their provin -
cial development planning.
West Java’s Environmental Agency is a small, sometimes insig -
nificant, agency amidst the larger government offices, such as the 
planning, agriculture, industrial, and public work agencies. Regardless, 
the officials bear a heavy mandate—  they have to ensure that all devel -
opment projects, economic activities, and government programmes 
comply with the environmental standards set. The agency has always 
been under public scrutiny in regard to their responsibility to safe -
guard the ecological integrity of West Java’s landscape amidst devel -
opment pressures. When the public sees there are floods during the 
heaviest rains, all eyes are set on the reasons why the Environmental 
Agency is unable to regulate factories along the Citarum River (the 
largest river in West Java, which connects major industrial areas and 
cities in the province). However, business often sneers at the agency 
for being a hindrance to development—  setting too low a pollution 
threshold and implementing too strict rules that might leave business 
inoperable.
So, when an opportunity arose to use an instrument potentially as 
strong as a development plan, the Environmental Agency took a lead 
in bringing its desire into an assemblage of environmental govern -
ance. They coordinated with various other offices to bring their ana -
lysis of environmental conditions in West Java onto the table. They 
consolidated data, reports, and statistics to make a valid planning point. 
They worked with academics and consultants to gain insights into 
data interpretation and meanings. Ultimately, they tried to convince 
the ministry about how their RPPLH had been planned succinctly    
Power, agency, and desire  81
and on a strong scientifically legitimate basis. RPPLH, here, acts as 
more than just a document or scheme. It is something that reconfigures 
actors in a new set of assemblages.
What we then witnessed within West Java’s Environmental Agency 
is how an institutional actor (and the human actors within) has made 
use of this new assemblage to exert a form of power that is different 
from what is usually exerted by the central government. The cen -
trality of planning now shifts to the Environmental Agency. However, 
whereas the central government exerts its power through regulations, 
instructions, and top-  down commands all the way to the regional 
level, the current power is instead moving sideways, making use of 
negotiation and coordination. The Environmental Agency negotiated 
with other agencies through data, and coordinated through the cre -
ation of a document. Let us take a few examples to illustrate.
It is clear that the Environmental Agency has a certain desire to 
delimit the extent of economic development in the province through 
strict environmental regulations and standards. It aims to prioritise 
environmental logic over others. RPPLH allows the agency to do so 
by demonstrating how environmental data (water and air pollution, 
human population, rate of deforestation, or soil degradation), if 
configured correctly, is apparently connected (in a statistical sense, 
correlated/  influenced by) to other sets of data for which other agencies 
are responsible (e.g. water availability, irrigation infrastructure, 
settlements, agricultural productivity). The agency might show, for 
instance, that the settlements encroaching on the hinterland reduce the 
availability of clean water and, in effect, increase the health risks to the 
population. In response to this, the agency argued that the Settlement 
Agency needed to shift the focus of its programme to a different area 
or limit the development altogether. The same holds true for the way 
the Manufacturing Agency should change where and how industries 
are operated. Through data (as translated through the RPPLH assem -
blage), the Environmental Agency de-   and reterritorialises the provin -
cial landscape by allowing and closing other actors’ access to one or 
other territory.
The Environmental Agency also coordinated through the cre -
ation of a document. As the lead actor in the formulation of RPPLH, 
the agency makes recommendations on how coordination between 
agencies is supposed to be conducted to achieve the province’s envir -
onmental goals. For every region that is assigned a certain environ -
mental and developmental objective (e.g. the north coast of West  
82 Power, agency, and desire
Java being assigned the role of a sustainable agricultural region), the 
agency appoints the Agricultural Agency to take on the main respon -
sibility of ensuring that environmental standards are being integrated 
into the food security objective. Similarly, at the central regional level, 
the responsibility is assigned to the Plantation Agency, and in the 
metropolitan area, to Settlement and Transportation Agencies. These 
agencies are required to coordinate with the Environmental Agency in 
each aspect of development, ensuring that environmental impacts are 
taken into account. For the Environmental Agency, therefore, RPPLH 
is seen to build a coherence between sectors at the same regional level, 
under its coordination.
The ministry, however, looks at this effort rather differently. 
From their perspective, RPPLH is a way to build coherence between 
national and regional planning. The RPPLH document at the national 
level should be the main reference for the lower-  level RPPLHD. It is 
like looking at a higher-  resolution map, where the detailed plans are 
actually derived from the bigger picture. It is another desire that leads 
such power to be exerted on the other actors within the assemblage. 
The central government, it seems, looks at power as part of a plain 
vertical relation, whereas the Environmental Agency would argue that 
power manifests through their assemblage, where governance may go 
top down, bottom up, sideways, or across. While the Environmental 
Agency acts as the centre of calculation in the context of RPPLH, its 
centrality is more rhizomatic rather than geographical in nature.
We therefore understand that a new power is exerted from the 
encounter between the assemblage of vertical hierarchies, which is a 
complex arrangement held together through rules and regulations that 
enable the ministry to issue commands to the regional governments, 
and the assemblage of horizontal arrangements brought about 
through coordination and negotiations between regional offices 
and agencies. We refer to the work of Faier and Rofel on what they 
termed the ethnography of encounters, as well as DeLanda’s tran -
sient assemblages. Their study focuses on how culture is “made and 
remade in everyday life” ( Faier and Rofel, 2014 : 364) not within a 
single population, but through encounters between two or more cul -
tural groups. Huang (2020)  extends the analysis to investigate the 
establishment of an energy initiative that emerges not from a well-  
planned project but a messy series of events. We think that the argu -
ment can also be applied to the notion of transient power, as shown 
in the case of RPPLH. 
Power, agency, and desire  83
One thing to underline in the case of environmental govern -
ance in Indonesia is that it never truly manifests in a stable set of 
assemblages (see Chapter 2  for an elaborate narrative of the history 
of environmental governance; or see Dwiartama, 2018 ). These con -
tinuous changes substantiate the idea that what appears to be stable is 
instead a “quasi-  stable state” ( Dwiartama & Piatti, 2016 ), subject to 
both weakening and reinforcing forces, or in Deleuzian terms, lines of 
flight and lines of articulation. However, what is interesting about this 
particular case is that RPPLH, in both its machinic (a document) and 
enunciative (an idea or scheme) senses, acts somewhat as a disruption 
that enables us to see this encounter between two sets of assemblages 
in their processes of de-   and reterritorialisation. In a Latourian sense, 
this is analogous to unravelling a black box ( Latour, 2005 ), or to 
foregrounding the infrastructure of an assemblage ( Star, 1999 ).
Our concern, however, is not only to see how assemblage is shaped 
but also, therefore, how power is exerted as a relational effect of the 
said encounter. RPPLH, in this case, enables a reconfiguration of 
actors and manifestations of different power relations. It has shifted 
one actor to the foreground (the Environmental Agency) and the 
others to the background (the Ministry of Forestry and Environment, 
the Regional Planning Agency), while introducing new materials (a 
formal RPPLH document) and reducing the importance of others (an 
AMDAL document). It enables actors to build new connections with 
others through coordination and negotiation, such as is the case with 
how the Environmental Agency becomes a centre with which other 
less powerful actors form an alliance. Tensions are also apparent in the 
way the ministry attempts to weaken this alliance through its claims 
about what an RPPLH document should be (while the agency argues 
that theirs aligns with what the province needs in terms of environ -
mental planning).
The two cases tell us that it takes a lot of effort to maintain an 
assemblage, but it would also take similar effort to build or introduce 
a new assemblage. Power is indeed an effect of an assemblage, but 
through the relationality of power, assemblage is also held together 
and broken apart. Power manifests in a spectrum of possibilities over 
many directionalities, and is driven through the many desires each of 
the heterogeneous actors in the assemblage brings along. Thus, power 
is something that is recursively performed. This happens through 
acts of controlling the production chains by means of a bundle of 
instruments, institutions, and groups of (human) actors; it also happens  
 
  
84 Power, agency, and desire
through forms of calculation and metrics that are used to reinforce 
and legitimise actions; and through practices such as meetings that 
consolidate membership, conjoin inter-  professional groups, as well 
as members of civil society and political representatives, and where 
diverse instruments find new spaces and territories of enactment, as 
we will show in the case of DS. This is, we think, where desires play a 
critical role in unravelling how such enactments are actualised.
When agency rules: collective enactments of desire and 
transnational spaces
Deleuze and Guattari’s work builds up in such a way that the gen -
erative power of assemblages comes through again and again. Not 
only does it emerge from the ongoing tensions that territorialise and 
deterritorialise assemblages, but also at the dynamic interface between 
the actual and the not-  yet- actualised. The tool that Deleuze and 
Guattari give us in order to get a grasp of how this interface is formed 
is that of desire. We argue that this interface invites further engage -
ment with the messy and transient/  ephemeral nature of assemblages 
and challenges us counterintuitively to search for the structuring 
power mechanisms therein. Desires have a significant role in how they 
operate in the collective dimension of assemblages.
The collective dimension is helpful in bringing a further order of 
understanding as to the place of motivation, imagination, enthusiasm, 
affect, beliefs, expectations, and attachments in the workings of the 
assemblage, and provides scope for analysing how these are reordered 
through certain practices. A significant role that DS engages with is 
communicating their understanding of the value of soya for Europe. 
This is not a clear-  cut or straightforward task, but a transactional and 
situated exercise. This is a form of expertise that DS members take on, 
embody, and practise consistently. And it is the driver of their craft, 
the desire that mobilises their work and goals.
The heterogeneity of the assemblage as actualised in the DS organ -
isation includes diverse and different perspectives on the value and 
promise of soya beans for Europe. What can soya do for Europe, what 
can it do for farmers, what can it do for the retailers, etc.? Given that the 
monoculture model of farming became so lucrative in the Americas, 
how can European soya provide interesting alternatives for industries, 
processors, and farmers? Could it disrupt existing patterns, could it 
provide innovative paths for more sustainable agri-  food systems?  
Power, agency, and desire  85
Organisations such as the World Wildlife Fund or Via Campesina-  
EcoRuralis, who support the idea of small farmers joining DS, are 
motivated by the fact that growing soya beans in Europe is a signifi -
cant measure whereby dependency on the monocrop production based 
on genetically modified (GM) soya beans can be reduced. This then 
raises for the said NGOs the question of how farmers are included in 
the organisation, how they can support DS work, and, in turn, what the 
benefits for farmers are. Thus, when DS organised the biannual inter -
national conference in 2018 in Schwäbisch Hall in close collaboration 
with a member farming association, some members criticised the fact 
that out of the nearly 300 participants, very few were farmers, and this 
undermined their expectations that farmers would be the bedrock of 
the DS organisation.
For the executive board of DS, however, farmers’ presence and 
power is a question relative to the functions and facilitations opened 
up by the method of certification and the stipulations of the standard, 
and also where large-  scale soya farming is seen as having a potentially 
significant impact by disrupting the still dominant monoculture styles 
of agriculture in Europe, which are blind to better crop rotation, less 
intensive uses of herbicides, and complexities of the nitrogen cycle. 
It is in this larger-  scale method of farming that soya beans become 
interesting in the conventional sector. Alternative systems such as 
the organic model had been adopting soya in crop rotation all along 
(the certification is taken up by the processors and not the farmers; 
farmers voluntarily adopt best practices, and regular checks take 
place). There are complementing tools to the certification process that 
aim to better assist farmers and the integration of products in value 
chains. DS focuses on setting training programmes in place as a way 
to create alliances between actors in the value chain and farmers, and 
on designing innovative tools—  such as the “Protein Partnership”—  
which are intended as a low-  cost alternative to the overseas credit 
system. For DS executives, farmers are one group of actors alongside 
equally important groups such as businesses, industries, retailers, and 
processors who adopt the certification and label and thus increase the 
presence of DS in the conventional markets.
The two stances in respect to internal reflexivity vis-  à- vis the prob -
lematisation and pragmatics of the role of farmers in the organisation 
articulate desire in two different ways: in terms of expectations of a 
bottom-  up change and in terms of an effort to make the standard work 
by pursuing the nitty-  gritty steps of enrolling actors, coordinating  
86 Power, agency, and desire
actions, and ensuring quality. These articulations of expectations 
and motivations are part of expressions of desire that unfold along 
the individual and distributive dimensions of the assemblage. 
They are strongly attached to the socio-  technical as well as institu -
tional expertise of developing the tools and conditions for soya to 
be cultivated and used in Europe. One consequence of this is that 
expectations of bottom-  up change are in fact transformed through the 
distinctive design of the certification process which actually relieves 
some of the pressures and expectations placed on farmers as drivers 
of change.
Everyday governance is entangled with high economic and polit -
ical stakes. Powerful actors in the business of soya are invited to con -
sider new opportunities in Europe, and important decision-  makers are 
presented with facts and figures as to the benefits of soya. The economic 
and ecological values of soya enter competitively multiple spaces of 
debate, persuasion, and calculation. In this way, plans to develop 
soya agriculture in Europe involve building diplomatic relations with 
national and regional state actors (including prime ministers, agri -
cultural, environmental, and trade ministers) within soya-  cultivating 
regions such as Hungary, Romania, Moldova, Germany, and Austria. 
They play important roles in building alliances, creating new projects 
and plans, and nourishing the transnational dimension of the vision 
for soya. The desires that flow into this territory break the boundaries 
of instrumental rationalities targeting economic and political gains. 
Several events direct desires into spaces of intense sociality where 
personal and professional relations can be strengthened, and members 
and non-  members can have lively and open discussions which allow 
for strengthening personal and professional relations, and for lively 
and open discussions among members and non-  members.
Every two years, DS organises an international conference and 
opens the stage for the science, politics, and economics of soya to 
be voiced to a heterogeneous public made up of members and non-  
members. The different actors of the organisation communicate their 
results, difficulties, and plans for the future. Every year, smaller events 
are also organised which also aim to reach out to different publics 
and inform on the ongoing developments. They also connect powerful 
allies with influence in the economics of soya across regions. Thus, the 
Budapest conference honoured Hungary not only as being important 
in terms of the cultivation of soya beans and adherence to non-  GM 
policy but also its agency as a liaising gatekeeping region between  
Power, agency, and desire  87
Western and Eastern European countries which produce soya. This 
thus confers geopolitical significance on Hungary and the Danube river 
basin. Such events and meetings lead to the formation of attractors 
where desires are shaped. In Haug’s (2013 : 705–  708) view, meeting 
arenas both organise and mobilise purpose and action which have an 
effect on the meso-  level spaces of governance; he underlines the key 
roles of face-  to- face meetings in the interorganisational domain of 
meso-  mobilisation and how these enable coordination across organ -
isational boundaries. All such events outstretch immediate goals and 
specialised knowledge in that they aim to communicate and translate 
the bigger picture of the sense and place of soya in terms of the signifi -
cant contribution it can bring to the wider vision of protein sufficiency 
in European agriculture, and therefore soya as a driver of a protein 
transition for Europe (see Bentia, 2021 ).
Accounts occupy the central stage of meetings. Results-  based 
accounts, administrative and financial accounts, outlook and agenda-  
setting accounts, environmental, agricultural, social, and polit -
ical accounts offer the building blocks of evidence that undergird 
decision-  making and planning. Accounts carry desires into the spaces 
of meetings and enact them in various ways. To a large extent, calcu -
lative instruments such as metric evaluations and assessments pro -
vide the launching pad of argumentation in favour of leading framings 
concerning carbon-  emission mitigation, the nitrogen cycle, land use, 
and forest conservation. Most often these point to how soya’s sys -
temic features affect the multiple levels of agri-  food systems at the 
same time that these make visible alignments or misalignments with 
sustainability goals. Accounts do not just articulate the results of 
the standard and how these meet or do not meet economic and eco -
logical expectations, they also voice propositions for acting on the 
yet- unrealised potentials of the standard and its value in advancing the 
protein transition in the European Union. Thus, a high-  level EU rep -
resentative expressed the possibility of developing a protein balance 
tool to be used as a new sustainable development indicator and as a 
way to monitor and address the protein-  plant deficit in Europe. Such 
accounts steer desires towards the overarching DS goal, namely, 
including soya as a tool to rethink the uses of protein in Europe, as 
well as how it can feature in policy-  making. In this way, new trajec -
tories for action emerge which undergird leverage points for sustain -
ability. Such acts of translation not only reposition the importance of 
metrics in steering change they also redefine the role of soya in food  
  
88 Power, agency, and desire
systems. As accounts are staged, many in the audience voice insights 
into soya being a political issue.
Hence, desire is useful not only in understanding the articulation 
and negotiation of power relations but also in making visible the 
relation between articulations of power and sense-  making processes 
that shape the assemblage. Farías (2014)  argues that sense-  making 
emerges from the coproduction processes taking place between actual 
and virtual assemblages. This is a further elaboration of Deleuze and 
Guatarri’s thoughts on capacities which exist in the virtual and have 
the power to shape actual assemblages. This is where the agencies 
of soya come into play once again, to show not only how soya is 
good for business or for the environment but also how soya is good 
for the transformation of food systems (which will be elaborated in 
Chapter 5 ).
As a valuable protein resource, soya can work as a powerful 
element of the assemblage by contributing to a protein transition 
in Europe. In this latter capacity, soya becomes the leverage point 
for reconfiguring agricultural practices, value chains, and inter -
national relations, to thus reorient a path-  dependent system into new 
directions. These new directions are embedded in the supraordinate 
goals of the organisation. These amount to a programmatic plan and 
vision that advocates and demands new integrated regulatory pol -
icies and comprehensive measures to be included in the Common 
Agricultural Policy Reform. The range of considerations and possible 
solutions framed in various documents include tackling systemic 
challenges such as the fact that farming systems are not balanced 
with respect to the nitrogen cycle, cropping systems are not diverse 
enough, the excess consumption of animal proteins, etc. The matter 
of soya beans as leverage points in a protein transition is raised at 
most meetings and this directs debates beyond the immediate and 
short-  term goals of the organisation and into spaces of possibility for 
wide-  reaching long-  term transformation.
Thus, what is being performed is not only a plurality of facts that 
manifests in documents, metrics, and events but also the heterogen -
eity of soya’s properties and capacities as emerging from their inter -
dependent agencies in wider assemblages. The engine that fires such 
coproduction of knowledge is the translation of matters-  of- fact into 
matters-  of- concern on the one hand, as well as into matters-  of- care 
on the other. This does not mean that the governance practice of 
DS diverges into random and infinite expressions of desires, or that  
Power, agency, and desire  89
governance plans represent a holistic exercise of adding up the sum of 
properties and capacities in one institutional setting.
Meetings contribute to the production of attractors by shaping col -
lective agency. Desires are pulled to gravitate towards attractors that 
both render DS as an organisation more stable and at the same time 
influence the wider soya assemblage. Soya is not only made sense 
of but also redefined in this process. Contrary to the expectations of 
participants in this event, soya is not the centrepiece of eco-  agronomic 
productivist measures, but rather the blind spot of legislators who are 
called to actualise its systemic and structural potential for agricul -
ture. In this way, assemblages gain performative power in a number 
of ways. One of the insights such a perspective brings to the analysis 
and method of inquiry of assemblages is related to the ontological 
ordering of governance.
The emergent power of the DS assemblage is strongly related to 
ways in which the collective dimension is enacted through everyday 
forms of governance. This means that everyday forms of govern -
ance not only participate in shaping the individual and distribu -
tive elements of the assemblage by contributing to the actualisation 
of infrastructures, alliances, and flows of certified soya but also in 
shaping and changing the very governance practice that realised the 
formation of the socio-  technical arrangement of soya. Thus, the col -
lective dimension of the assemblage has a defining role in enacting the 
onto-  epistemological possibilities embedded in the agencies of soya 
beans and in the distributed and diverse network of the human actors 
involved. Furthermore, it is the collective dimension that makes vis -
ible the deterritorialising forces of the DS assemblage regarding the 
wider soya assemblage. At the same time, the collective dimension is, 
through the enactment of desire, what lends stability and durability to 
the assemblage.
Concluding remarks: opening to the dynamics of the 
assemblage
Assemblage thinking “flags agency”, to use Tania Murray Li’s words. 
Indeed it does so, but not without implying a redefinition of how agency, 
along with power, should be understood. The Deleuzian concept of 
desire is a useful tool in this process, helping us better understand how 
diverse forms of agency—  individual, collective, and distributive—  
coexist and play in governance assemblages. The convergence of   
90 Power, agency, and desire
desires empowers individual elements of the assemblage, while the 
divergence of desires helps destabilise existing arrangements and 
organisations. From an assemblage perspective no one acts alone. An 
individual form of agency always participates in a distributive form 
of agency and what emerges from the assemblage never fully follows 
individual plans. The interplay of desires defines the direction in which 
the assemblage will evolve and the processes it will trigger or nurture 
in wider assemblages. Thus, desire also points to the collective agency 
and power of a given assemblage to influence the world beyond its 
own limits. DeLanda (2002)  elaborates Deleuze and Guattari’s con -
cept of desire by emphasising its infrastructural nature. He introduces 
the concept of “attractor” in order to define the relation between the 
actual (i.e. what is) and the virtual (i.e. what could be), and to explain 
their mutual shaping or, in other words, their interdependence. We 
have already shown how the virtual helps shape collective desire using 
the example of DS. While the actual and the virtual are interpreted in 
research in numerous ways, like for instance as spaces of possibilities 
or the not-  yet- realised outcomes and goals, for us it is important to 
retain that attractors have an agentic role in influencing the dynamics 
of the assemblage and, as we develop further in the next chapter, a role 
in how we define transformation in governance.
References
Allen, J. (2011). Powerful assemblages? Area  43(2): 154–  157.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.
Bentia, D. (2021). Accountability beyond measurement: the role of meetings 
in shaping governance instruments and governance outcomes in food 
systems through the lens of the Danube Soy organization. Journal of Rural 
Studies  88: 50–  59.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a Theory of Practice  (translated by R. Nice). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buchanan, I. (2021). Assemblage Theory and Method . London/  
New York: Bloomsbury.
Clapp, J., & Fuchs, D. (2009). Agrifood corporations, global governance 
and sustainability: a framework analysis. In J. Clapp & D. Fuchs (Eds.). 
Corporate Power in Global Agrifood Governance  (pp. 1–  25). Cambridge, 
MA/  London: The MIT Press.
DeLanda, M. (2002). Deleuze and the use of the genetic algorithm in architec -
ture. Architectural Design  71(7): 9–  12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Power, agency, and desire  91
Deleuze, G., & Guatarri, F. (1987). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Dwiartama, A. (2018). From ‘disciplinary societies’ to ‘societies of control’: an 
historical narrative of agri-  environmental governance in Indonesia. In J. 
Forney, C. Rosin, & H. Campbell (Eds.). Agri-  environmental Governance 
as an Assemblage: Multiplicity, Power, and Transformation  (pp. 91–  104). 
London and New York: Routledge.
Dwiartama, A., & Piatti, C. (2016). Assembling local, assembling food 
security. Agriculture and Human Values  33(1): 153–  164.
Faier, L., & Rofel, L. (2014). Ethnographies of encounter. Annual Review of 
Anthropology  43: 363–  377.
Farías, I. (2014). Virtual attractors, actual assemblages: how Luhmann’s 
theory of communication complements actor-  network theory. European 
Journal of Social Theory  17(1): 24–  41.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison  (translated 
by Alan Sheridan). New York: Vintage.
Haug, C. (2013). Organizing spaces: meeting arenas as a social movement 
infrastructure between organization, network, and institution. Organization 
Studies  34(5–  6): 705–  732.
Huang, J. Q. (2020). Transient assemblages, ephemeral encounters, and 
the “beautiful story” of a Japanese social enterprise in rural Bangladesh. 
Critique of Anthropology  40(1): 125–  145.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers 
through Society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-  Network 
Theory . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Li, T. M. (2007). Practices of assemblage and community forest management. 
Economy and Society  36(2): 263–  293.
Mol, A. (2021). Eating in Theory . Durnham: Duke University Press.
Rolli, M. (2016). Gilles Deleuze’ s Transcendental Empiricism: From Tradition 
to Difference . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral 
Scientist  43(3): 377–  391.
Windsor, J. (2015). Desire lines: Deleuze and Guattari on molar lines, 
molecular lines, and lines of flight. New Zealand Sociology  30(1): 156–  171. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-5
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.5  Reframing change in  
governance assemblages
Properties, capacities, and basins of 
attraction
Introduction: what change is and is not
In 2021, UN Secretary-  General Anto ́nio Guterres will convene a 
Food Systems Summit as part of the Decade of Action to achieve 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030. The Summit 
will launch bold new actions to deliver progress on all 17 SDGs, 
each of which relies to some degree on healthier, more sustainable, 
and equitable food systems. The Summit will awaken the world to 
the fact that we all must work together to transform  the way the 
world produces, consumes, and thinks about food.
(The UN Food Systems Summit, emphasis added)1
We must transform our food systems and the relations that consti -
tute them . This imperative has become a globally shared narrative, 
as reflected in the United Nations Food Summit 2021 communica -
tion. Similar calls for a profound transformation are found at diverse 
geographical and political scales, in diverse institutional contexts, 
carrying diverse framings of the problems and related solutions. The 
Milan Urban Food Policy Pact, signed in 2015 by cities worldwide, 
points to actions at the level of cities and towns aimed at “urban food 
systems transformation” ( Magarini & Porreca, 2019 ). The World 
Bank joined the movement in 2020 and created a “dedicated Umbrella 
Multi-  Donor Trust Fund” called “Food Systems 2030”. According to 
its website, “Food Systems 2030 seeks to transform food systems by 
2030, fostering healthy people, a healthy planet and healthy econ -
omies”.2 We could give endless other examples of this transformation 
rhetoric being mobilised. 
 
 
   
Reframing change in governance assemblages  93
This call for change is not new; scholars have addressed it at many 
technical levels, and other more theoretical. What is more recent is 
the apparent unanimity on the need for “transformation”. What should 
be transformed remains, however, ambiguous. Debates on diverse 
paradigms have animated public and political debates, opposing, for 
instance, food security to food sovereignty, agroecology to sustain -
able intensification, as well as technological innovations to a restruc -
turing of power relations between economic actors (e.g. Jansen, 2015 ; 
Jarosz, 2014 ; Scott, 2011 ). In this chapter, we argue that assemblage 
thinking can contribute to the debate, first and foremost, by changing 
the dominant way transformation and change are understood in gov -
ernance practices.
To begin with, we concur that there have been many ways of 
understanding change and transformation. The fundamentals of 
change in society underlie numerous social science theories that dis -
cuss change and transformation, including (but not limited to) Marx’s 
metabolic rift ( Foster, 1999 ), Kondratiev’s cycle ( Barnett, 1998 ), 
moments of translation in actor–  network theory (Callon, 1986), 
Holling’s adaptive cycle ( Gunderson & Holling, 2002 ), and Geels’s 
transition theory ( Geels, 2007 , 2010 ). When social scientists talk 
about change, they often mean profound and radical changes ( Stirling, 
2015 ). In resonance with complexity theory and systems thinking, the 
assemblage approach develops non-  linear attributes entailed in trans -
formation to highlight small but consequential changes for wider-  
reaching transformations. Small changes, however, are not easily 
defined and often hidden in the backdrop of several different domains, 
including socio-  technical, socio-  ecological, as well as in social norms 
and values. One approach that addresses how these small changes 
potentially make a difference is socio-  technical transition theory, 
through the seminal works of Frank Geels (2007 , 2010 ). A socio-  
technical transition is understood as a process of transition involving 
not only technological innovation but also the mutual unfolding of 
societal change interwoven with technology. Geels’s multi-  level per -
spective on socio-  technical transition seems to advocate for a radical 
change stemming from a small, niche level that may challenge the 
existing, stable structures of industry, market, policy, science, and 
technology regimes. Through a combination of this small change 
and broader landscape dynamics (exogenous context, e.g., climate 
change), a regime can be disrupted and readjusted to align with the 
anticipated state brought by innovations. 
  
  
 
  
  
94 Reframing change in governance assemblages
Geels’s multi-  level perspective on socio-  technical transition 
resonates with what is now known as resilience thinking and socio-  
ecological systems ( Folke et al., 2002 ). A socio-  ecological system 
builds its dynamics within a particular stable state, or stability 
domain ( Walker et al., 2004 ) and will withstand perturbations and 
stay within its stable state, unless the perturbation is large enough to 
change the system’s configuration, and shift it into a new state of sta -
bility.3 This stability domain is affected by a combination of different 
variables: some are large and slow-  changing (e.g. a broad political 
regime or economic system), and others are small and fast-  changing 
(e.g. technological innovations, local movements) ( Walker et al., 
2006 , 2012 ). This cross-  scale relationship is known as panarchy4 and, 
to an extent, it resembles Geels’s idea of socio-  technical transition.
What differentiates these two bodies of literature is the nuances 
of what they convey as changes. While transition theory emphasises 
an orderly, controlled, and quite linear change (transition), panarchy 
opens the possibility of an unpredictable and messy change and the 
interplay between change and persistence. Stirling (2015) , in this case, 
advances an important argument on contrasting transition with trans -
formation, where the latter aligns more closely with the idea of unpre -
dictable change. A transformation, he argues, involves more diverse 
and emergent alignments of actors, causes, and values. Drivers of 
transformation go more broadly than just technological innovations, 
as they also include what he identifies as emancipatory struggles, 
which work by challenging the existing structures. On one hand, 
transformation can be seen as a path towards something profoundly 
different, in both structure and values. The quote in the beginning of 
this chapter depicts that sense of values, hopes, and desires attached 
to transformation. On the other hand, transformation can also mani -
fest as an open-  ended process leading to multiple possibilities. In a 
study on the New Zealand kiwifruit industry, for example, Dwiartama 
(2017 ) sees transformation as an effect emanating from an unprece -
dented moment of crisis and unpredictable future.
From an assemblage thinking perspective, problems are messy, and 
it is logical to think that answers cannot be simple, and that change 
will hardly follow a unidirectional line. However, the realisation and 
implementation of such aims are riddled with numerous obstacles that 
fuel a linear understanding of change based on modernist and instru -
mental rationalities. Techno-  optimism and a pervasive replacement 
logic, for instance, do little to bring us closer to a deep awareness that  
  
 
 
 
  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  95
problems are entangled and always complex. This difficulty to move 
away from a unilinear understanding of change is further reinforced 
by assumptions of ideals of harmony and equilibrium, equal par -
ticipation, or the autopoietic functioning associated with some sim -
plistic formulations of holistic system thinking. As a consequence, 
actors of governance often assume that stability is the norm and that 
changes, although desirable, are the exception one must advocate 
for. In reality, however, we often see change happening so rapidly 
and frequently that an overarching stability is no longer relevant; 
instead, amidst the ever-  changing reality, we must anticipate what -
ever path a transformation would take us onto, and, as we argue in 
this chapter, detect less obvious and smaller forms of stability which 
drive transformation. Governance interventions targeting agricul -
ture and food systems are marked by the same kind of limitations 
as mobility or energy systems that are, we argue, notably related to 
a linear and unilateral way of conceptualising change. This, in turn, 
relates to how we understand governance through an overly dominant 
logic of control and monitoring. In this chapter, we position ourselves 
against a linear understanding of change and transformation that is 
pervasive in most social and political contexts. Assemblage thinking 
offers an alternative concept of change that points to the limitations 
of this dominant framing. Importantly, assemblage thinking does not 
build on the premise of stability, but more on insights resonant with 
chaos theory and the second law of thermodynamics, where systems 
exist in ever-  changing environments and evolve towards more 
stable states. Drawing on assemblage thinking, we want to promote 
conceptualisations of change that are more attuned to the diversity 
and unpredictability of changes. From our perspective, such a move is 
of utmost importance in the context of food and agriculture and their 
governance, the tension between linear simplifications and an extreme 
complexity of assemblages where all dimensions of life are entangled.
Reassembling change and transformation
To “transform” evokes profound changes at the level of funda -
mental organising principles of any assemblage. However, assem -
blage thinking flags change as an ontological dimension of social 
entities. Assemblage thinking emphasises the changing nature of 
social life and constructs. What does it mean then to transform 
assemblages if they are continuously transforming themselves?   
96 Reframing change in governance assemblages
Does the differentiation between change and transformation hold in 
a framing from an assemblage perspective? Those are the funda -
mental questions related to governance that we want to address in 
this chapter. From an assemblage perspective, answers first require 
reiterating a few central ideas around “change”, building on the con -
ceptual constructs around multiplicity, unpredictability, desire, and 
distributive agency.
The first thing we learn from an assemblage perspective on govern -
ance is that the main actors of governance practices—  institutions and 
people who design and implement instruments aimed at changing or 
controlling behaviours, and steering the assemblage—  are not external 
to the assemblage; they are part of the situation they aim to trans -
form. Unfortunately, however, as Arie Rip (2006 : 82) noted, “political 
actors, and more generally, actors with a governance responsibility, 
will see themselves as somehow outside the system that they have to 
govern”. Acknowledging this participation in the assemblage is, how -
ever, the condition for a reflexive governance that could consider that 
changes in the way of doing governance stand as an essential aspect 
of achieving transformation.
The multiplicity  characterising assemblages and their outcomes 
urges us to anticipate that change never happens alone. Multiple 
changes happen, and none of them can be fully isolated from the others. 
In other words, no assemblage is an island. Moreover, their interactions 
reshape the assemblage, and therefore the reterritorialisation of an 
assemblage is never entirely predictable. Governance as an action 
oriented towards implementing or stopping change is, thus, a tricky 
endeavour. This being said, unpredictability  does not mean total 
blindness or an impossibility of anticipation. As Protevi (2006 : 21) 
notes, the “behaviour of chaotic systems” might well be “unpredict -
able in quantitative detail” but is nevertheless sometimes “predict -
able in the long run” from a more qualitative perspective. As we will 
develop later, this speaks for addressing the capacities of assemblages 
as central elements of assessments.
Multiple changes also imply, quite logically, that we move away 
from a unilinear perspective of assemblage evolution. There is never 
a unique path guiding transformation. In governance practices, the 
consequence is that the changes we want to implement or avoid are 
always accompanied by other processes of change, unwanted or unin -
tended, which we might well overlook despite their potential effect 
on the whole assemblage. Therefore, it is necessary to continuously  
  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  97
apply a reflexive approach to governance and engage with the mul -
tiple changes provoked by governance practices.
We have already highlighted the importance of small changes. 
While transition theory points to the role of niches in the larger trans -
formations, assemblage thinking alternatively stresses ways in which 
multiple possibilities are opened up through small changes. Ripple 
effects in a rhizomatic set of relations might well turn what initially 
seemed an anecdotal moment into a game-  changing series of events. 
This is notable because small changes can affect and effect relations 
and desires  in various ways. Whether big or small, changes are very 
rarely carried by all the elements of the assemblage. The distributive 
agencies do not always connect all the dots. This runs counter to the 
expectations and idealised visions of a uniform change happening 
simultaneously across the assemblage, for instance, across the realm 
of consumption and production. This does not mean, for example, that 
the reordering of value chains does not affect consumers’ or produ -
cers’ attitudes and actions. It rather means that it does so in multiple, 
partial, and place-  based ways: ripple effects and experimentations 
unfold unevenly.
In the following section, we propose a theorisation of change that 
acknowledges the multiplicity and unpredictability of assemblages 
without entirely discarding hope in societies’ capacity to antici -
pate and steer their evolution towards desirable futures, and there -
fore, without diminishing the power of actors in steering change. If 
it seems unreasonable to try to control assemblages, their evolution 
is not random and still follows a certain intentionality, specific oper -
ational compositions, and stronger or weaker orderings.
Properties, capacities, and attractors: paths of change
The heterogeneous and unpredictable dimensions of governance 
practices as assemblages alongside their unevenly distributive 
agencies ( Bennett, 2010 ) place assemblages in a highly dynamic 
field of unfolding interactions and processes. Such dynamism does 
not render assemblages fragile and prone to contingent and fleeting 
everyday governance outcomes, but, in a more counter-  intuitive 
manner, instead provides the conditions and means of change and 
transformation. In this way, the variety of yearly meetings and 
conferences connecting both closely and distantly related actors, or the 
proliferation of the new institutional settings, does not undermine the  
  
98 Reframing change in governance assemblages
foundations of the DS organisation; rather, as we show in this chapter, 
they contribute to enrich the strategies of action and further pull sus -
tainability ends upfront. This resonates with Deleuze and Guattari’s 
view of emergence stemming from the properties and capacities of the 
assemblages. We start from the two concepts of properties and cap -
acities, which define the current state of the assemblage in its actual 
organisation and composition and the outcomes (actual or virtual) that 
emerge from it.
Properties  are actualised features of the assemblage and its 
components at a given time; they are, therefore, limited. Yet they are 
essential in the making and stabilisation of the assemblage. To give 
an example, the fact of associating a farmer organisation with a large 
and powerful retailer is a property of the IP-  Suisse assemblage, as 
is the articulation of environmental data on maps with the provision 
of development consent in the Indonesia RPPLH assemblage, or the 
existence of a central office in Vienna dedicated to the coordination 
of the Donau Soja (DS) assemblage. Properties are, therefore, finite, 
at least at a given point, as they describe the state of the assemblage. 
Of course, properties change with time and along the processes of 
constant territorialisation and deterritorialisation of the assemblage.
Capacities , however, are unlimited as they emerge from infinite 
possible relations between assemblages and components. In other 
words, capacities refer to the emergence and the becoming of the 
assemblage. Capacities can be actual, referring to existing processes 
that can be documented based on a close observation or analysis, or 
virtual. Virtual capacities still exist and are real, but different from 
actual capacities. They refer to what is not yet emerging, but could 
be, within the space of possibilities of the assemblage. Therefore, 
they have concrete effects by influencing the action, engagement, 
and desires of the elements in the assemblage. Coming back to our 
examples, the association of a large farmer organisation and a major 
retailer has the actual capacity of introducing significant changes 
both at the farm level, in agricultural practices related to the IP-  
Suisse standard, and on the national market, by impacting the prices 
of agricultural goods and the general availability of more sustainable 
products for consumers. This can be observed in the short history of 
the IP-  Suisse assemblage. However, the capacity of DS to lead the 
European Union towards a Protein Policy remains virtual: it guides 
the action of many and influences the general strategy of the organ -
isation, even if it has not yet been actualised through, for instance, the  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  99
introduction of a protein policy, or through the formation of a (new) 
protein assemblage. In other words, the virtual exists in the assem -
blage through properties, capacities, and desire. To stress once more, 
capacities in assemblages reach beyond individual agency and beyond 
human actors, and therefore also beyond, for instance, the managerial 
notion of capacity-  building in the practice of organisations. This 
emphasis on actual and virtual capacities highlights the emerging 
nature of assemblages that are defined by what they produce rather 
than by the sum of their elements. The relation between what is and 
what could be nurtures these dynamics of change. The multiplicity of 
the capacities of an assemblage echoes, from a different perspective, 
the multiplicity of the outcomes of assemblages, as highlighted in the 
previous chapters.
However, not any change is likely to emerge from an assemblage. 
The multiplicity of capacities as possible outcomes, actual and vir -
tual, defines a space of possibility in the emergence from the assem -
blage. These numerous possible evolutions are not chaotic or random. 
They are limited and bounded by, as well as oriented towards, spe -
cific directions that can be referred to as attractors . We have already 
introduced the concept of attractors in the previous chapter and 
resumed our analysis in this chapter. Dittmer describes attractors 
through the metaphor of an axis on which the assemblage can evolve:
Possibility spaces are abstract topological spaces existing in mul -
tiple dimensions. Each dimension is an axis on which the assem -
blage can vary, reflecting the various capacities of its parts or 
neighboring assemblages. Possibility spaces are structured by 
how properties of components or assemblages tend to interact. In 
these spaces, singularities emerge as points that tend to actualize 
more often. The degree to which the assemblage, as actualized in 
any given place or time, is near to these attractors indicates how 
territorialized the assemblage is, and how coherent and stable 
it appears to us. The ability to vary many of these dimensions 
and still produce a similar assemblage gives the impression of 
permanence…
(2014 : 393)
The multiple dimensions, or directions, mentioned by Dittmer refer 
to a set of attractors that influence the trajectory of the assemblage. 
As attractors are multiple and not always aligned, the aggregated   
100 Reframing change in governance assemblages
attraction they exert forms what Dittmer calls a “basin of attraction”. 
A basin is not a point of attraction that would provide a clear singular 
direction of change. The concept of a basin of attraction, as referred 
to earlier, comes first from the literature on social ecological systems 
(Walker et al., 2004 ). However, Dittmer’s 2014 proposition introduces 
a more dynamic understanding of basins, as constituted not of stable 
points of attraction but rather axes. In this sense, the metaphor of the 
basin is replete with multiple and possible trajectories—  rather than 
“states”—  of the assemblage. Still, these trajectories remain within 
a space of possibilities where the assemblage’s capacities and the 
attractors’ forces of attraction meet. The influence of attractors on the 
assemblage lies in this conjunction between the internal dimension 
of the assemblage—  its capacities and the desires they provoke—  
and attractors that generally refer to broader aspirations. A basin of 
attraction is a visual conceptualisation of directions defining the cap -
acities and possible pathways for the assemblage. It embodies pos -
sible futures that already exist through anticipations that shape desires 
and are prefigured in the actual properties of the assemblage. Desire is 
then related to the internal perspective on agency and transformation 
in assemblage, while attractors express the same kind of forces but 
from an external perspective. To make the difference clearer between 
resilience and assemblage thinking, we could say that within a resili -
ence framing, which emphasises states of stability, the assemblage/  
system is located within  the basin, while according to an assemblage 
approach that emphasises the always-  becoming nature of things, the 
assemblage evolves towards  the basin.
Thinking with Dittmer, we see that changing the basin of attraction 
can happen through powerful external interventions, like the asteroid 
that led to the extinction of the dinosaurs, or what we are currently 
experiencing, which is climate change and biodiversity collapses 
that will probably lead to dramatic tipping points. These two last 
examples are interesting because they can be seen at the same time 
as external and internal factors: most human assemblages are more or 
less related to the causes of climate change and biodiversity loss, even 
if, in their everyday experiences, assemblages are mostly confronted 
to the effects of climate change as an external pressure. In this sense 
attractors are never totally external to assemblages.
Attractors can take many shapes and forms. Attractors associate 
enunciative and material elements, just as assemblages do. Ideas and 
objects gravitate around attractors, building a thread of attraction,  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  101
stimulating desire within the assemblage. At the same time, attractors 
form with the aggregation of desires that become strong enough to 
guide assemblages in a specific direction. The attraction draws a 
line that could become either a line of flight or line of articulation, 
depending on the alignment of directions followed by the assem -
blage: either parts of the assemblage move away from the main 
attractors, or on the contrary they all follow the same direction.
As a form of synthesis, we can propose a definition of transform -
ation as a deep redefinition of the space of possibility resulting from 
a reorientation of attractors and the emergence of new capacities . In 
this context, the change of the properties of the assemblage can either 
be the origin or a consequence of the process. As we will develop in the 
next chapter, this conceptualisation of change suggests that we should 
spend less energy to control the actual capacities of assemblages and 
pay more attention to virtual capacities and attractors. Indeed, the 
former tends to concentrate all the resources in governance, while the 
latter is generally neglected. Governance should target attractors as 
much as the properties of the assemblage.
The subsequent sections discuss empirically how change and 
transformation are understood through the lens of assemblage 
thinking in our three cases. In Switzerland, we question the proper -
ties of the current agri-  environmental governance (AEG) assemblage 
in relation to its capacities to overcome its limitations and produce 
meaningful transformations. Strongly rooted power relations seem 
to maintain a fundamental status quo, while allowing shallower 
processes of ecologisation. The centrality of logics of accountability 
and administrative control divert learning processes from a necessary 
co- construction of new agricultural and food knowledge. However, 
alternative processes of counter-  power and knowledge creation lay 
the ground for the development of other possible futures. At the same 
time, ripple effects of small changes might reveal a stronger trans -
formational dimension of the Swiss AEG, for instance in the case of a 
progressive restriction of pesticide uses. In the case of DS the different 
tools and actors that frame and articulate soya beans as part of a pro -
tein transition for Europe lay out the possibilities of an accelerated 
transformation that would affect substantially a whole range of areas 
in the food system. This case shows that a reconfiguration and its real -
isation depend to a great extent on making visible a number of small 
changes that interdependently impinge upon the physical and political 
infrastructures that are crucial to affecting change. As for RPPLH in  
102 Reframing change in governance assemblages
Indonesia, we highlight the properties and capacities of regulations, 
collaboration, and agri-  environmental data. Big data has been particu -
larly critical since its initial inception, where it became a scapegoat 
for the mismanagement of environmental governance in the country. 
NGOs blamed the government for the inaccuracies of environmental 
data presented to them, while the private sector was reluctant, and 
the state had been oblivious to collecting countrywide data. When the 
assemblage of actors agreed upon the importance of building data-  
driven environmental policies, the very nature of big data in fact 
altered the assemblage altogether. It reoriented actors towards new 
goals, restructured organisations, and reconfigured actors in the AEG 
assemblage. While big data, new forms of regulations, and collabor -
ation indeed have the capacity to transform agri-  food assemblages, it 
is by no means clear what kind of assemblage actors would be led to 
reimagine.
Small changes and the generation of attractors
As we have seen in Chapter 2 , IP- Suisse emerged from a deep change 
in the Swiss AEG context in the 1990s. It reassembled agricul -
ture and food actors according to new logics based on new power 
relations. The governance of agriculture moved from a state-  centric 
model dominated by productivist values and objectives towards a 
multi-  centric model that articulates liberal principles to environ -
mental preoccupations. From an everyday approach, it played a role 
in reinforcing and stabilising new practices of governance that rely 
heavily on a logic of bureaucratisation and control. Through this, IP-  
Suisse has directly contributed to the transformation—  defined as a 
reorientation of trajectories—  of the previous dominant productivist 
and protectionist AEG assemblage, opening a new space of possibility. 
We also identified spaces of exploration and experimentation within 
the new assemblage. None of these experimentations was related to 
grand expectations in terms of transforming again the Swiss AEG 
assemblage as deeply as the previous political reform. Nevertheless, 
some of them had important effects in terms of what was seen as pos -
sible and feasible, reinforcing the idea that, from an assemblage per -
spective, small changes can have a dramatic impact on the long run 
through ripple effects that lead to a reconfiguration of relations in the 
assemblage. Those processes reshaped the assemblage by redefining 
its properties and reconfiguring its capacities to evolve in the future.  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  103
Let us come back to two examples already mentioned in the pre -
vious chapters, which allow us to consider the question of the poten -
tial and limitation of small changes: the example of a progressive ban 
on pesticide use in grain production and the development of a new 
value chain for Swiss quinoa.
The IP-  Suisse standard for grain production already banned 
fungicides and insecticides in coordination with the “Extenso” scheme 
stemming from Switzerland’s agricultural policy. Only herbicide use 
was tolerated before the germination of the crop in order to eradicate 
weeds. IP-  Suisse conducted a first experiment on production without 
herbicide in collaboration with an industrial baker who wanted to offer 
bread made of zero-  pesticide Swiss flour without having to deal with 
the complications of a fully organic value chain. All this happened at 
a time when the use of pesticides had been extensively discussed and 
criticised in political and media arenas. Indeed, the ban on (or very 
strong limitation of) pesticide use in agriculture was attacked by two 
“popular initiatives”—  a kind of referendum that constitutes one of 
the instruments of Swiss direct democracy, allowing civil society to 
propose changes in the legislation. The campaign preceding the citi -
zens’ vote was intense and very conflictual. The two initiatives were 
rejected, but the intensity of the public debate on the topic could not 
be ignored.
In this context, IP-  Suisse’s main retail partner, Migros, was appar -
ently inspired by the success of the aforementioned experiment. This 
trial in the real world of a flexible and trustworthy source of pesticide-  
free grain offered a very welcome opportunity to demonstrate one’s 
commitment to sustainable agricultural production. In other words, 
the properties of the IP-  Suisse assemblage that brings together 
and coordinates innovative farmers, industry partners, research 
institutions, and pre-  existing practices of reducing pesticide use in 
wheat production opened up the way for different possible futures and 
new desires to emerge and converge in a shared direction. In parallel, 
the public debate on a potential ban on pesticides reinforced the idea 
of and the collective desire for a pesticide-  free agriculture. In 2020, 
the retailer decided to integrate the new pesticide-  free standard for the 
85,000 tonnes of grain processed in its own bakery by 2023.
The experiment carried out by the farmer organisation IP-  Suisse 
can be seen as a small step in a long chain of changes that happened 
notably in the selection of wheat varieties that are particularly resistant 
to disease and pests, in the successive adaptations of the federal  
104 Reframing change in governance assemblages
agricultural policy, in the progressive establishment of the IP-  Suisse 
standard, and in the evolution of retailers’ strategies. However, obvi -
ously, IP-  Suisse as an assemblage offered fertile ground for this kind 
of synergies and progressive developments. Many actors and elem -
ents of the assemblage contributed to the process, illustrating again 
the distributive nature of agency in assemblages, but more central 
to our point here is the convergence of desires leading the evolution 
of the IP-  Suisse assemblage towards pesticide-  free futures which 
became a strong attractor. As we have shown, many properties of the 
assemblage have been mobilised to produce new capacities towards 
such a future. Public debates, practical agricultural knowledge, and 
marketing strategies of differentiation have emerged and converged. 
This convergence of capacities and desires formed a new powerful 
attractor, which in turn oriented the desires of multiple actors in a 
similar direction, opening the space of possibility in a way that allows 
the IP-  Suisse assemblage to evolve towards a pesticide-  free future. 
The fact that a reduction of pesticide use in farm practices was from 
the beginning at the core of the IP-  Suisse standard also explains this 
success: the new pesticide-  free future attractor  was quite aligned with 
the existing trajectory of the IP-  Suisse assemblage. Its appearance 
in the basin of attraction did not involve major realignments of the 
relations making the assemblage.
Another example of an experiment initiated within the IP-  Suisse 
assemblage is the development of the production of certified quinoa in 
Switzerland. In 2014, a few farmers, members of IP-  Suisse, convinced 
the farmer organisation to back up their efforts to develop a full value 
chain for the regional production of quinoa. This initial support made 
it possible to mobilise the usual partners of IP-  Suisse, notably a local 
mill and the retailer Migros. Thanks to the properties of the assem -
blage that gathers diverse competencies and infrastructures, technical 
and marketing issues could easily find first solutions. However, the 
new value chain did not really take off until now. Eight years after the 
launch of this regional production, the quinoa sold in Migros shops is 
still mostly imported under fair-  trade and organic certifications. As for 
the regional production, it is only labelled with the guarantee of Swiss 
origin, without any specific environmental standard, which means 
without wearing the IP-  Suisse “ladybird” label. Despite very posi -
tive coverage by the regional media who have told the “nice tale” of 
farmer entrepreneurship and innovation ( Bétrisey, 2022 ), the regional 
IP- Suisse quinoa has not resulted in significant change at a large scale.   
Reframing change in governance assemblages  105
A few farmers were able to diversify their production and the shop of 
the local mill is now selling IP-  Suisse quinoa products. Apparently, 
the Swiss IP-  Suisse certified quinoa attractor  was not strong enough. 
Despite the general success of local food, the capacity of farms to 
produce quinoa, and the support of many actors, the overall assem -
blage did not really follow this direction. Notably, the consumers 
apparently resisted the attraction. We have no clear explanation for 
this unsuccess to offer. However, it seems clear that the emerging 
production of IP-  Suisse quinoa did not fit in well with the growing 
interest for new exotic crops like quinoa. Maybe the exotic identity 
of quinoa contrasted with the Swissness of the label. In any event, the 
convergence did not really happen.
In these two examples we see how small changes can easily develop 
in the IP-  Suisse assemblage as long as they result in an alignment 
with the desires of key actors. The retailer wants to demonstrate its 
commitment to sustainability by showcasing the ban of pesticides in 
its bakeries? Then the IP-  Suisse assemblage experimentation with 
pesticide-  free grain production can spread and soon become the new 
norm for the label, as the retailer buys 80% of IP-  Suisse grain. The 
farmer organisation wants to support new potential productions for its 
members and develop new markets, while the retailer sees synergies 
with its own strategy promoting regional products. Then the small 
group of farmers can launch a value chain for local quinoa and carve 
a new path for a more diverse agricultural production in the area. 
However, it is hard to identify ripple effects of these experimentations 
which would introduce deeper changes that could be called “trans -
formative”. Apparently, those seem rather small changes that led 
to a series of technical and relational adjustments, while remaining 
mostly within the frame of the existing material and immaterial terri -
torialisation of the assemblage. In other words, these changes did not 
drastically modify the trajectory of the assemblage. On the contrary, 
they seem mostly to have reinforced the current configuration around 
the centrality of retailers and logics of certification. However, a more 
positive story can also be told, as valid as the former. These changes 
are still important and significant as they open new possibilities and 
directions for the next small changes that will inevitably happen: by 
rendering a large-  scale, pesticide-  free grain production beyond the 
organic niche concrete and thinkable; and by supporting processes of 
diversifying crops through the multiplication of small regional value 
chains. 
106 Reframing change in governance assemblages
The emergence of a protein transition as a new powerful 
attractor
In the previous chapter, we engaged with the constituting elements 
and “mechanics” that build attractors, thanks to meetings in the DS 
assemblage. In those spaces, governance aims and visions are being 
enacted through attracting desires in a collective that allows and 
enables reimaging, rethinking, and reframing desires towards a more 
integrated understanding of soya and the role it can play in a desirable 
protein transition in Europe. Within such framing, soya exhibits its 
capacity to reconfigure the ways in which protein plants and animal 
protein are used and made use of. The protein attractor emerges and 
finds a degree of stability in the basin of attraction forming around 
DS meetings and where the collective agency of the DS assemblage 
holds a determining role. The protein attractor enacts an imaginary 
of European agriculture based on more regional value chains, on 
improved trade relations between East and West, more productive 
soya crops, and the raising of quality for related grain and legume 
crops used for feed and food. These are imaginaries anchored in soya’s 
capacity to produce ripple effects that catalyse a protein transition.
Attention to properties and capacities as elements of assemblages 
not only gives us a finer-  grained view of the agencies at play that 
mobilise practices, desires, and goals but also a deeper grasp of the 
relationality between soya and protein that ultimately informs the atyp -
ical forms of change emerging from the DS organisation. Having an 
institutional setup that focuses on one crop alone to effect wider scale 
change in agricultural policies and practices is not the gold standard of 
reform in Europe’s food systems, nor is it, as we show later, the silver-  
bullet measure of transformation. However, the assemblage approach 
provides us with perspectives on why and how this opens up new 
possibilities that are more desirable in terms of the sustainability of 
our food systems.
DS kept gaining momentum in a dynamic field nourished equally 
by tensions and alliances, or dynamics that Hodson et al. (2017)  refer 
to as a mix of competing, coexisting, and complementary processes 
across domains and fields. In the case of DS, complementary 
processes create two trajectories that evolve synergistically to develop 
the political and economic conditions for soya on the one hand, and 
conditions for a protein transition on the other hand. Practices such 
as the creation of alliances with like-  minded initiatives across the  
  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  107
non- genetically modified (GM) organism markets, or partnerships 
with farmers, as well as tools such as a best-  practice manual or the 
use of carbon-  footprint assessments, feed the formation of the sustain -
able/  environmental soya attractor . The everyday governance practice 
of meetings not only fully accommodates the environmental soya 
attractor in the basin of attraction but also feeds the emergence of the 
protein-  transition attractor .
The concept of attractor enables us to provide alternative accounts 
of how transformation unfolds as well as how questions around 
assessments of AEG are reframed once potential understandings 
of future potentials are drawn out of the black box of dominant 
narratives. Moreover, attractors underline the possibility of seeing 
change occurring multi-  directionally, of change occurring simultan -
eously across more than one domain or sector, or organisation, and 
of transformation occurring once one attractor gains in intensity, 
weakening the others that orbit in the larger assemblage. In this vein, 
some scenarios are losing traction, with business-  as- usual models 
losing their grip on their critics and proponents alike, with fears of his -
tory repeating itself fading, and the shock of the new alleviated. In this 
sense, the attractors in the DS assemblage emerge as counterforces to 
the competing and coexisting forces shaping processes in the global 
soya assemblage. Forty different standards for soya beans occupy the 
economies of the soya sector. Global industry initiatives such as the 
Roundtable for Sustainable Soy, The Proterra Standard, and many 
others, converge with variously articulated soya criteria for respon -
sible deforestation-  free soya, along with feed manufacturers’ asso -
ciations and oil-  processing industries in Europe. In the absence of 
a stronger legislative infrastructure, economic actors take the lead 
in developing more sustainable soya-  based markets. While such 
standards compete on the European soya market with the DS standard, 
their gradual and growing take-  up in the value chains does reinforce 
the demand for non-  GM quality products, thereby weakening those 
aspects of the European Union’s legislation on genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs) that allow inflows of GM soya for indirect con -
sumption, such as in feed for livestock. The DS work on value-  chain 
development and the attraction of retailers in support of specific qual -
ities of soya, along with their contribution to a protein strategy, came 
to reveal new opportunities for addressing obstacles in the uptake 
of European soya. These do not just concern the European Union’s 
policy of coexistence (between non-  GM, GM, and organic) but also  
108 Reframing change in governance assemblages
the excess of GM stipulations and standards, along with insufficient 
consideration of protein plants. However, expected protein policies 
and the harmonisation of GMO regulations have not yet actualised.
More recently, many of the concurring standards developed and 
gained traction around the emerging attractor of sustainable meat . 
Pressures to decarbonise the meat sector, and narratives forming 
around a collectively shared need to diminish meat consumption, cry 
out for the creation of new paths for change. Indeed, the meat indus -
tries are currently carving out possibilities for them transitioning to the 
production of plant-  based products that mimic the texture and mouth-  
feel of meat. This experimentation phase and desire for technological 
innovation are backed up by consortia of actors worth multi-  billion 
dollars. This new development presents DS with the possibility of fur -
ther developing the network of stakeholders from the retail sector to 
take up certified European soya beans in their value chains, and thus 
further promoting the collaborations between those meat industries 
that are willing to transition to meat replacements and retailers, all the 
while strengthening the sustainable meat attractor . Much emphasis on 
the vegan markets was placed at the 2022 DS Conference in Vienna, 
with many European retailers showing enthusiasm and commitment 
to promote soya and thus further anchor the view of legume proteins 
as valuable for direct human consumption. These processes evolve as 
the socio-  technical instruments for soya are being refined and made 
to work on the basis of the infrastructures created to move soya from 
East to West. The Ukrainian war showed the importance of physical 
infrastructures for facilitating soya at the same time that it brought 
new challenges in keeping to high standards, especially in terms of 
quality related to non-  GMO and selective herbicide use. Lines of flight 
like those arriving with the Ukrainian war intervened only to con -
firm the need for improved, more diversified, and fitted adapted use of 
shipping systems by rail and by sea. The gradual developments that 
had supported the steady, albeit slow, certification of DS soya beans 
since 2012 proved helpful in lessening the fragility of food chains in 
the advent of crises and severe disruptions. The desire expressed by 
DS (through the Legume Transition proposal of 2016) to the European 
Union for the inclusion of a value-  chain approach in the Directorate for 
Agriculture’s plans and strategies on economic relations between East 
and West was eventually realised independently of decisions missed 
in this respect at EU level. Nonetheless, the European Union’s deci -
sion to support Legume Translated, a new project started in 2018, was  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  109
actualised in the creation of a knowledge and exchange platform—  
Legume Hub—  intended to promote in a unique way flows of technical 
knowledge and innovation for practitioners. While such developments 
were welcomed, the expected integration of value-  chain approaches 
to support East-  to- West flows (as demanded in the Legume Transition 
document from 2016) did not actualise.
This is anything but a stall, for the assemblage is multiplying relations 
with new networks and projects spreading from the initial conditions 
carved out by the DS assemblage. Since 2019, new developments have 
pointed to potentials that could contribute to the actualisation of a pro -
tein assemblage. New initiatives and associations were created around 
Europe. These exist as independent entities from DS, though they may 
include DS advisors in their boards, or are in the process of becoming 
established as their ideas and plans take on. They include Fields of 
Europe (formally established in 2021 as a standard to integrate food and 
feed, extending beyond soya to other grains used to produce proteins); 
the European Non-  GM Industry Association (established in 2019; it 
highlights and represents the business interests of national non-  GM indus -
tries and economic operators (production, processing, marketing, retail, 
certification, labelling) vis-  à- vis the political bodies of the European 
Union); the Collaborative Soy Initiative (established in 2019; the focus 
lies on communications and actions that promote synergies between 
stakeholders); and the European National Soya Initiative (established in 
2021 to identify issues of common interest in the field of sustainability, 
international trade, and European affairs where these relate directly to 
soya production, and to exchange good practices between the national 
soya initiatives). Far from being a flat and fragmented multiplication 
of initial conditions, the assemblage grows rhizomatically ( Deleuze & 
Guatarri, 1988 ). Relations with actors are extended to support the non-  
GM market, including the meat sector and forest conservation, the policy 
environment, the sustainable development of other crops, and the  sense-  
making processes for soya across economic borders. In this vein, 
assemblages thrive on heterogeneity and on more than one attractor, 
lending intensity to the protein transition attractor  and accelerating the 
orbiting speed of the environmental soya attractor.
Transformative pathways and the spectrum of possibilities
The previous chapters have highlighted how the Indonesian govern -
ment, academics, and community groups put high hopes on RPPLH    
110 Reframing change in governance assemblages
as a planning instrument that might change whole practices of envir -
onmental governance. Amidst the ever-  changing environmental 
governance landscapes in the country, this instrument could lead to 
something more than change—  a complete transformation. It was 
supposed to restructure the planning, permit-  granting, monitoring, 
and evaluation processes into something that places the environment 
at the centre of calculation. It would lock areas and regions according 
to their predesignated purposes, be they agricultural production, 
industrial complex, or conservation and protection. It would close 
down unnecessary business negotiations and redirect development 
according to what the government wants, preferably on the basis of 
sustainable development goals.
Over the course of more than a decade since a new environmental 
management law was enacted in 2009, none of these hopes came 
to fruition. Development was still guided by the so-  called business 
as usual in which environmental assessments were made subse -
quently as a response to proposed development projects, although 
new instruments such as the Strategic Environmental Assessment 
(Kajian Lingkungan Hidup Strategis , KLHS) have begun to take 
shape. Regional and provincial governments across Indonesia have 
now engaged more frequently with RPPLH, through training, courses, 
assistance, and consultancy work with experts and academics. Some 
have even succeeded in preparing a formal RPPLH document that the 
ministry would approve, although the implementation of this planning 
document is a different story altogether. National strategic projects, 
such as hydroelectric dams or high-  speed railways, still run their 
course regardless of any RPPLHs. The general public is most likely 
still oblivious to what RPPLH is.
We can therefore be fairly sure that transformation does not 
transpire in the case of RPPLH, as no major reorientation of the 
Indonesian AEG assemblage can be directly observed. To put it 
more clearly, transformation as a “project” ( Forney & Dwiartama, 
2023 ), as it is imagined by the decision-  makers and planners, has 
been a failure. Explicit goals that are embedded within the idea of 
transformation may not be achieved; changes, however, do happen. 
As in the case of IP-  Suisse and DS, ripple effects from little changes 
may lead to a certain unexpected pathway. These changes can at least 
open up multiple possibilities, for better or worse. If we refrain from 
looking at transformation as a form of intentionality, then we may be 
able to see beyond success and failure, which leads us to a different   
Reframing change in governance assemblages  111
understanding of change . Assemblage thinking carries a radical 
understanding of change in which strategic action and unintentional 
effects and reconfigurations combine in leading actors to navigate a 
new set of assemblages.
To illustrate this, we bring three examples of what the small 
changes that RPPLH made led to or aligned with. The first is a sim -
plification of environmental permits. As mentioned in Chapter 2 , 
development projects in Indonesia relied on rigorous, painstaking 
environmental permits on the basis of AMDAL, or Environmental 
Impact Assessments. Depending on the scale of the industry, a com -
pany needs to develop an environmental assessment that identifies 
every stage of the development project and the potential impacts of 
each of the stages on the local community and environment, including 
the mitigation and monitoring plans in regard to those impacts. The 
process requires not only a thorough study but also a series of public 
hearings to ensure that the result is communicated transparently to 
community members. The consecutive processes would then be 
assessed by the environmental agency and a third-  party reviewer for 
a decision on the permit to be made. Loopholes are usually present in 
every stage of the process, be it an AMDAL consultant not reporting 
the correct data, a public hearing being untransparent, or an official 
being bribed to release a permit. What complicates the matter is that 
the permit given to a company often ignores the opportunity cost of 
developing something else in the area. An agricultural agency official, 
for instance, lamented about the declining agricultural area because 
more and more permits were given to the construction of manufac -
turing factories.
When RPPLH was introduced, it offered a breath of fresh air to 
the pressing land-  use- change problems, by assigning a designated 
function to a piece of land. As we understand, the scheme has not 
been implemented consistently. Still, a partial manifestation of its fun -
damental logic surprisingly lingers: administrative simplification. In 
2021, the national government introduced the 1,187-  page Omnibus 
Bill (Law Number 11 of 2020; see Sembiring et al., 2020 : 1) with 
one specific aim, “… to deregulate the scattered, overlapping, and 
disharmonious laws related to business activities in Indonesia”, or, put 
simply, to ease developing business in the country. The Bill amended 
78 other laws and 1,288 articles, including the 2009 Environmental 
Protection and Management Law (the one which mandated the use 
of RPPLH). Although the obligation of the central, provincial, and   
112 Reframing change in governance assemblages
regional governments to formulate and implement RPPLH is still 
present, what changes in the Omnibus Bill is the way the environ -
mental permit is weakened and replaced by a broader business permit, 
which contains an environmental approval. This transition towards 
a more simplified environmental due diligence aligns with the spirit 
of RPPLH, in which what is necessary is the compliance of a given 
business development project with the regional spatial planning, 
which further complies with the environmental planning as stated in 
RPPLH. Yet, there is a notable sliding in the direction leading to this 
simplification, from an environment-  centred to a business-  centred 
logic. The change of terminology from “permit” to “approval”, amidst 
the vague and premature RPPLH, is perhaps one of the factors that 
created backlashes and protests among environmental activists. This 
notwithstanding, we would argue that, on the one hand, RPPLH has 
opened, or justified, one new pathway of environmental governance 
in Indonesia. On the other hand, we see the emergence of a central -
isation of control on the basis of ease-  of- doing-  business attractor  that 
acts on the RPPLH assemblage and imposes its trajectory.
The second small change that RPPLH introduced is a new form 
of collaboration in doing planning. Prior to RPPLH, planning was 
mainly done from the top down, according to the political agenda and 
programmes of the elected governors, majors, or regents. With the 
introduction of RPPLH, the ministry could now implement a stricter 
rule on planning: after a governor/  major/  regent is inaugurated, his/  
her administration must compile an RPPLH over the next six months, 
otherwise some part of their budget would be withheld. This leads 
to the formation of a task force that consists of representatives from 
different agencies working together on the said document. Consultants 
are often invited but data, reports, analyses, and decisions are all 
made by the task force. This is a relatively new approach to planning. 
Previously, the Planning Agency played a central role, whereas other 
agencies provided only inputs. Now, a more distributed and collabora -
tive planning seems to take shape, regardless of whether the RPPLH 
itself is successful or not. We can say that RPPLH helped to intro -
duce changes in the properties of land-  use governance, particularly by 
changing the way agencies relate to each other. As discussed more in 
depth in Chapter 4 , this environmental planning scheme has brought a 
new pathway for governing sideways and across sectors. In this sense, 
we might consider that a cross-  sectoral collaboration attractor  has 
been predominant in the case of RPPLH. 
Reframing change in governance assemblages  113
This relates to the third attractor, which relates to data-  driven 
governance ( Hughes et al., 2020 ). RPPLH has brought something 
new to the table which is data, or to be more precise, a new way of 
looking at data. While data, and particularly ecological data, were also 
considered in previous spatial and development planning, they were 
never truly the central aspect that mobilised strategies and decisions. 
RPPLH not only helps in expanding the range and scope of data used 
in decision-  making but also pushes for a more accurate and detailed 
set of data. For example, in order to simulate a projected population 
growth and the consequences for waste production, water consump -
tion, and land-  use change, the RPPLH task force must have collected 
time-  series data on the population and its spatial distribution, along 
with the amount of household waste produced on average, average 
water needs per capita , and many other environmental indicators. The 
richer the data, the more accurate the projection is supposed to be. 
These projections would then be used as part of a decision-  support 
tool to determine the most sustainable use of areas and regions.
In advocating for this richer set of data, some agencies offered ways 
to engage with the idea of “big data” in their respective sectors. The 
Ministry of Agriculture, for instance, installed weather-  monitoring 
stations on a few sites to build a more accurate climate prediction. The 
Ministry of Trade collects prices of major agricultural commodities 
on the central markets on a weekly basis and provides the data to the 
wider public through a web portal. Environmental agencies in major 
cities place air-  quality-  monitoring panels in central business districts 
and show the numbers to the general public in real time. In West Java, 
each agency develops its own platforms for their information systems, 
one for each form of data (village potentials, farmers’ groups, epi -
demiology, market prices, soil properties, land suitability for crop 
production, etc.), although we would argue that these platforms have 
not been able to demonstrate the richness and variability of data. This 
convergence of actions towards the production of increasing and more 
precise data reflects the influence of a common attractor, the promises 
of Big Data attractor , which RPPLH helped to consolidate and anchor 
in the Indonesian context. This is different from the way in which 
data were used before the ubiquity of digital technology (see, e.g. 
Kitchin, 2014 ).
The increasing trend towards big data is captured not only by gov -
ernment offices but also, and arguably more effectively, by local com -
munities (as in the case of farmers’ groups collecting rainfall data; see  
  
114 Reframing change in governance assemblages
Winarto et al., 2018 ) and start-  ups (see, e.g. Forney & Dwiartama, 
2023). Some agri-  food startups, for instance, collaborate with the 
provincial government in providing user-  collected data on pests and 
diseases, water quality, crop yields, and market prices. Their collected 
dataset is a form of trade-  off with farmers, who gain benefits from the 
free use of those companies’ apps/  technologies, which can then be 
used to predict market trends and meet offtakers’ demands for agricul -
tural products. At the same time, these startups also reap benefits from 
their involvement with government projects, or as simple as being 
endorsed by the government (which for them means a huge potential 
for scalability). Reciprocally, most often they would provide the gov -
ernment with their collected data for the latter to monitor programmes 
or, more likely, to claim success in achieving targets.
This engagement with big data or collaborative planning was by no 
means initiated by RPPLH. Collaborative planning has been the spirit 
of governance—  and a strong attractor—  during the post-  reform era 
and particularly after the 2014 Bill on Regional Autonomy ( Undang 
Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 23, 2014 ) giving the regional 
and provincial governments broader responsibilities in key develop -
ment aspects. Likewise, big data became an integral part of the ter -
minology of the public sector around 2018 without any connection 
to environmental planning. If anything, it was probably big data that 
later influenced how RPPLH-  related policy was designed. However, 
RPPLH as an assemblage aligns perfectly with the ubiquitous data and 
their everyday use. It opens up the possibility of planning, managing, 
and monitoring the environment on the basis of data, together with the 
heterogeneous elements that come with it (communities, companies, 
startups, academics, devices, apps, and platforms). Along with col -
laborative planning, RPPLH demonstrates the capacity to produce 
new kinds of environmental governance in Indonesia. Particularly to 
the conceptual framework surrounding AEG as assemblage, this case 
provides an example of how governance can be seen as something 
beyond policies, planning, and regulations, and more as relationships, 
configurations, and anticipations of multiple possibilities.
Concluding remarks: a radical understanding of change
This chapter has highlighted what change and transformation are 
through the lens of assemblage thinking. Change is associated with 
unpredictability and multi-  linearity, but also with the properties and   
  
Reframing change in governance assemblages  115
capacities of the very assemblage to manifest into many different pos -
sibilities. Some of these capacities (such as pesticide-  free policies, 
meat alternatives, or data-  driven governance) might be more desirable 
than others, relevant to different assemblages, and strong enough to 
move an assemblage towards a new future direction. We identify this 
form of capacities and their ramification with other assemblages as 
attractors. By understanding this, we can safely say that an assem -
blage, despite leading to multiple and often unpredictable changes, is 
not necessarily chaotic. We may return to talk about transformation, 
for instance, as something that we aim to pursue, as a change of direc -
tion, but while also being aware that it may lead to some unexpected 
places.
What this implies for our understanding of AEG is that we might 
need to recognise the diversity of alternatives and future trajectories 
(Gibson-  Graham & Dombroski, 2020 ) and to navigate away from the 
idea of stability in order to emphasise the multiplicity of assemblages 
as always-  becoming. Assemblage thinking is a radical understanding 
of change where transformation is not considered in opposition to sta -
bility but instead to other changes, and where diverse directions of 
change can coexist. Over the course of this book, we have emphasised 
repeatedly that adopting assemblage thinking brings a deep shift in 
how we think about unpredictability, multiple possibilities, agency, 
power, and now, change and stability.
This way of thinking, of course, is not exclusive to academics, but 
extends to practitioners and decision-  makers as well. We argue that 
assemblage thinking is useful not only in how we interpret the world 
but also, and more importantly, in how we change it, “by introducing 
transformative thinking into the relationship to the present” ( Braidotti, 
2019 : 465). To refer to Castree et al. (2021) , there is a need for a pol  -
itics turn towards wicked assessments, a wider range of worldviews, 
and productive dissensus. In Saldanha’s (2012: 197)  view, the “so 
what” question can be answered by assemblage thinking to “disturb 
hegemonic desire! to better intervene!”. In Chapter 6 , we will explore 
what assemblage thinking means in the practical sphere of AEG.
Notes
 1 www.un.org/  en/ food-  syst ems-  sum mit/ about , last accessed 27.09.2023.
 2 www.worldb  ank.org/  en/ progr  ams/  food-  syst ems-  2030/  food-  syst ems-  tra 
nsfo rmat ion, last accessed 27.09.2023. 
 
  
 
 
  
116 Reframing change in governance assemblages
 3 We will revisit this notion of stability with a similar concept in assemblage 
thinking, namely, basins of attraction, later in this chapter.
 4 Gunderson and Holling have proposed this idea of panarchy ( Gunderson & 
Holling, 2002 ), which is based on Holling’s (1973)  seminal work on sta  -
bility and resilience in ecological systems.
References
Barnett, V . (1998). Kondratiev and the Dynamics of Economic Development . 
London: Macmillan.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.
Bétrisey, F. (2022). Récit médiatique de la production de quinoa en 
Suisse: idéalisation du local et dépolitisation de l’agriculture. Géo-  Regards  
15: 125–  142.
Braidotti, R. (2019). Affirmative ethics and generative life. Deleuze and 
Guattari Studies  13(4): 463–  481.
Callon, M. (1984). Some elements of a sociology of translation: Domestication 
of the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. The Sociological Review , 
32(1_  suppl): 196–  233.
Castree, N., Bellamy, R., & Osaka, S. (2021). The future of global envir -
onmental assessments: making a case for fundamental change. The 
Anthropocene Review  8(1): 56–  82.
Deleuze, G., & Guatarri, F. (1988). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia . London: Athlone.
Dittmer, J. (2014). Geopolitical assemblages and complexity. Progress in 
Human Geography  38(3): 385–  401.
Dwiartama, A. (2017). Resilience and transformation of the New Zealand 
kiwifruit industry in the face of Psa-  V disease. Journal of Rural Studies  
52: 118–  126.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling, C. S., & 
Walker, B. (2002). Resilience and sustainable development: building 
adaptive capacity in a world of transformations. AMBIO: A Journal of the 
Human Environment  31(5): 437–  440.
Forney, J., & Dwiartama, A. (2023). The project, the everyday, and reflexivity 
in sociotechnical agri-  food assemblages: proposing a conceptual model of 
digitalisation. Agriculture and Human Values  40(2): 441–  454.
Foster, J. B. (1999). Marx’s theory of metabolic rift: classical foundations for 
environmental sociology. American Journal of Sociology  105(2): 366–  405.
Geels, F. W. (2007). Transformations of large technical systems: a multilevel 
analysis of the Dutch highway system (1950–  2000). Science, Technology, 
& Human Values  32(2): 123–  149. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Reframing change in governance assemblages  117
Geels, F. W. (2010). Ontologies, socio-  technical transitions (to sustainability), 
and the multi-  level perspective. Research Policy  39(4): 495–  510.
Gibson-  Graham, J.-  K., & Dombroski, K. (2020). The Handbook of Diverse 
Economies . Cheltenham and Northampton: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Gunderson, L. H., & Holling, C. S. (Eds.). (2002). Panarchy: Understanding 
Transformations in Human and Natural Systems . Washington, D.C.: 
Island Press.
Hodson, M., Geels, F. W., & McMeekin, A. (2017). Reconfiguring urban sus -
tainability transitions, analysing multiplicity. Sustainability  9(2): 299.
Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual 
Review of Ecology and Systematics  4(1): 1–  23.
Hughes, S., Giest, S., & Tozer, L. (2020). Accountability and data-  driven 
urban climate governance. Nature Climate Change  10(12): 1085–  1090.
Jansen, K. (2015). The debate on food sovereignty theory: agrarian capit -
alism, dispossession and agroecology. The Journal of Peasant Studies  
42(1): 213–  232.
Jarosz, L. (2014). Comparing food security and food sovereignty discourses. 
Dialogues in Human Geography  4(2): 168–  181.
Kitchin, R. (2014). Big Data, new epistemologies and paradigm shifts. Big 
Data & Society  1(1): 2053951714528481.
Magarini, A., & Porreca, E. (2019). European Cities Leading in Urban 
Food Systems Transformation: Connecting Milan & FOOD 2030 . 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
Protevi, J. (2006). Deleuze, Guattari and Emergence. Paragraph  29(2): 19–  39.
Rip, A. (2006). A co-  evolutionary approach to reflexive governance –   and 
its ironies. In V . Jan-  Peter, D. Bauknecht, & R. Kemp (Eds.). Reflexive 
Governance for Sustainable Development  (pp. 82–  100). Cheltenham, UK/  
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Saldanha, A. (2012). Assemblage, materiality, race, capital. Dialogues in 
Human Geography  2(2): 194–  197.
Scott, D. (2011). The Technological fix criticisms and the agricultural bio -
technology debate. Journal of Agricultural and Environmental Ethics  
24(3): 207–  226.
Sembiring, R., Fatimah, I., & Widyaningsih, G. A. (2020). Indonesia’s 
omnibus bill on job creation: a setback for environmental law?. Chinese 
Journal of Environmental Law  4(1): 97–  109.
Stirling, A. (2015). Emancipating Transformations: from controlling ‘the 
transition’ to culturing plural radical progress. In I. Scoones, M. Leach, 
& P. Newell (Eds.). The Politics of Green Transformations  (pp. 54–  67). 
New York and London: Routledge.
Undang Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 23. (2014). Tentang Pemerintahan 
Daerah ( Law on Regional Governments ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
118 Reframing change in governance assemblages
Walker, B., Carpenter, S. R., Rockstrom, J., Crépin, A. S., & Peterson, G. D. 
(2012). Drivers, “slow” variables, “fast” variables, shocks, and resilience. 
Ecology and Society  17(3): 30.
Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R., & Kinzig, A. (2004). Resilience, 
adaptability and transformability in social–  ecological systems. Ecology 
and Society  9(2): 5.
Walker, B., Gunderson, L., Kinzig, A., Folke, C., Carpenter, S., & Schultz, L. 
(2006). A handful of heuristics and some propositions for understanding 
resilience in social–  ecological systems. Ecology and Society  11(1): 13.
Winarto, Y . T., Ariefiansyah, R., Prihandiani, A. F., & Taqiuddin, M. (2018). 
Nurturance and trust in developing agrometeorological learning in a chan -
ging climate: the science field shops in Indonesia. Indonesia and the Malay 
World  46(136): 360–  381. 
 
 
  
 DOI: 10.4324/9781003271260-6
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND license.6  Governing emergence towards 
the transformation of  
agri-  food assemblages
Introduction: from reflexive governance to governance of 
emergence
The ways agri-  environmental governance (AEG) is currently thought 
of and conceptualised in reorienting and transforming our food 
systems towards more desirable and sustainable futures seem to be 
bound for failure. Assemblage theory, in dialogue with empirical work 
on everyday AEG, opens new perspectives for dealing with some of 
the classical conundrums of governance studies. This core idea is at 
the basis of this book and triggered the conceptual developments in 
every chapter. After setting the scene and introducing our approach 
and project in the introduction, we started by framing empirical case 
studies ( Chapter 2 ) from an everyday-  governance perspective. Over 
and above individualised instruments, complex and entangled gov -
ernance assemblages have appeared. Those assemblages are not well-  
defined and stabilised systems. They are sets of concrete relations 
between heterogeneous elements, and these relations transgress 
the usual categories used to qualify governance. Assemblages are 
traversed by destabilising tensions (lines of flight) and forces of cohe -
sion (lines of articulation). In this sense, AEG assemblages and the 
relations that made them are always changing and recreated. They are 
vibrant ( Bennett, 2010 ) and always becoming. The intricacy of the 
relations making an assemblage and the diverse forces that traverse 
them inevitably generate a diversity and multiplicity of processes.
Assemblage is defined by what they produce (Buchanan, 2021), and 
this multiplicity of outcomes, found at the level of desires, imaginaries, 
or material processes, is a core feature of assemblage thinking. This is 
what we understand when Deleuze and Guattari define assemblage as  
 
  
120 Governing emergence
being, at the same time, one and many. More concretely, the same AEG 
assemblage can result in diverse, sometimes contradictory, outcomes. 
It can simultaneously nurture practices of bureaucratic control and 
stimulate environmental experimentation at its margins. This multi -
plicity of outcomes also means that predicting them is challenging. 
What resulted from a governance action was always, at least partly, 
unexpected. This observation opens a new question about assessing 
the outcomes of governance practices ( Chapter 3 ). Their fundamental 
unpredictability forces us to think beyond success or failure, and to 
pay more attention to the unintended effects of governance. Indeed, 
what emerges from AEG assemblages is often quite distant from stated 
objectives and goals. Interventions change the configuration of the 
assemblage, indirectly impacting its elements and their relations. The 
apparent failure of a new governance scheme can still be productive 
in transforming the way governance actors, such as state offices and 
services, relate to one another. Therefore, governance can also be seen 
as an attempt to ride this uncertainty rather than setting objectives and 
assessing achievements.
Unpredictability does not mean that actors have absolutely no cap -
acity to orient what AEG assemblages become. On the contrary, the 
questions of agency and power are not only central to the topic of 
governance itself but also to an assemblage approach ( Chapter 4 ). 
However, to understand better the capacity of elements to influence 
the course of an assemblage, one must accept to move away from an 
individualistic definition of agency and integrate its collective and dis -
tributive nature. No one acts alone in an assemblage.
Power can take many forms, some being ephemeral and others 
well-  established, depending on how consolidated relations in the 
assemblage are. Therefore, voluntary or circumstantial alliances are 
essential in the capacity of individual elements to act according to their 
interest or will. What makes assemblages hold together is the coming 
together of desires. Joint interests create powerful movements in the 
assemblage, orienting its future evolutions. From this perspective, the 
emergence of shared desires and projects, for instance, around a redef -
inition of the role of soya in European agriculture is a central aspect of 
the collective agency of AEG assemblages and points to their capacity 
to impinge on broader food and agriculture assemblages.
This discussion on agency and power then leads us to the question 
of social change and transformation, which stands as AEG’s fun -
damental objective ( Chapter 5 ). As a starting point, assemblages’  
Governing emergence  121
vibrant and always-  in- becoming nature emphasises the mundanity 
of change. What matters then is not so much “changing” things, 
but rather understanding which change counts and how it is located 
within a broader direction of changes. Transforming food and agri -
culture becomes a matter of changing the general directions guiding 
the assemblage. In this process, small changes can become mean -
ingful when they contribute to the emergence of new attractors and 
the creation of new spaces of possibilities. Altogether, assemblage 
thinking provides useful tools for a renewed and regenerated engage -
ment with AEG in a context where “transformation” is called for by 
many actors.
In this final and concluding chapter, we build an argument that 
assemblage thinking can participate in the much-  needed transform -
ation of our agri-  food systems. Laying the emphasis on the notion 
of emergence and capacities, assemblage thinking contributes to a 
paradigmatic change and an epistemological turn in how we address 
unpredictability in the practice of governance. The articulation of 
individual, collective, and distributive agency and the related attention 
paid to the multiplicity of ongoing processes of change are not only 
useful framings for analysing power relations and the effects of gov -
ernance but can also help to recalibrate the way we develop and target 
new governance instruments, and to nurture crucial transformative 
processes which are premised on the reordering of power relations 
to overcome locked-  in situations. The everyday perspective on gov -
ernance usefully helps to redefine and go beyond the notion of reflex -
ivity in governance. The distributive nature of agency in governance 
assemblages critically questions the focus on “governing” in steering 
governance practices, neglecting the need for a more distributed 
reflexivity in the whole assemblage.
As already stated, assemblage thinking provides useful tools for 
scrutinising unwanted effects and spillovers. Therefore, and leaving 
academic considerations aside, it is a useful guide in the practice of 
governance for building reflexive and transformative assemblages of 
instruments, by targeting capacities and attractors, as leverage points, 
rather than specific objectives that will always remain elusive and fun -
damentally unachievable. Thus, we claim that assemblage thinking 
makes a double contribution to the debates surrounding AEG. The first 
is to show how assemblage theory is useful in understanding issues 
around governance. The second is the promotion of a practice of gov -
ernance that would focus on creating new assemblages as a powerful  
122 Governing emergence
tool of change. This last chapter engages more directly with this 
second contribution by asking questions such as: What does it mean to 
leave aside a definition of governance as steering, based on objectives 
and monitoring, or on the success and failure of assessment? Can we 
do governance without fixed objectives? How can ripple effects and 
small changes be integrated to govern “sideways” without necessarily 
belittling our ambitions? What does “embracing uncertainty” mean 
concretely? Simply put, this final chapter serves as a first translation 
of the book’s theoretical contributions into a vocabulary more attuned 
to the needs of the actors of governance, such as policymakers, NGOs, 
or local food organisations.
The unruly consequences of governance and the call for  
reflexive​governance
As presented in the introductory chapter of this book, our original 
inspiration for engaging in this discussion on everyday governance 
and AEG assemblages can be found in our previous engagement with 
AEG practices. There, we worked to identify several weaknesses 
and limitations in how our current societies develop answers to agri-  
environmental issues and challenges. Of course, this statement also 
builds on what many authors have said in a large literature addressing 
AEG practices’ many failures, weaknesses, and unwanted effects. 
The rich body of scholarship emphasises once again that, as unpre -
dictable assemblages, governance practices rarely reach only the 
expected results. The extreme difficulty of predicting evolutions and 
developments is a key feature of complexity thinking, and this is par -
ticularly true for matters of sustainability. Many factors mingle and 
render the governance of socio-  ecological transformation unpredict -
able: hidden abodes, external interventions, fortuitous interactions 
and events, and diverse forms of resistance (e.g. V oß & Kemp, 2006 ). 
Because of these difficulties in achieving explicit goals, Miller and 
Rose (1990 ) speak of the idea of “government” as a “congenitally 
failing operation”. Consequently, they claim, the “will to govern” 
needs to be understood “in terms of the difficulties of operationalising 
it”, as the unruly nature of social life can never be fully captured by 
any form of knowledge that informs governing programmes (ibid.: 10–  
11). Therefore, as Walker and Shove (2007 : 222) argue, contingencies 
and ambivalences in pursuing governance objectives must be seen as 
“a normal rather than a pathological state”. 
 
 
  
Governing emergence  123
Despite these already old critical assessments, the design of 
governance interventions, in the overwhelming majority of cases, 
remains based on simplification and schematisation that translate 
into monolinear anticipation of change. This may be explained using 
Scott’s (1998)  insight that “seeing like a state” systematically requires 
certain forms of knowledge and control based on oversimplification. 
This narrowing of the vision makes possible imaginations of rigorous 
control, accurate measurement, and precise manipulation of an other -
wise far too complex and unwieldy reality. Shove (2010)  already 
highlighted that criticising such a linear and simplistic vision is not 
limited to the theoretical debate, but has concrete implications as they 
produce a “template for intervention” that attributes specific roles 
to diverse actors and closes different possibilities of action. From a 
different perspective, an everyday and assemblage approach to gov -
ernance renders such simplifications unbearable, as no one lives in 
a world where issues can be fully isolated and separately resolved. 
Multiplicity, unpredictability, and perpetual change are not only key 
elements of a theory of assemblages; they also reflect the everyday 
experience of actors involved in governance practice. Too often, the 
failure of governance interventions is explained by the actors’ resist -
ance or the task’s difficulty. This critical analysis of simplification in 
governance tells us that the cause of failure might just as well be found 
on the side of the theory of change and the templates for interven -
tion in which governance instruments are produced. Indeed, Shove 
(2010 : 1278) also highlights that “effect is never in isolation and that 
interventions go on within, not outside, the processes they seek to 
shape”, pointing to the need for governance actors to see themselves 
as part of the “system that they have to govern” ( Rip, 2006 : 82), which 
also means assuming part of the responsibility for the outcomes.
These observations rejoin calls for a careful and reflexive practice 
of governance, as formulated by V oß and Kemp:
Reflexive governance refers to the problem of shaping societal 
development in the light of the reflexivity of steering strategies—  
the phenomenon that thinking and acting with respect to an object 
of steering also affects the subject and its ability to steer. Examples 
of such reflexivity include research policies bringing up new 
knowledge that shifts policy objectives, or subsidies increasing 
the lobbying power of supported industries and thereby changing 
political force fields. Reflexive governance thus implies that one  
 
  
124 Governing emergence
calls into question the foundations of governance itself, that is, the 
concepts, practices and institutions by which societal development 
is governed, and that one envisions alternatives and reinvents and 
shapes those foundations.
(V oß and Kemp, 2006 : 4)
The idea of nurturing reflexivity among the actors of governance is 
not limited to the literature on “reflexive governance” and can be 
found in the work of many scholars. In general, this literature includes 
more concrete recommendations. For instance, in the conclusion to 
his critical engagement with development policies and their con -
tinuous failure, Scott (1998 : 345) provides a few rules of thumb “to 
make development planning less prone to disaster”. First, because 
we cannot predict the future and remain largely ignorant of what will 
come next, caution and small steps should be the rule to avoid irre -
mediable negative consequences. As the author puts it: “a small step, 
stand back, observe and then plan the next small move”. Second, and 
as part of the same logic, governance action should favour revers -
ibility. Third, one should plan for a surprise and be prepared to accom -
modate his/  her actions to the unforeseen. Fourth, one should also 
plan for human inventiveness and the capacity of actors to play with 
the rules. James Scott’s recommendations emerge from his work on 
development policies and programmes in Africa. Nevertheless, they 
find a strong echo in Alejandro Portes’s 1999 presidential address to 
the American Sociological Association on unpredictability, when he 
called for more cautious policy interventions:
These alternative forms require relentless questioning of the ini -
tial blueprints and an examination of the various contingencies at 
each step of program implementation. In particular, this approach 
results in two practical considerations: First, change must proceed 
in measured steps, with close attention to fortuitous events and 
pressures from outside forces; second, one must know the actors 
involved and their actual goals in order to anticipate their reactions 
to external intervention.
(2000 : 14–  15)
The core of reflexive governance is creating conditions that allow con -
tinuous attention to the “unforeseen” or the “fortuitous”, as opposed 
to usual practices of governance where all the efforts concentrate on   
Governing emergence  125
the construction of strong and well-  thought-  out instruments, with few 
resources left for serious monitoring and reassessment of the interven -
tion. As Walker and Shove put it:
A system orientation when combined with ideas of reflexive gov -
ernance consequently implies not one moment of intervention, 
following which managers stand back and await the desired result, 
but a constant process in which further adjustments are made as 
environmental conditions change, these changes being, in part, 
the outcome of previous interventions. Feedback, monitoring and 
circuits of action and reaction are integral to this overall scheme.
(2007 : 219)
The assemblage approach we developed in the previous chapter partly 
leads to similar conclusions. Notably, the emphasis on the unpredict -
ability of outcomes in AEG assemblages strongly echoes the idea 
of the unforeseen and the fortuitous mentioned by these scholars. 
However, “reflexive governance” alone, as an alternative framework, 
does not fully engage with some of the questions assemblage thinking 
raises on AEG practices, which include, among others, the multipli -
city of outcomes, the distributive nature of agency, the non-  linearity 
of change, and the existence of attractors. Scott and Portes might have 
touched upon some of those aspects without fully integrating them. 
Assemblage thinking, we argue, gives us the means to go beyond 
reflexive governance, which appears as a first and important step on a 
longer way towards a more profound and articulated reconfiguration 
of the principles of doing governance.
The​limitations ​of​reflexivity ​and​the​need​to​embrace​emergences
Reflexive governance is essentially based on a feedback-  loop 
model. This model can translate into a series of steps following a 
“formulation–  implementation–  reformulation” sequence. While such 
a model introduces more complexity and forces us to pay attention 
to the unexpected effects of interventions, it preserves a form of lin -
earity in the definition of governance goals as the unique direction of 
change and the multiplicity of outcomes being reduced to mere side 
effects that should be avoided if unwanted. Also, reflexive govern -
ance remains centred around the original intention of the actors of 
governance. This argument is mobilised in the controversy between   
126 Governing emergence
assemblage theorists, when Buchanan criticises DeLanda’s position 
on the reflexive model (even if none of these authors calls it that). 
Buchanan (2021 : 125) makes an important comment based on the 
concept of intentional fallacy: “This way of seeing policy succumbs 
to what literary theorists refer to as the ‘intentional fallacy’ because 
it holds to the idea that a policy can and should be measured against 
a policy intention”. Buchanan introduces the notion of wild policy 
he borrows from Lea (2014)  to counter the idea that policies (and 
governance at large, we would add) are controllable processes guided 
by intentions and precise plans, which is more an image that policies 
produce of themselves than an accurate reflection of the messiness of 
real life. The wild side of policies described by Lea relates explicitly 
to criticism of Australian liberalism and does not overlap exactly with 
our theorisation of AEG assemblages, despite the wilderness of gov -
ernance also expressing itself in the notion of multiplicity and distribu -
tive agency. This contradicts the centrality of individual intentions and 
points to the fundamentally uncontrollable nature of what emerges 
from assemblages following governance interventions.
The insistence on the wild dimension of governance has both an 
analytical and a practical value. On the one hand, we hope to have 
demonstrated in this book that governance is better understood when 
described as an assemblage. On the other hand, as Stirling (2015)  puts 
it, the enormous challenges our societies face today demand moving 
away from an illusion of control through governance. The author 
opposes emancipating transformations to shallower transitions; the first 
“involving more diverse, emergent and unruly political alignments, 
more about social innovations, challenging incumbent structures, sub -
ject to incommensurable knowledge and pursuing contending (even 
unknown) ends”, and the latter being “managed under orderly control, 
through incumbent structures according to tightly disciplined know -
ledge, often emphasising technological innovation, towards some par -
ticular known (presumptively shared) end” (ibid.: 54). Following a 
similar inspiration, our purpose here is to emphasise the need to go 
beyond “reflexive governance”, which tends to maintain an ontology 
of change as linear and controllable, adding a layer of caution and 
attention in the process. Instead, we propose the basis for a govern -
ance of emergence  that acknowledges the multiplicity and messiness 
of change and the challenges brought by the distributive nature of 
agency. In the following, we do so by identifying and sketching out 
four guiding principles. 
 
  
Governing emergence  127
Redistributing responsibilities
In the introduction to a recent special issue on “Governing Food 
Futures: Towards a ‘Responsibility Turn’ in Food and Agriculture”, 
Arnold and colleagues ( 2022 ) discuss the “turn to responsibility” in 
the governance of agri-  food systems, highlighting the centrality of 
power relations in the attribution of responsibilities. Even if its prox -
imity with neoliberal discourses is pertinently criticised, the notion of 
responsibility itself remains central in governance, as it guides action 
by defining who has to respond to problems. The authors highlight 
this process of responsibilisation as “a ‘constitution of the self’ of the 
actors of the system in relation to a common set of rules or norms” 
(ibid.: 83). In other words, responsibilisation calls upon the—  voluntary 
or not—  engagement of all the reflexive elements of an assemblage in 
acknowledging their share of responsibility for what emerges from the 
assemblage. The process of taking or attributing responsibility inev -
itably raises the question of power relations—  some actors can avoid 
responsibility, while others have to take a larger share of it than they 
might deserve. The combination of individual, collective, and dis -
tributive agency—  highlighted in assemblage thinking—  helps reframe 
this ambivalence of responsibilisation. Maye and colleagues (2019)  
highlight the limitations of individual responsibilisation in solving 
large-  scale and systemic issues, echoing the call for “more collective 
notions of responsibility and the acknowledgment that responsibilities 
are distributed  across complex networks of actors” (ibid.: 303). To 
this end, they draw on, among others, Barnett and colleagues’ ( 2011 ) 
definition of responsibility as
not just an individuated action taken by a single person or by some 
collective agent. It is theorised in terms of how distributed actions 
join actors together, feeding into wider networks of cooperation 
that reach out and influence events elsewhere.
(Barnett et al., 2011 , cited in Maye et al., 2019 : 303)
Evans and colleagues ( 2017 : 1401) identified “an emergent sense 
of distributed responsibility” in the framing of food-  waste-  reduction 
actions by supermarkets in the United Kingdom, not without interro -
gating what such powerful actors renounced to divert responsibility 
towards other actors. Their work calls for caution in the idealisa -
tion of distributed responsibility as a tool for diluting responsibility.  
 
 
 
  
128 Governing emergence
A governance of emergence  combines a distributed understanding 
of responsibility—  echoing the distributive agency—  with a crit -
ical engagement with power relations as a key issue in making the 
transition possible through a “reassignment of rights and responsi -
bilities” ( Sareen & Wolf, 2021 : 2)—  reflecting the power dynamics 
in assemblages. As stated, taking seriously the distributive nature of 
agency does not equal ignoring the unequal distribution of power to 
influence the course of the assemblage. On the contrary, distributive 
agency calls for a redistribution of responsibilities according to the 
capacity of elements to act on the wider assemblage. In simple words, 
more power implies more responsibility in the collective outcomes.
In the case of IP-  Suisse, the significant development of pesticide-  
free grain production resulted from a distributed set of actions and 
self- responsibilisation. Civil society, retailers, research institutions, 
farmer organisations, state agencies, and individuals all brought their 
contributions. In the process, influential and powerful actors worked 
to make the engagement of smaller players, notably consumers and 
individual farmers, easier. As a new environmental management 
planning instrument, RPPLH not only reconstructed the playing field 
and redistributed roles and responsibilities to a wider set of actors, 
including various government agencies, but also re-  established how 
those responsibilities should be taken; in other words, reframing how 
actors respond to environmental problems. The consistent summoning 
of stakes by the central actors of the DS organisation evolved into 
collective evaluation processes of governance goals. It also brought 
about diverse forms of responsibility and reflexivity over where 
respective actions can be meaningfully directed towards. The dis -
tributive agencies of instruments proved to lift some of the pressures 
placed on farmers, on the one hand, and consumers, on the other hand, 
to direct it towards actors placed in the middle of the value chain 
where decisions are seen as highly consequential. In this process, the 
assemblage also reached out to the larger assemblage where global 
relations between producing and consuming countries are to be taken 
into account. A desirable imaginary emerged around European “envir -
onmental soya” opening up a window of opportunity for Brazil, for 
instance, transitioning to organic soya and thus upscaling the current 
10% achieved in this country.
Governance of emergence  in AEG should aim to either distribute 
responsibilities proportionally to the actual capacity to influence the 
trajectory of the food and agriculture assemblages or rebalance power   
Governing emergence  129
relations that lock these assemblages in unsustainable situations. In 
the first case, it implies reorienting governance away from its focus on 
individual responsibility and favourite targets, mostly individual con -
sumers or farmers, to more risky and novel interventions across food 
and agriculture assemblages, targeting a diversity of actors, including 
the initiators of governance practices themselves. Indeed, governance 
practices are too often constructed in a way that limits the attribu -
tion of responsibility for outcomes to the governed, overlooking the 
role of the governors. This should be reversed. In the second case, 
the autonomisation of small players, such as farmers or consumers, 
becomes a tool for building more sustainable food futures. From 
an assemblage perspective, this autonomisation can only happen 
through alliances. Consequently, governance aims begin to favour 
the emergence of alliances and experimentations. In most cases, such 
an endeavour also means buffering the pressure exerted by power 
relations. In this sense, the governance of emergence  automatically 
focuses on relational objectives, as relations are the fundamental 
architecture of assemblages.
Prioritising processual and relational objectives and outcomes
Measurable outputs, control of achievements, and sanctions in case of 
noncompliance play a central albeit overpowering role in most current 
environmental governance practices. While there are many reasons 
for defending the importance of improving the accountability of 
actors regarding environmentally harming practices and implementing 
“strong accountability” systems ( Sareen & Wolf, 2021 ), an assemblage 
perspective calls for leaving more space for less controllable and unin -
tended dimensions of change. The complexity of processes of change, 
their multiplicity and unpredictability call for a definition of govern -
ance objectives as a matter of creating paths towards a desirable future, 
rather than achieving predefined goals or adopting pre-  identified 
practices. To transform an assemblage means to affect all relations—  
making new ones, breaking others, changing power balances—  and 
opening up new possibilities. Concrete and measurable outcomes are, 
of course, important, and such an approach does not mean discarding 
any attempt to monitor changes. However, too often, a fundamental 
mistaken belief underpins many governance practices: that precise 
targets can be easily achieved if we design the right tools and that 
having precise goals per se  is more efficient in achieving change.   
130 Governing emergence
Yet, at least in terms of sustainability, governance has failed in this 
endeavour ( Arnouts & Arts, 2009 ; Miller & Rose, 1990 ). Indeed, 
prescribed practices do not provide the expected outcomes, and fixed 
and measurable objectives are rarely achieved, giving the impression 
of stagnation or failure of governance actions. This auto-  generative 
diagnosis of failure can have a negative impact on motivations and the 
desire to pursue what becomes unachievable objectives.
More fundamentally, the focus on measurable outputs of govern -
ance objectifies and renders graspable some of the processes that 
emerge from a governance assemblage. However, simultaneously, 
it renders invisible many other processes that might develop in par -
allel. The logic of quantification and measuring becomes hegemonic 
to the extent that much of what is not measured and measurable 
does not count and is not taken into account. Assemblage thinking 
advocates for acknowledging and integrating existing and emerging 
alternative processes of change that overflow the boundary of precise 
objectives. Counting has its limits, however, and needs continuous 
recontextualisation. Otherwise, focusing on fixed and measurable, 
but always partial, objectives increases the risk highlighted by Park 
and Kramarz (2019)  of a mismatch between governance means and 
governance ends, and therefore of losing sight of the fundamental 
objectives of environmental governance, to concentrate mainly on a 
follow-  up of governance means—  making instruments “work”—  and 
forget a deeper follow-  through of governance ends.
A governance of emergence  moves the focus to relations and 
processes. It builds on the lesson that transformation happens through 
reconfigurations of relations and the generation of the new processes 
they include. If IP-  Suisse has grown and become a significant con -
tributor to the dissemination of the desire for and the enactment of 
more sustainable agricultural practices, it is because the organisation 
has developed strong relations of interdependence with many actors 
in value chains and the broader food and agriculture assemblage. The 
fundamental contribution of Donau Soja has been the development 
of a dense network of collaboration and the generation of thoughts 
around soya in Europe. In Indonesia, the apparent failure of RPPLH 
to fundamentally reform land planning and impact assessment in 
Indonesia should not hide the underlying changes in how diverse 
actors interact and collaborate.
This focus on relations is not limited to the human elements of the 
assemblage. As we have seen, the relation to bureaucratic instruments,  
  
Governing emergence  131
soya as a plant, a seed, and a source of protein, or to data and maps 
deeply influences how assemblages form and evolve. To exemplify 
the importance of relations in transforming the fundamental processes 
guiding agri-  environmental assemblages, we can draw on the work of 
scholars engaging with soil from the perspective of care ( Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015 ; Krzywoszynska, 2019 ). As those authors highlight, 
soil exhaustion through agricultural practices goes hand in hand with 
a specific way of relating to soil as a mere support for human activity. 
Moving away from these processes of overexploitation of soil implies 
changing the quality of the relationship—  from a logic of control to 
a logic of care and attentiveness. It also implies acknowledging and 
integrating into the web of relations around soil’s diverse elements 
that have been ignored but are all essential to soil health, such as 
earthworms, insects, or fungi. While AEG instruments related to soil 
quality would target measurable biological and physical outcomes, 
without questioning how soil is integrated into webs of relations, a 
form of governance of emergence  should target this kind of recon -
figuration of relations that leads to a reorientation of fundamental 
processes. Indeed, the practice of using soybeans as cover crops has 
been forgotten, and the nitrogen-  fixing property excluded as a count -
able element.
Creating reflexive and processual methods for 
monitoring change
The first principle highlighted the importance of diversifying object -
ives and outcomes to revert the prejudices against non-  measurable 
outcomes and remain somewhat discerning because of their qualitative 
and relational nature. However, this call does not equal renouncing all 
kinds of accountability and monitoring of change. We have already 
highlighted the importance of reflexive governance. Reflexivity 
requires monitoring and feedback instruments and methods. However, 
these instruments and methods should not only be able to assess meas -
urable outcomes but also be attuned to the identification of multiple 
and often unexpected processes, which escape usual monitoring but 
happen and matter nevertheless. For such an open and encompassing 
reflexive governance, the question becomes what kind of processes 
and relations are we initiating/  supporting, and what kind of processes 
are we stopping or impeding? Again, this monitoring also requires the 
assessment of concrete and measurable effects; however, it does not   
  
132 Governing emergence
stop there. Those quantitative measurements should be the first step 
and the means for more qualitative and dialogic monitoring.
This way of replacing reflexive governance within a complex 
landscape of actors and interventions echoes what V oß and Kemp 
(2006 : 7) call second-  order governance, understood as “a procedural 
approach towards reflecting the interdependencies, understanding 
aggregate effects of specialised concepts and strategies, and engaging 
in the modulation of ongoing societal developments by establishing 
links and organising problem-  oriented communication and interaction 
among distributed steering activities”. However, the everyday framing 
on governance highlights the fact that this reflexive engagement with 
the effects of governance cannot be restricted to the perspective of 
the people initiating governance actions and the experts consulted. 
Therefore, a governance of emergence  requires a reflexive and proces -
sual monitoring which seeks and welcomes the multiple and diverse 
experiences of the actors involved in the governance assemblage. This 
includes, but is not limited to, the active and direct participation of 
the “stakeholders”—  following the now classical category used in the 
governance lingo. The assemblage approach clearly indicates that the 
actors concerned and affected by governance practices are far more 
numerous. If the ambition of integrating all the possible perspectives 
would be unrealistic, a fundamental openness to the diversity of 
perspectives is necessary and of crucial importance, as confirmed by 
the critical discussion around the UN Food System Summit and the 
implications of who was or was not invited ( Canfield et al., 2021 ).
Acknowledging and integrating diverse perspectives consequently 
highlights the probable dissensus on objectives and effects and, 
therefore, the inevitably political dimension not only of governance 
practices but also of the monitoring process. The inevitable political 
dimension—  in a broad sense of the encounter and confrontation of 
a wider range of worldviews resulting in productive dissensus—  has 
been well commented on by Castree and colleagues ( 2021 ) in the con -
text of global environmental assessments, as a central piece of “wicked 
assessments” answering “wicked problems”. For the authors, environ -
mental assessment opens to a “space of existential choice”, which is 
a “space that’s overflowing with debatable framings of society, with 
politics not merely policy options, and with strategic choices not only 
operational ones” ( Castree et al., 2021 : 69). This space mirrors the 
space of possibility in assemblage thinking. In this sense, reflexive 
and processual monitoring for AEG is not so much a place of external  
  
Governing emergence  133
and neutral knowledge production but also, above all, a political space 
where diverse perspectives meet. Castree and colleagues describe these 
politics of assessment as “diverse, ordered conceptions of the world 
that marry diagnosis with critique, analysis with evaluation, evidence 
with argument” (ibid.: 72). A governance of emergence  expands this 
integration of the subjective and political by highlighting the dimen -
sion of affects through the notion of desire, not just as a human com -
plication of assessment, but rather as a central feature of the dynamics 
of assemblage. Desire emphasises that the diversity of perspectives 
and agendas is not an obstacle to a—  otherwise elusive—  consensus 
as a precondition for generating change, but rather drives the coming 
together of actors following diverse interests. What emerges from 
governance originates fundamentally in this convergence.
When talking with actors of the IP-  Suisse assemblage, one can 
observe that sparks of transformation emerge not so much, thanks 
to the capacity of the biodiversity point system to reflect effective 
environmental benefits, nor in the sense of control allowed by the 
certification scheme. Rather, they appear in a general vision where 
farmers can still see themselves as good producers while doing 
something for the environment, in the collective experimentation 
made possible by the gathering of diverse actors, and in the actors’ 
enthusiasm for exploring new possibilities. In other words, sustain -
ability needs collective desire. Donau Soja meetings, as governance 
practices, mobilise desires into affective territories where imaginaries 
and desires are co-  constituted. They require sophisticated setups that 
allow people to move to places and get together, to exchange insights, 
to sense and experience, imagine and make sense together, and finally 
to take action. This process of collective reflexive engagement is 
more than a dialogical exercise where ideas are communicated from 
one to another. It is not knowledge transfer, nor is it capacity building 
in a classical sense. It has consequences. Here, inclusive governance 
pays off. Experts from different fields have a rare chance to mingle 
and get better at grasping the complexity of issues. A collective goal-  
sharing exercise takes place. More than expected results emerge. This 
coming together of actors is also visible in the case of RPPLH, where 
the more stringent planning instrument is not the one that drives the 
planning process. It is instead the fact that through this new space 
of possibility, actors (different government sectors, academics, and 
professionals) can find a way to channel their wishes and inspirations 
and, indeed, their desires on how environmental governance ought  
134 Governing emergence
to manifest. And yet, it is not only the human actors that pursue 
their desires. Nature, through layers of data and proxies, brings its 
desire to the table, allowing actors to change their viewpoint on the 
environment.
Desire also questions the role and limitations of expert knowledge 
in guiding governance and change. In the governance of emergence , 
expertise is obviously more than technical and fact-  based. It not only 
helps nurture the reflexive process through scientific monitoring 
but also contributes to the emergence of new desires and existential 
spaces. Scientific experts, among other actors, have indeed important 
arguments to bring in the formation of collective desires. If we follow 
Gergen’s ( 2015: 294) call for a paradigm shift in research—  from pro -
ducing a reflection of the world to “illuminate what is” to contributing 
to the formation of the future and “create what is to become”—  we 
could even say that this role is primary. However, scientists have col -
lectively developed little competences in reflexively co-  constructing 
desire with the other actors. Therefore, the governance of emergence  
is also about a change in the culture of expertise.
Targeting attractors to influence spaces of possibility
Moving away from precise objectives in terms of the adoption of spe -
cific practices or the achievement of measurable outcomes requires 
redefining the target of governance action in order to propose answers 
that match the importance of the sustainability challenges facing food 
and agriculture. From an assemblage perspective, innovations and 
changes can sometimes be a means to actually maintain as much as 
possible the current state of things and to keep the same trajectory. 
Because changes happen constantly and introduce new unsettling 
elements in the assemblage, often the reaction is to voluntarily take 
action to avoid destabilisation, restore what has been lost, and keep 
moving in the same direction. This is all fine and legitimate, when 
stability is the objective. However, when governance aims at a change 
of direction, a switch in priorities, or a re-  foundation of relations—  as 
should be the case with AEG—  then change should be transformative. 
The definition of transformation we offered in Chapter 5 — as a deep 
redefinition of the space of possibility resulting from a reorientation 
of attractors and the emergence of new capacities—  provides the first 
insights into how to achieve this: by targeting attractors and capaci -
ties. This means that while concrete, technical, and practical elements   
Governing emergence  135
are most of the time part of the process of change, the production of 
new imaginaries and desires is also essential.
Attractors, imaginaries, and desires are not the same thing, but they 
are deeply entangled. They work together in redirecting the trajec -
tory of an assemblage by shaping the basin of attraction. Thinking of 
governance with the notion of attractor in mind draws our attention 
to how dominant narratives and imaginaries rooted in material 
arrangements help consolidate a status quo despite perpetual changes 
and innovations. This is where a governance of emergence  is open 
to alternative futures and gets inspiration from experimentations and 
“real utopias” ( Wright, 2020 ). Prefigurative imaginaries constitute 
the fertile ground in which new attractors can take root. However, 
attractors are not only made of desires and ideals but also of material 
arrangements. In this sense, generating new desires is not enough if 
this does not include a reopening of concrete possibilities. This double 
dimension of governance, with desires and meanings, on the one 
hand, and materiality in governance, on the other hand, is pointed to 
by Buchanan (2021 : 127) when he says that conceiving policy as an 
assemblage implies “seeing it in terms of the kinds of arrangements 
and orderings it makes possible and even more importantly the com -
plex and not always fully disclosed set of expectations it entails”. This 
is why a governance of emergence  means fundamentally engaging 
reflexivity with this double nature to impact attractors.
When diverse actors of the soya value chain meet at the initiative of 
DS, they do not resolve the tensions and disagreements that might exist 
between them. Nevertheless, from these meetings emerge new visions 
of possible soya futures, which reorient these diverse perspectives 
towards a shared horizon without implying a unification of all object -
ives and desires. At the same time, investments in infrastructures for the 
development of a renewed soya value chain in Europe have made new 
collaborations and relations possible. While we mentioned that actors 
did find a consensus on how to better manage the environment through 
RPPLH, it does not mean that all actors have the same objective. Each 
actor still pursues their desires and interests, while at the same time 
confronting the others over contradicting goals. No patch of land can 
be used for two purposes at once, so only those actors (agricultural, 
settlement, public work, or environmental agencies) that can make their 
case heard would be allowed to push through their plan on that patch of 
land. However, what this means is that the coming together of different 
desires is what makes the assemblage vibrant in ways that shape the   
136 Governing emergence
new environmental management plan. Likewise, when retailers, indus -
trial bakeries, mills, IP-  Suisse, and farmers collaborate to develop a 
pesticide-  free grain value chain, they do not aim for the same object -
ives, nor build on the same appreciation of the situation. Neither do 
they share the visions of the activist who launched a political movement 
for banning pesticides from Swiss agriculture. However, all of them 
brought in the assemblage desires that resulted in a significant change 
and worked to make it possible, by adapting standards, separating flows, 
or experimenting with new agricultural practices.
These last references to our case studies also show clearly that 
AEG engages in transformative work when diverse instruments and 
actions converge, often unintentionally, towards a shared direction. 
In this sense, doing governance of emergence  means embracing its 
relational nature. Actors of governance should therefore have an acute 
sense of how their practice participates in a wider governance assem -
blage, in order to look for alliances and synergies, and counter lock-  
in situations. This assemblage-  attuned engagement in governance 
goes beyond coordination to mitigate uncertainty and antagonism. In 
actuality, it is more like developing the skills and attention needed to 
navigate uncharted futures.
Conclusion: a governance of emergence as a new attractor 
for AEG
In this concluding chapter, we have engaged with what we consider as 
the contributions of assemblage thinking in regenerating the practice 
of governance. We have built the argument that assemblage thinking 
can participate in the transformation needed in our agri-  food systems. 
Laying the emphasis on the notion of emergence and capacities, 
assemblage thinking contributes to a paradigmatic change and an epis -
temological turn in how we address unpredictability in the practice 
of governance. Without providing ready-  to- use instruments and good 
practices, we hope to have offered deep anchors for the foundations of 
a governance of emergence . We share this call with all those who take 
a stance—  through reflexive governance, distributed responsibility, 
global environmental assessments, and similar engagements—  in 
favour of rejuvenating the answers, actions, and attitudes our societies 
embody in relation to the burning challenges faced by our food and 
agriculture futures. We contend that assemblage thinking provides a 
framing that relates and articulates these elements.  
Governing emergence  137
What emerges from this theoretical assemblage, we argue, is more 
than the sum of its elements. Redistributed responsibilities, proces -
sual and relational objectives, reflexive and processual monitoring, 
and attractors as targets work together in a governance of emer -
gence . We offer it as a new paradigm for transformative AEG. We 
regard the translation of these four principles into actual governance 
practices as already rooted in currently unfolding efforts and mani -
fold experimentations which diminish the grip of other attractors 
pulling in different and sometimes opposing directions. Our objective 
is, therefore, emancipatory, in that we offer this governance of emer -
gence  as a new attractor for redirecting AEG, nurturing a desire for 
renewed practices and logics in the wide and global AEG assemblage. 
In this process, our own desire is to now encounter others’ desires. As 
multiple others have made it possible for reflexive engagement to be 
developed in this book, so multiple others are needed for the emer -
gence and enactment of this governance of emergence .
References
Arnold, N., Brunori, G., Dessein, J., Galli, F., Ghosh, R., Loconto, A. M., & 
Maye, D. (2022). Governing food futures: towards a ‘responsibility turn’ in 
food and agriculture. Journal of Rural Studies  89: 82–  86.
Arnouts, R., & Arts, B. (2009). Environmental governance failure: The "dark 
side" of an essentially optimistic concept. In B. Arts, A. Lagendijk, & H. 
van Houtum (Eds.), The Desoriented State. Shifts in Governmentality, 
Territoriality and Governance  (pp. 201–  228). Berlin: Springer.
Barnett, C., Cloke, P., Clarke, N., & Malpass, A. (2011). Globalizing 
Responsibility: The Political Rationalities of Ethical Consumption . 
Chichester: Wiley.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham 
and London: Duke University Press.
Buchanan, I. (2021). Assemblage Theory and Method . London/  
New York: Bloomsbury.
Canfield, M. C., Duncan, J., & Claeys, P. (2021). Reconfiguring food systems 
governance: the UNFSS and the battle over authority and legitimacy. 
Development  64(3): 181–  191.
Castree, N., Bellamy, R., & Osaka, S. (2021). The future of global envir -
onmental assessments: making a case for fundamental change. The 
Anthropocene Review  8(1): 56–  82.
Evans, D., Welch, D., & Swaffield, J. (2017). Constructing and mobilizing ‘the 
consumer’: responsibility, consumption and the politics of sustainability. 
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  49(6): 1396–  1412. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
138 Governing emergence
Gergen, K. J. (2015). From mirroring to world-  making: research as future 
forming. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour  45(3): 287–  310.
Krzywoszynska, A. (2019). Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: the role 
of attentiveness in more-  than-  human ethics. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers  44(4): 661–  675.
Lea, T. (2014). “From little things, big things grow”: the unfurling of wild 
policy. E- Flux 58: 1–  8.
Maye, D., Kirwan, J., & Brunori, G. (2019). Ethics and responsibilisation 
in agri-  food governance: the single-  use plastics debate and strategies to 
introduce reusable coffee cups in UK retail chains. Agriculture and Human 
Values  36(2): 301–  312.
Miller, P., & Rose, N. (1990). Governing economic life. Economy and Society  
19(1): 1–  31.
Park, S., & Kramarz, T. (Eds.). (2019). Global Environmental Governance 
and the Accountability Trap . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Portes, A. (2000). The hidden abode: sociology as analysis of the unex -
pected: 1999 presidential address. American Sociological Review  
65(1): 1–  18.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: technoscientific futurity 
and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science  45(5): 691–  716.
Rip, A. (2006). A co-  evolutionary approach to reflexive governance –   and 
its ironies. In V . Jan-  Peter, D. Bauknecht, & R. Kemp (Eds.). Reflexive 
Governance for Sustainable Development  (pp. 82–  100). Cheltenham, UK/  
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Sareen, S., & Wolf, S. A. (2021). Accountability and sustainability transitions. 
Ecological Economics  185: 107056.
Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the 
Human Condition Have Failed . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shove, E. (2010). Beyond the ABC: climate change policy and theories 
of social change. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  
42(6): 1273–  1285.
Stirling, A. (2015). Emancipating transformations: from controlling ‘the 
transition’ to culturing plural radical progress. In I. Scoones, M. Leach, 
& P. Newell (Eds.). The Politics of Green Transformations  (pp. 54–  67). 
New York and London: Routledge.
V oß, J.-  P., & Kemp, R. (2006). Sustainability and reflexive govern -
ance: introduction. In J.-  P. V oß, D. Bauknecht, & R. Kemp (Eds.). Reflexive 
Governance for Sustainable Development  (pp. 3–  28). Cheltenham, UK/  
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Walker, G., & Shove, E. (2007). Ambivalence, sustainability and the gov -
ernance of socio-  technical transitions. Journal of Environmental Policy & 
Planning  9(3–  4): 213–  225.
Wright, E. O. (2020). Envisioning Real Utopias . London: Verso Books. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Index 
Note : Endnotes consist of the page number followed by “n” and the endnote 
number e.g., 68n2 refers to endnote 2 on page 68. The acronym “AEG” is 
used for “agri-environmental governance throughout this index.
accounts 87– 88
actor–  network theory 72, 93
administration 61, 87, 101, 111
AEG see agri-  environmental 
governance (AEG)
agency: and alliances 75– 80; 
collective 18, 71, 89, 90, 106, 
120; of desire 74; distributive 
18, 73, 76, 77, 96, 121, 126, 
127, 128; individual 18, 99; and 
interdependencies 75– 80; three 
forms of 73
agendas 2, 32, 39, 54 62 , 63, 68, 
68n2 , 87, 112, 133; multiple 74, 
76, 77
agential capacities 72, 124
Agricultural Agency 7, 42, 43, 53, 
82, 111
agricultural policies 5, 13, 25,  
31– 32, 33, 34, 39, 67, 88, 103, 
104, 106
agricultural production 2, 25, 26, 31, 
32, 42, 53, 103, 105, 110
agri-​ environmental ​certification ​
scheme see IP- Suisse
agri-  environmental governance 
(AEG):​definition ​of​2; everyday 
dimension of 4– 7; practices of 
8– 9, 15, 24, 31, 122, 125
agri-  environmental governance 
assemblages 8, 119, 120, 126, 137; Donau Soja 41, 89, 98, 
106, 107, 109; and everyday 
governance 8, 12, 122; 
heterogeneity of 49, 52; and 
instruments 13; IP- Suisse 39, 
60– 61, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 98, 103, 
104, 105, 133; reterritorialisation 
of 31– 34, 40; unpredictability 
of outcomes in 125; see also  
Environmental Management and 
Protection Plan (RPPLH)
agri-  food assemblages 102, 119– 137
agri-  food systems 26, 84, 87, 121, 
127, 136
agronomy 6, 41, 61, 65, 66, 89
alliances 31, 73, 74, 75– 80, 83, 85, 
86, 89, 106– 107, 120, 129, 136
alternative futures 135
AMDAL (Analisis Mengenai 
Dampak Lingkungan) 37, 83, 111
anthropology 4, 8, 14, 51
anticipation 18, 50, 51, 96, 100, 114, 
123
Anti-  Politics Machine, The  51
assemblage: AEG see agri-  
environmental governance 
assemblages ; agri-  food 102, 
119– 137; complex 30, 49, 52– 53, 
68, 79; Donau Soja 41, 89, 98, 
106, 107, 109; dynamic nature 
of 31, 44, 45, 58– 59, 75, 77, 84,   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
140 Index
89– 90; elements of the 13, 14, 
31, 71, 72, 73– 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 
79, 89, 90; ephemeral 12, 16, 17, 
80– 84; as ethos 16– 17; everyday 
governance as 9– 12; governance 
see governance assemblages ; 
heterogeneous governance 23– 46; 
from instruments to 12– 15;  
IP- Suisse see IP- Suisse ; machinic 
11; meaning of 10; messy 7, 44, 
52– 55; multiplicity of 68, 115; 
pragmatic 10; public governance 
7; Rencana Pengelolaan dan 
Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup 
(RPPLH) see RPPLH (Rencana 
Pengelolaan dan Perlindungan 
Lingkungan Hidup) ; soybean 6; 
Swiss AEG 5, 31– 32, 57– 58, 102; 
theory of 10, 123; transient 82; 
wider 15, 30– 38, 41, 50, 88, 90
assemblage effect 52– 57
assemblage perspective 1– 19, 31, 
40, 68, 76, 90, 96, 102, 129, 134
assemblage theory 4, 16, 119, 121
assemblage thinking 4, 12, 15– 18, 
19, 24, 101, 119– 120, 121, 136; 
and agency 38, 39, 72, 89– 90, 
127; and capacities 121; and 
change 95– 96, 97, 101, 111, 
114– 115, 130; and emergence 
121; and messy problems 94– 95; 
and​reflexive​governance ​125; 
and resilience 100; and resistance 
following a status quo 73; 
space of possibility in 132; and 
transformation 93, 95, 101, 121
attraction, basin of 18, 100, 104, 
106, 107, 135
attractors: for AEG 136– 137; 
centralisation of control on basis 
of ease-  of- doing-  business 112; 
cross-  sectoral collaboration 
112; pesticide-  free future 104; 
promises of Big Data 113; 
protein transition 106– 109; and 
small changes 102– 105; and 
spaces of possibility 134– 136; 
sustainable meat 108; sustainable/  environmental soya 107; Swiss 
IP-​ Suisse ​certified​quinoa​105
autonomy 9, 56, 74, 114
basin of attraction 18, 100, 104, 106, 
107, 135
Basler Criteria for Sustainable Soy 
35
Berlin Declaration for a GMO-  free 
Europe 35
big data 102, 113– 114
biodiversity 2, 5, 7, 19, 26, 34, 37, 
42, 58, 64, 100; point system  
25– 26, 58, 60, 133
black box 44, 52, 83, 107
Blair House Agreement 35
broader assemblages 15, 30– 38, 41, 
50, 88, 90
Brussels Soy Declaration 35
bureaucracy 9, 42, 57, 60, 61, 62, 
67, 102, 120, 130– 131
business permits 29
capacities 97– 102, 133, 134– 135,  
136; agential 72, 124; of 
assemblages 58, 67, 74, 88, 96, 
102, 104, 106, 114, 115, 128– 129; 
and unpredictability 120, 121
case studies, as used in this book 
15– 17
centralisation 17, 36– 38, 56, 76– 77, 
78, 79; of control on basis of 
ease-  of- doing-  business attractor 
112
certification ​schemes​see IP- Suisse
certified​quinoa​104, 105
change: climate 2, 93, 100; logics 
of 65– 67; monitoring 131– 134; 
multiple 96– 97; paths of 97– 102; 
radical understanding of 114– 115; 
reassembling 95– 97; small 14, 93, 
97, 101, 102– 105, 111, 112, 121, 
122; social 3, 120– 121; theory of 
64, 123
climate change 2, 93, 100
collaborative planning 112, 114
collective agency 18, 71, 89, 90, 
106, 120 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
Index  141
collective enactments of desire and 
transnational spaces 84– 89
complex assemblages 30, 49, 52– 53, 
68, 79
complexity: of acting 76; of 
AEG 2– 3; of agency 73; of 
assemblages 13, 49, 51, 95; of 
change 129; of data 52; of design 
7; and feedback-  loop model 125; 
and inclusive governance 133; 
of phenomena 16– 17, 45; of 
processes 4, 129; of the social 10; 
theory of 68, 93; thinking 122; 
turn to 11
conservation 1, 29, 110; forest 3, 29, 
87, 109
consumption 97, 113; food 2, 64, 88, 
107, 108
contingent futures 12
control 23, 33, 51, 78; administrative 
101; of assemblages 68, 75,  
76– 77, 96, 97, 101; bureaucratic 
120; centralisation of 112; 
Deleuzian society of 15– 16; over 
disruptive non-  human elements 
32; logic of 95, 102, 131; market 
31, 34, 78; and seeing like a 
state 123; social 12; state 32, 56; 
top- down 56, 79; and transition 
theory 94; and wild dimension of 
governance 126
coordination 19; between agencies; 
and assemblages 67, 72, 
81– 82, 83, 87, 98, 136; and 
certification ​schemes​34; market 
32; multi-  sectoral 8, 55– 56; and 
territorialisation 12; value-  chain 
32, 39
corporate power 78
crop rotation 28, 63, 68, 85
cross-  sectoral collaboration attractor 
112
data-  driven governance 113, 115
deforestation 6, 34, 35, 36, 81,  
107
DeLanda, Manuel 38– 39, 46n1 , 68, 
82, 90, 126Deleuze, Gilles 4, 10; and capacities 
88;​definition ​of​assemblage ​
119– 120; and desire 74, 84, 90; 
and emergence 98; on lines of 
flight​46n1,​73; on machinic 
assemblage 11; on multiplicity 
38– 39, 45; on organising logics 
of assemblages 77; on power of 
assemblages 84; and rhizomatic 
growth of assemblages 109; on 
territorialisation 12; vocabulary 
describing assemblages 24– 25
deregulation 1, 4, 31; see also  
regulation
description, reliance of assemblage 
thinking on 16, 17, 24
desirable futures 8, 97, 119
desire 11, 18, 68, 106; and agency 
89– 90, 100; and assemblages 
119– 120, 135– 136, 137; and 
attractors 101, 104; and basin of 
attraction 135; collective 84– 89, 
133; convergence with capacities 
104; and everyday governance 71, 
73– 74, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83;  
and governance of emergence 
133– 134; and possible futures 
100, 103; and small changes 97; 
and virtual capacities 98, 99
destabilisation 8, 32, 45, 74, 90, 119, 
134; see also  stabilisation
deterritorialisation 12, 34, 38, 45, 
46n1 , 84, 89, 98
development: economic 57, 81; 
sustainable 1, 27, 50– 51, 87, 92, 
109, 110; planning of 7, 29, 37, 
38, 44, 54– 55, 56, 57, 80, 113, 
124
digitalisation, of governance tools 67
direct payments, to farmers 13, 32, 
39, 60, 61, 62
discursive power 78
distributed responsibility 127, 136
distributive agency 18, 73, 76, 77, 
96, 121, 126, 127, 128
documents, role of 62– 63
Donau Soja (DS) 15, 16, 17, 19, 
128, 130, 133, 135; and everyday  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
142 Index
governance 78, 84, 85, 86, 87, 
88– 89, 90; and heterogeneous 
governance assemblages 23, 
26– 28, 40, 41, 45; and reframing 
change 98– 99, 101, 106, 107, 
108, 109; and unpredictability 52, 
62, 63– 64, 66– 67, 68n2
Donau Soja assemblage 41, 89, 98, 
106, 107, 109
Donau Soja Declaration 66,  
68n3
Donau Soja standard 35, 63
double movement, and assemblages 
14, 79
DS see Donau Soja (DS)
ecologisation turn 1– 2
economy 42, 57, 81
ecosystems 2, 41, 42, 54, 55, 64
EIA (Environmental Impact 
Assessment) 29, 37, 57, 111
emergence 11– 12, 68; and capacities 
98, 99, 101; Deleuze and Guattari 
on 98; of the environment as 
political object 1; governance 
of 18, 119– 137; of IP-  Suisse 
32; of multifunctionality turn 
in agricultural policies 67; need 
to embrace 125– 126; of new 
governance assemblages 30– 31; 
of protein transition as attractor 
106– 109
emergent power, of Donau Soja 
assemblage 89
encounters of power 80– 84
environment, as political object 1
Environment Act 36– 37
Environment Management Act 37
Environmental Agency 7, 43, 53, 
80– 82, 83, 111
environmental governance 2, 3, 16, 
55, 56, 80, 83, 129, 130, 133– 134; 
and heterogeneous governance 
assemblages 28, 29, 30, 36; and 
reframing change 102, 110, 112, 
114
environmental governance 
assemblage 52, 80Environmental Impact Assessment 
(EIA) 29, 37, 57, 111
Environmental Management and 
Protection Plan (RPPLH) 15, 
16, 17, 19, 128, 130, 133, 135; 
everyday governance 79– 80,  
80– 82, 83; heterogeneous 
governance assemblages 23, 
28– 30, 30– 31, 36, 42– 44, 45; 
reframing change 98, 101– 102, 
109– 113, 114; unpredictability 
52– 53, 54– 57, 67
environmental management 
planning 7, 15, 28– 29, 44, 128, 
136
environmental permits 111, 112
environmental planning 7, 8, 29, 
37– 38, 44, 45, 54, 55, 57, 67, 83, 
112, 114
environmental standards 13, 33, 60, 
80, 82, 104
ephemeral assemblages 12, 16, 17, 
80– 84
ephemerality: of environmental 
governance 36– 37; of governance 
assemblage 17; of power 80; of 
relations 16
ethnofictions ​15
ethnography 14, 15; of encounters 
82; of everyday lives 15
ethos: assemblage as 16– 17; 
of Donau Soja 65, 66; of 
engagement 45
European Protein Transition 64, 66
European Union 23, 35, 63, 66, 87, 
98– 99, 107– 108, 108– 109
everyday agri-  environmental 
governance 1–  19 
everyday governance 3, 4, 18, 30, 
58, 62, 71– 90, 97, 107, 119, 
122; as assemblage 9– 12; as 
framing 8– 9; from instruments to 
assemblages 12– 15
everyday lives 2, 14, 15
expectations 14, 32, 67, 84, 85– 86, 
87, 89, 97, 102, 135
experimentation 16, 18, 58, 59– 60, 
75, 120, 129, 133, 135, 136, 137;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Index  143
and reframing change 97, 102, 
103– 104, 104– 105, 108
external interventions 50, 100, 122, 
124
failed governance, and messy 
assemblages 52– 55, 56
failure 2, 4, 17, 30, 49– 50, 51, 62, 
110– 111, 119, 120, 122, 123, 
124, 130; breaking with 67– 68; 
productive 52– 57
farmer innovation 104
farmer organisation see IP- Suisse
feedback-  loop model 125
Ferguson, James 51
food consumption 2, 64, 88, 107, 108
food processing 2, 40, 75, 77, 109
food production 2, 7, 8, 9, 25, 33, 
39, 43, 44
food systems 1, 2, 8, 9, 17, 27, 39, 
41, 60, 92, 95, 101, 106, 119, 132; 
agri-   26, 84, 87, 121, 127, 136; 
and everyday governance 73, 77, 
78, 88
Food Systems 2030 92
forest conservation 3, 29, 87, 109
Foucault, Michel: and agency 18; 
and governance 2– 3, 24; on 
power 71, 79
framing: of AEG 24; everyday 
governance as 8– 9
futures 19, 136; alternative 135; 
contingent 12; desirable 8, 97, 
119; Legume 63, 66; pesticide-  
free 104; possible 100, 101, 
103, 135; sustainable 119, 129; 
uncharted 136 
Geels, Frank 66, 93, 94
genetically ​modified​organisms ​
(GMO) 35, 65, 107, 108
globalisation 2, 4
GMO​(genetically ​modified​
organisms) 35, 65, 107, 108
good practices 12, 15, 32, 109, 136
governance: data-  driven 113, 
115; Deleuzian view of 24; 
of emergence 18, 119– 137; environmental see environmental 
governance ; everyday see 
everyday governance ; failed  
52– 55, 56; Foucauldian view of 
24; hybrid 3; innovation in 14; 
and power 73;​reflexive​18,  
50– 51, 96, 119– 126, 131– 132, 
136; unpredictable nature of  
49– 52; unruly consequences of 
122– 125; wild dimension of 126
governance action 14, 45, 51, 120, 
124, 130, 132, 134
governance assemblages: 
heterogeneous 23– 46; as 
multiplicities 38– 44; reframing 
change in 92– 116
governance instruments 13, 30, 31, 
44– 45, 49, 79, 121, 123
governance interventions 1, 45, 95, 
123, 126
governance of emergence 18, 
119– 137
governance practices 4, 12, 14, 15, 
17, 18, 73, 88– 89; governing 
emergence 120, 121, 122, 123, 
129, 132, 133, 137; heterogeneous 
governance assemblages 26, 30, 
32, 40, 45; reframing change 93, 
96, 97, 107; unpredictability of 
49, 50, 58, 59, 60, 62– 67
governance tools 13, 14, 67
government agencies 7, 15, 43, 56, 
128
governmentality 3
grain production 75, 103, 105, 128
Guattari, Félix 4; on assemblages 
10, 77, 84, 119– 120; on desire 74, 
90; on emergence 98; on lines of 
flight​73; on machinic assemblage 
11; on territorialisation 12; 
vocabulary of assemblages 24– 25
habitats 2, 26, 57
Hertz, Ellen 10
heterogeneity 24, 40, 49, 50– 51, 52, 
62, 84, 88, 109
heterogeneous governance 
assemblages 23– 46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
144 Index
human actors 8, 9, 14, 18, 32, 44, 
52, 63, 68, 81, 83– 84, 89, 99,  
134
human–  nonhuman relations  
15– 16
hybrid governance 3
imaginaries 30, 45, 106, 119– 120, 
128, 133, 135; multiplicity as 
diversity of 40– 42
individual agency 18, 99
Indonesian assemblage see 
Environmental Management and 
Protection Plan (RPPLH)
innovation: from assemblage 
perspective 134; farmer 104; 
in governance 14, 64, 66; and 
governance of emergence 135; 
social 126; technological 93, 94, 
108, 109, 126
instrumental power 78
instruments to assemblages 12– 15
integration 1– 2, 25, 33– 34, 46, 85, 
109, 133
intentional fallacy 126
interdependencies 73, 74, 75, 90, 
130, 132; building power and 
agency through 75– 80
internal tensions 31, 45; and 
centralisation forces 36– 38
interventions 1, 2, 5, 26, 40, 51, 120, 
125, 129, 132; external 50, 100, 
122, 124; governance 1, 45, 95, 
123, 126; policy 124; template 
for 123
IP- Suisse 5, 15, 16, 17, 19, 52, 98, 
102, 103– 105; and everyday 
governance 75, 76, 77, 78, 79; 
and governing emergence 128, 
130, 133, 136; and heterogeneous 
governance assemblages 23, 
25– 26, 32, 33– 34, 39– 40, 
44– 45; unintended but desirable 
outcomes of 57– 60; unwanted 
side of 60– 62
IP- Suisse assemblage 39, 60– 61, 
75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 98, 103, 104, 
105, 133knowledge creation 9, 59, 101
labels 5, 18, 25, 26, 32, 39, 40, 58, 
59, 63, 67, 77, 78, 85, 104, 105
land-  use 7, 29, 37, 111, 112, 113
Latour, Bruno 41, 44, 52, 72, 83
learning 16, 59, 60, 101
Legume Futures 63, 66
Legume Transitions 66
Legumes Translated 66
legumes 35, 63, 64, 65, 66
Li, Tania 3, 54, 72, 73
lines of articulation 12, 17, 43, 45, 
73, 83, 119
lines​of​flight​12, 17, 24– 25, 37, 
43, 45, 46n1 , 73, 83, 108, 119; 
and reterritorialisation of AEG 
assemblages 31– 34
lock-  ins 31, 34– 36
logic of control 95, 102, 131
logics of change 65– 67
machinic assemblage 11
market control 31, 34, 78
market coordination 32
markets 6, 39, 41, 42, 78, 79, 85, 
105, 107, 108, 113
materiality 13, 14, 43, 44, 135; and 
socio-  technical devices 62– 65
meetings 18, 84, 87, 88, 89
messiness 4, 8, 10, 16– 17, 44,  
45– 46, 67, 126
messy assemblages 7, 44, 52– 55
messy process 3; multiplicity as 
42– 44
Migros 33– 34, 39, 77– 78, 103, 104
Milan Urban Food Policy Pact 92
modern agriculture 1
Mol, Annemarie 76– 77
molar lines 24– 25
molecular lines 24– 25
monitoring change 131– 134
motivations 5, 23, 39, 45, 84, 86, 
130
M- Sano system 33
multifunctionality turn, in 
agricultural policy 67
multiple agendas 74, 76, 77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Index  145
multiple changes 96– 97
multiplicities: of assemblage 68, 
115; as diversity of imaginaries 
40– 42; as diversity of reasons 
to assemble 39– 40; governance 
assemblages as 38– 44; of 
intended and unintended 
processes 57– 62; as messy 
process 42– 44; of relations 75– 76
multi-  sectoral coordination 8, 55– 56
National/  Regional Environmental 
Management and Monitoring Plan 
(RPPLH-  N/ D) 38
natural resource management 1, 3
negotiation 4, 24, 43, 56, 71, 81, 82, 
83, 88, 110
neoliberalism 1, 3, 127
non-​ genetically ​modified​organisms ​
(non-  GMO) 35, 108
non- human actors 9, 14, 44, 62, 68
non- linearity 16, 32, 34, 62, 93, 125
Omnibus Bill 111, 112
ontology 12, 17, 31, 32– 33, 38– 39, 
52, 89, 95, 126
organic farming 33, 39
panarchy 94, 116n4
paperwork 61, 87, 101, 111
path dependency 15– 16, 51
path-  dependent processes 34– 36
path-  dependent system 16, 68, 88
paths of change 97– 102
pesticide-  free agriculture 26, 60, 
75– 76, 101, 103, 104, 105, 115, 
128, 136
pesticide-  free future attractor 104
pests 25, 26, 36, 59, 103– 104,  
114
planning: collaborative 112, 114; 
development 7, 29, 37, 38, 44, 
54– 55, 56, 57, 80, 113, 124; 
environmental 7, 8, 29, 37– 38, 44, 
45, 54, 55, 57, 67, 83, 112, 114; 
environmental management 7, 15, 
28– 29, 44, 128, 136; regional 29, 
42, 82, 83; small change in 112point system, for biodiversity 25– 26, 
58, 60, 133
policy: agricultural 5, 13, 25, 31– 32, 
33, 34, 39, 67, 88, 103, 104, 106; 
public 1, 3, 8, 12, 13, 45; state 39, 
61; wild 68, 126
policy advocacy 66
policy interventions 124
politics 16, 31, 42, 43, 66, 86, 115, 
132, 133
Portes, Alejandro 51, 124, 125
possible futures 100, 101, 103, 135
possibility spaces 99
power: and alliances 75– 80; 
corporate 78; of desire 74; 
discursive 78; emergent 89; 
encounters of 80– 84; and 
governance 73; instrumental 78; 
and interdependencies 75– 80; 
structural 3, 78
power relations 3, 31, 74, 75, 79, 
83, 88, 93, 101, 102, 121, 127, 
128, 129
practice theory 72
pragmatic assemblage 10
pressures, on farmers 61– 62
processual objectives 129
production: agricultural 2, 25, 26, 
31, 32, 42, 53, 103, 105, 110; 
food 2, 7, 8, 9, 25, 33, 39, 43, 
44; grain 75, 103, 105, 128; 
integrated 25, 33– 34
productive failure, and unpredictable 
assemblage effect 52– 57
promises of Big Data attractor  
113
properties, of assemblages 11, 18, 
38, 67, 88, 89, 97– 102, 103, 104, 
106, 112, 114– 115
protein assemblage 99
Protein Partnership 85
protein policy 98– 99
protein transition 62, 64, 66, 87, 88, 
101; as attractor 106– 109
proteins 27, 34, 36, 42, 63, 64, 67, 
68, 87, 88, 108, 109, 131
public governance assemblage 7
public policy 1, 3, 8, 12, 13, 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
146 Index
quinoa 59, 103, 104– 105;​certified​
104, 105
radical understanding of change 
114– 115
reasons to assemble 39– 40
reassembling change 95– 97
reconfiguration ​31, 41, 66, 67, 79, 
81, 83, 88, 101, 102, 106, 111, 
125, 130, 131
reflexive​governance ​18, 50– 51, 96, 
119– 126, 131– 132, 136
reflexivity ​85– 86, 121, 123– 124, 
128, 131, 135; limitations of 
125– 126
reform 34, 36, 88, 102, 106, 114, 
130
reframing change, in governance 
assemblages 92– 116
regional planning 29, 42, 82, 83
regulation 1, 2, 4, 8, 32, 35, 37, 
81, 82, 102, 108, 114; see also  
deregulation 
relational objectives 129– 131
relationality 16, 71– 72, 79, 83,  
106
relations: ephemerality of 16; 
human–  nonhuman 15– 16; 
multiplicities of 75– 76; power  see 
power relations
relationships 24, 30, 72, 73, 94, 114, 
115, 131
Rencana Pengelolaan dan 
Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup 
(RPPLH) see Environmental 
Management and Protection Plan 
(RPPLH)
responsibilisation 127, 128
responsibility, distributed 
understanding of 128
responsibility turn, in food and 
agriculture 127
reterritorialisation 12, 40, 45,  
83, 96; of AEG assemblages 
31– 34
rhizome 23– 24, 32, 82, 97,  
109Rip, Arie 96, 123
ripple effects 97, 101, 102, 105, 106, 
110, 122
Roundtable for Sustainable Soy 35, 
107
RPPLH see Environmental 
Management and Protection Plan 
(RPPLH)
RPPLHD 29, 43, 53, 54– 55, 82
RPPLH-  N/ D (National/  Regional 
Environmental Management and 
Monitoring Plan) 38
schematisation 50, 123
Scott, James 50, 123, 124, 125
SDGs (sustainable development 
goals) 92, 110
SEA (strategic environmental 
assessment) 57, 110
seeds 6, 27, 28, 40– 41, 66, 68, 75, 
131
seeing like a state 123
simplification ​50, 54, 95, 111, 112, 
123
small change 14, 93, 97, 101, 111, 
112, 121, 122; and generation of 
attractors 102– 105
social change 3, 120– 121
social control 12
social innovation 126
society of control 15– 16
socio-  ecological system 94
socio-  technical devices 62– 65
socio-  technical transition 93, 94
soil degradation 36, 81
soybean assemblage 6
soybean production programme see 
Donau Soja (DS)
spaces of possibility 88; and 
attractors 134– 136
stabilisation 12, 34, 45, 50, 98, 102, 
119; see also  destabilisation
standards: Donau Soja 35, 63; 
environmental 13, 33, 60, 80, 82, 
104
state control 32, 56
state policies 39, 61  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Index  147
strategic environmental assessment 
(SEA) 57, 110
strategic national projects 57
structural power 3, 78
subjectivity 3, 43, 133
subsidies 5, 31– 32, 75– 76, 123– 124
success 4, 15, 17, 75, 78, 120,  
122; breaking with 67– 68;  
and heterogeneous governance 
assemblages 26, 30, 35, 39, 42, 
43; and reframing change 103, 
104, 105, 110– 111, 112, 114;  
and unpredictability 49, 50, 56, 
58, 59, 61
sustainability 1, 39, 50, 60, 67, 74, 
75, 77, 87, 98, 105, 106, 109, 122, 
130, 133, 134
sustainable development 1, 27, 
50– 51, 87, 109; goals for (SDGs) 
92, 110
sustainable futures 119, 129
sustainable meat attractor 108
sustainable/  environmental soya 
attractor 107
Swiss AEG assemblage 5, 31– 32, 
57– 58, 102
Swiss agriculture 33, 60, 136
Swiss​IP-​Suisse ​certified​quinoa​
attractor 105
technological innovation 93, 94, 
108, 109, 126
template for interventions 123
Terrasuisse 78
territorialisation 12, 17, 37, 44,  
45, 84, 98, 105; see also   
deterritorialisation ; 
reterritorialisation
territory 12, 24, 42, 56, 81, 84, 86, 
133
theory of assemblage 10, 123
Theory of Change 64, 123
tools approach, to public policies 12
top- down control 56, 79
traceability 32, 78
transformation 92, 93, 94, 95, 
101, 110– 111, 115; of agri-  food assemblages 119– 137;​definition ​
of 101; reassembling 95– 97
transformative pathways 109
transient assemblages 82
transition: European Protein 64, 
66; Legume 66; protein 62, 64, 
66, 87, 88, 101, 106– 109; socio-  
technical 93, 94; theory of 93, 
94, 97
transnational spaces 84– 89
treadmill politics 66
tripartite​certification ​26, 33, 34
unanticipated consequences 51
unanticipated outcomes 58
uncertainty 9, 120, 122, 136
uncharted futures 136
unexpected outcomes 51, 67
unexpected realignments 65– 67
unidirectional traceability 78
unintended consequences 34, 51, 
63, 67
unintended effects 17, 53, 120
United Nations Food Summit 2021 
92
unpredictability: of effects in AEG 
49– 68; of governance practices 
62– 67
unpredictable assemblage effect 
52– 57
unpredictable nature, of governance 
49– 52 
unruly consequences, of governance 
122– 125
unwanted effects 49, 51, 57– 58
unwanted side, of IP-  Suisse 60– 62
value-  chain coordination 32, 39
value chains 59, 60, 64, 68, 128, 
130, 135, 136; and everyday 
governance 75, 77, 78, 85, 88; 
and heterogeneous governance 
assemblages 28, 32, 33, 34, 39, 
40, 45; and reframing change  
97, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107,  
108, 109
virtual capacities 98, 99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
148 Index
water 2, 29, 36, 37, 43, 54, 81, 113, 
114
West Java 53– 54, 55, 80, 81, 113
wicked assessments 115, 132
wicked problems 53, 132
wider assemblages 15, 30– 38, 41, 
50, 88, 90wild dimension, of governance  
126
wild policy 68, 126
Will to Improve, The  3
World Bank 92
Zwart, Frank de 51  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
