Journal of Posthumanism  
October 2022  
Volume: 2, No: 3, pp. 24 9–266 
ISSN: 2634 -3576 (Print) | ISSN 2634 -3584 (Online)  
journals.tplondon.com/jp  
 
 Journal of Posthumanism   
All rights reserved @ 202 2 Transnational Press London  
Received : 02 August 2021 Accepted: 08 August 2022 
DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.33182/joph.v2i3.1728  
 
Forms of  Care in Human –Nature–Technology Environments  
Patricia Ciobanu1 and Oskar Juhlin2 
 
Abstract  
With the ongoing environmental disruptions, designers are increasingly interested in exploring nature –technology 
entanglements that create sustainable and collaborative futures. Although largely unarticulated, these emerging design 
inquiries are motivated by care for natur e, which indirectly depends on cultural and social human practices. Drawing on 
a broad set of works on care from feminist theory, science and technology studies, and human –computer interaction, this 
article introduces a care framework that focuses on revea ling tensions in the interrelationship between humans and 
nonhumans. The framework is used to examine an initial study in which five participants engaged with a speculative 
design probe, specifically a combination of a device and a plant, envisioning a sce nario in which plants generate electricity. 
We reveal how forms of care manifest differently in a human –plant–technology dynamic and identify tensions, such as 
plants being considered utilities, proxies, or humans.  
Keywords : Care framework ; Plants ; More-than-human design; Research through design 
 
Introduction  
Human -centred design has long been a crucial part of human –computer interaction (HCI) 
design research (Cooley, 1989). However, human -caused environmental crises call for 
rethinking techno -centr ic and human -centric design approaches. To tackle this issue, design 
researchers have moved towards exploring more -than-human interactions (J. Liu et al., 2018; 
S. Liu et al., 2019). This body of work is continuously growing. Emerging design practices 
that apply post -anthropocentric theories include multispecies ethnography (Smith et al., 
2017), thing -ethnography (Giaccardi et al., 2016), human –computer –biosphere interaction 
(HCBI) (Kobayashi, 2015), animal –computer interaction (ACI) (Aspling & Juhlin, 2017 ; 
Mancini, 2011) and collaborative survival (Liu et al., 2018). We argue that this tendency in 
design research is, to some extent, implicitly motivated by humans’ care for nature  and thus 
indirectly depends on their cultural and social ways of expressing c are. It is important for 
design research ers to understand how care for nonhumans is embedded in social dynamics 
that inherently include humans, as it can reveal unarticulated tensions within more -than-
human relations. We thus ask : what forms of care are enacted by humans in human –plant 
relations, and how does care shift when digital technology is embedded in the assemblage?  
We have chosen a broad care lens since care for nonhumans is embedded in social and cultural 
practices of care for humans, such as th ose present in previous work in HCI (Dye et al., 2019; 
 
1 Patricia Ciobanu, Stockholm University, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences . E-mail: patricia@dsv.su.se   
2 Oskar Juhlin, Stockholm University, Department of Computer and Systems Sciences. E -mail: oskarj@dsv.su.se  
 
250 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
Friese, 2013; Harmon et al., 2017; Houston & Jackson, 2016; Kocksch et al., 2018; Martin et 
al., 2015; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015; Schrader, 2015; Zegura et al., 2018). We believe a broad 
perspective i s needed as the topic is heterogeneous and ambiguous (Puig de la Bellacasa, 
2015). We draw on works from feminist theory (Murphy, 2015; Tronto, 1993) to conceptually 
understand what care is, along with works from HCI and science and technology studies (STS ) 
(Atkinson -Graham et al., 2015; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017) as they investigate how care occurs 
within socio -technical and cultural contexts. By reviewing these works, we outline a 
framework of care composed of six forms  of care: practice , relations , noticing, decision 
making , response -ability , and emotion .  
Figure 1.  The design probe  Juniper , with a kalanchoe plant (left) and in stand -by mode (right)  
 
Image: Project archive  
We then apply the care framework to unpack the ties between humans, nonhumans, and 
technology. We chose to focus on a specific group of nonhumans – plants – as they are a vital 
part of addressing environmental concerns (Kobayashi, 2015), and they have been  gaining 
interest within HCI design research (Angelini et al., 2016; Budinger & Heidmann, 2019; 
Degraen et al., 2019; Steer et al., 2015). The importance of caring for plant needs and not 
caring for them as a vehicle for human needs was formulated in ACI  (Aspling et al., 2016). 
We contribute to this literature by using the care framework to uncover this friction in an 
initial design study of a human -plant -technology interaction . For this study, we invited five 
participants to articulate their interaction wi th plants in daily life and their interaction with a 
speculative design probe  (see Figure 1 left).  We use the probe method (Gaver et al., 1999; 
Wallace et al., 2013) to design a speculative computational device combined with a kalanchoe 
plant that portrays  a future in which plants are a source of electricity. This device was created 
by considering current technological trends into alternative sources, such as plants used to 
generate electricity, and through speculative thinking of living with plants as an a lternative 
energy resource “to nurture political imagination about what the world could be” (Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2009 , 307 ). As a speculative prototype, Juniper does not generate electricity but 
instead represents this function through LEDs. Without the plant, the probe is in standby 
mode , with LEDs emitting a blue light that fades in and out (see Figure 1, right). With the 
plant, the LEDs switch to a green charging pattern, with each LED turning on one by one.  

Ciobanu and Juhlin  251 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp Wallace et al. (2013 , 3441 ) define  design probes as “objects that are usually small in scale, 
whose materiality and form are designed to relate specifically to a particular question and 
context .” The approach follows a combination of Research through Design (RtD) 
(Zimmerman et al., 2007) a nd speculative design (Dunne & Raby, 2013). RtD supports a 
process of exploration and use of methodologies from design practice to investigate 
ambiguous topics (Zimmerman et al., 2010). Speculative design aims to question current 
practices by imagining alt ernative ways of being (Dunne & Raby, 2013), thus inviting us to 
examine the impact of new technologies from multiple perspectives ( Nonhuman Nonsense , 
2021). The methodological approach is supported by Puig de la Bellacasa , who argues that 
“for more caring  affective ecologies to become possible, we need speculative thinking ” (2017, 
219) and a “speculative commitment to neglected things”  (2011, 85) . As such, there is value 
in looking at care at a local and personal level to understand and discover new ways o f 
interacting. We can thus critically reflect on which futures certain technologies are pushing us 
towards (Tonkinwise, 2014) and whether these futures are improving or harming more -than-
human worlds. We learn that care presents itself in different forms b y applying the care 
framework, depending on the social context. Additionally, by exploring more -than-human 
worlds within a human context, we can uncover unseen interactions and how these 
interactions evolve when technology is embedded. In the following, we  outline the six forms 
of care that comprise our propos ed framework : practice , relations , noticing , decision making , 
response -ability , and emotion . 
Establishing a care framework  
Research on care is diverse and occurs in many domains. As a step towards unpacking its role 
in our area of interest, we will summarise these bodies of work as an initial approach . This 
framework includes research on care for nonhumans and humans. The latt er is included as 
care for nature occurs in a social and cultural setting. By using such a double approach, we 
hope to articulate what it means to care for nonhumans and how care is enacted in more -
than-human settings, thus contributing to a systematic for mulation of care to better 
understand ambiguous interactions. The framework is based on previous framings of care 
(Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017, 42; Tronto, 1993) with a more explicit, systematic, and consistent 
scheme to apply in design research contexts. T hus, the care framework comprises the 
following forms of care:  practice,  relations,  noticing,  decision  making,  response -ability, 
and emotion.  For each form, we look at relevant work that unpacks care between humans 
and then with nonhumans. Care is imbued w ith practical experimentation, or  tinkering  (Mol et 
al., 2010), of adjusting between the subject and the object of care. As Puig de la Bellacasa 
(2009) explains,  ready -made explanations  cannot be provided when it comes to care, as it is 
contextually depend ent. Among other conceptualizations of care based on principles for 
collaboration among species (Modi, 2021) , we introduce the following care framework for a 
more structured approach to understanding how care is generated in more -than-human 
interactions, a ll the while sustaining the space for further additions and modifications.  
Care as practice  
Human care emerges through action . This care giving  (Tronto, 1993 , 107 ) is represented 
through physical labour, initially studied in medical contexts in which a patient is cared for by 
a clinician or in domestic settings. It is a malleable practice, a set of “efforts that are ongoing, 
adaptive, tinkering and open ended ” (Heu ts & Mol, 2013, 130). Practising care requires 
252 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
continuous work, routine, and adjustment (Bennett et al., 2020 , 2), along with innovation and 
creativity (Wong -Villacres et al., 2017 , 13). However, while improving the lives of certain 
groups, these care prac tices can become harmful to others (Murphy, 2015 , 726 ). 
Examples of direct care practices for nonhumans are acts of maintenance of objects and 
systems (Houston & Jackson, 2016 , 2) or using soil sampling techniques to identify the needs 
of the soil (Puig de  la Bellacasa, 2015 , 704 ). These go along with indirect care practices, such 
as supporting animal rescue organisations (Harmon et al., 2017 , 1639 ). Nonhumans can also 
be subjected to care that ultimately becomes harmful, such as weeding a garden or improvi ng 
the conditions of animals intended for slaughter (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017, 164).  
Care as relations  
Care is emerging in and from relations of various kinds. Puig de la Bellacasa (2012, 198) points 
out that caring is  “inevitably to create relation .” Between humans, care is built on 
interdependence (Light & Akama, 2014 , 153 ), on relations that are co -constitutive (Bennett 
et al., 2020 , 5), empathic (Toombs et al., 201 7, 46) and socially -situated (Howard & Irani, 
2019, 12). We see this in the  context of local communities (Sabie & Parikh, 2019 , 5; Toombs 
et al., 2015 , 636 ), where a caring collective ethos is built to deepen the relationship between 
the community members.  
Care as relations between humans and nonhumans emerges depending on the arrangement. 
Having the human at the centre of the relation implies a different dynamic to a nonhuman in 
focus. When the nonhuman is the direct focus  of care , this creates a relation similar to that 
found between humans , whereas when human  needs are  ultimately at the centre , this depicts 
what we refer to as proxy caring . In this situation, nonhumans are the care receivers, but the 
subject of care is a human. For instance, proxy care is represented when care for human 
patients is improved by better precl inical care for laboratory animals (Friese, 2013 , 131 ).  
Care as noticing  
Noticing is an important aspect of care. It is a required skill of “learning to pay attention ” 
(Haraway, 2008, 19) and caring about  (Tronto, 1993 , 106 ). Care as noticing requires “attuned 
attentiveness and adaptive tinkering ” (Mol et al., 201 0, 15). This attentiveness exposes aspects 
of the world that are often invisible or neglected (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011 , 94). For example, 
it occurs when recognis ing someone else’s given care and reacting accordingly (Tixier et al., 
2018 , 141 ). Care as noticing is encouraged by asking power -related questions , such as “who 
has the power to care, and who or what tends to get designated the proper or improper objects 
of care” (Martin et al., 2015 , 636 ) and further uncovering power asymmetries (Howard & 
Irani, 2019 , 7). 
Care as noticing within nonhuman worlds requires humans to attune to different temporal 
rhythms, such as the time of the soil that requires pauses for r egeneration (Puig de la Bellacasa, 
2015 , 705 ). By being attentive to, for example, the surrounding environment (Atkinson -
Graham et al., 2015 , 742 ) or the data that a system produces (Kaziunas et al., 2017 , 2262 ), 
there is a sense of accountability that forms for different ways of living within more -than-
human worlds : “care and accountability are inextricably entangled in shifting relationships ” 
(Kocksch et al., 2018, 14).  
 
Ciobanu and Juhlin  253 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp  
Care as decision making  
Decision making is an aspect of care concerned with “balancing values ” (Mol, 2008, 42) and 
requires sensitivity and consideration. Mol (2008 , 7) describes it as a logic of care  concerned 
with facts when making choices. For instance, in a researcher -partici pant dynamic, the 
participant can choose whether to prioritize care for the researcher, the research project , or 
themselves (Toombs et al., 201 7, 53).  
This form of care becomes a process of negotiation or tinkering between humans and 
nonhumans (Karusala et al., 2017 , 17). For example, with care -oriented data science, the 
choices involved in gathering the data imbue the data with specific values , which  further affect 
the communities where it  is used (Zegura et al., 2018 , 8). The negotiation proce ss is ethically 
and politically charged (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011 , 90), which means the decider has “to 
trouble oneself ” (Schrader, 2015, 666)  whether to care for nonhumans and how . When the 
care subject is not known,  which is usually the case with nonhumans,  the carer , i.e. the human , 
can even experience hesitancy and the “ordeal of the undecidable ” (683).  
Care as response -ability  
Care as response -ability (Haraway, 2008 , 88) is the ability to respond to being affected  and the 
responsibility of affecting others (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2011, 2017), the  care receiving  and 
taking care of  described by Tronto (1993 , 106 ). It is a “capacity and willingness to be moved, 
in both the affective and kinesthetic senses of the verb ‘to move’ ” (Martin et al., 2015, 635). 
We see this form of care exemplified within practices that are of assistance to others, such as 
creating a network that can provide Internet access to an entire community (Dye et al., 2019 , 
2). In research, we can identify the same kind of commitment through examples of humans 
caring for each other by becoming “agents of change ” (Toombs et al., 201 7, 47) or being 
“custodians of care ” (Light & Akama, 2014, 160).  
Response -ability within more -than-human worlds requires consideration of how to develop 
an affective response towards nonhumans (Schrader, 2015 , 670). It can take the form of moral 
and material responsibility, from the human side, for repairing and maintaining of devices and 
systems (Ho uston & Jackson, 2016 , 2; Kocksch et al., 2018 , 5). A responsibility for 
nonhumans can be engaged when connected with care for humans, such as when care for 
patients is improved by taking responsibility to provide care for the nonhumans that are part 
of pr eclinical research (Friese, 2013 , 136 ). 
Care as emotion  
Care is intrinsically about affectivity. It is being “emotionally attached ” (Murphy, 2015, 721) 
and “troubled, worried, sorrowed, uneasy, and unsettled ” (721). Within human relations, this 
aspect of care, referred to as affective labour and usually performed by women, has been 
undervalued both in domestic and professional environments (Murphy, 2015 , 723). However, 
such caring emotions are necessary for co llective living and take the form of emotional and 
moral support within communities (Kocksch et al., 2018 , 15; Vyas, 2019 , 9). For example, this 
is the case when acknowledging vulnerabilities within power -laden relations (Toombs et al., 
2017, 53).  
254 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
Nonhuma n care is also about emotions. For example, the maintenance and repair of 
nonhumans enact affective relations between the human repairer and the human user 
(Houston & Jackson, 2016 , 2) or using data, which in specific contexts nurtures “empathy and 
togethe rness ” (Kaziunas et al., 2017, 2270). Having an emotional response towards the well -
being of nonhumans, while not solely sufficient to prompt care, has a role in becoming 
affected (Schrader, 2015 , 683 ). 
Thus, the care framework outlined above reveals how c are is a heterogeneous and 
multifaceted activity. Previous research has focused on human interactions, while the 
nonhuman, if present, remained in the background or acted as a media or proxy. Care can 
influence the interaction in many ways, overshadow the nonhuman through technical 
implementations, and perpetuate a sense of control over the natural world. In the following, 
we will investigate  how this framework performs in an initial study of care responses to a 
speculative computer -mediated plant probe.  
Probe design and initial study  
As a means to evoke care for nonhumans, we conducted an initial study using RtD and 
speculative design. Speculative design is a method where functionality is imagi ned rather than 
implemented, used to provoke discussions and expose issues around emerging technologies 
in the context of an alternative present or a future scenario (Dunne & Raby, 2013). RtD is a 
widely adopted approach within HCI design research that emb races the practice -based nature 
of design investigation, where the knowledge is articulated in and through ongoing design 
work. By adopting RtD, our approach is twofold (Giaccardi, 2019). First  is a practice -based 
design exercise resulting in a speculative  probe based on current technological trends in 
biotech. Second, there is a focus on care, which opens up the design space within human -
nonhuman relations. Given the intricacy of the topic, following a speculative and qualitative 
approach allows us to unco ver the hidden dynamics within human -nonhuman interactions 
and how technology transforms them without having this context as a set reality . We can thus 
learn how care is enabled as it unfolds in the study. In the following, we describe the probe 
and the se tup of the user study.  
Probe design   
Juniper represents a potential human –plant –technology relationship, where the human relies 
on the plant as an energy source, and the technology is the mediator that sustains the 
dependence. The increasing interest in introducing technology to the biotic in spired us, such 
as the system developed by Plant -e (Living Light, 2020) that uses plants to generate electricity. 
Juniper is a speculative prototype of this technology, as our probe does not generate electricity 
but instead represents this function through  LEDs. Our speculative probe consists of a 
wooden box with an Arduino unit3 and a kalanchoe plant, a flowering succulent with low 
watering needs. We chose this particular plant in order for the participants to focus on aspects 
of care different from the o nes they usually express with plants, such as watering. The 
impression of an energy source  in this design probe is indicated by the LED strip that displays 
either a “standby ” or “charging ” sequence. Without the plant, the probe is in standby mode, 
and LEDs  emit a blue light that fades in and out (see Figure 1, right). When the plant is 
positioned in the wooden enclosure, the LEDs switch to a green charging pattern, with each 
 
3 Arduino is an open -source electronics prototyping platform used to create tangible interactive devices . 
Ciobanu and Juhlin  255 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp LED turning on one by one (see Figure 1, left). We seek to understand how this tech nology 
affects human –nonhuman relations with this probe. Furthermore, we reveal which frictions 
are perpetuated or created in these interactions through the care framework.   
Initial study  
This subjective study was carried out with five participants, three women and two men, who 
we recruited by word -of-mouth. The participants were students between the ages of 21 and 
28 originating from Spain, the USA, Sweden, Poland, and Peru. They will be referred to by 
their assigned pseudonyms: Ivy, April, Olivia, Jade, and Jordan. While two of the five 
participants worked in the same interaction design lab where we created the probe, the study’s 
primary concern relates to the participants’ experience using the probe and the reflections 
expressed afterwards.  Juniper was fostered independently by each participant between one 
and four days. We informed each participant of the probe’s functioning and their position as 
speculators in what it would mean if the plant was a sourc e of electricity. They were requested 
to have the probe always connected to their personal computer.  
Before handing out the probe, we conducted semi -structured interviews with each participant 
to reflect upon their current relationship with plants and how  care towards them was 
manifested. These questions explored the overall position of caring for plants. We conducted 
a follow -up semi -structured interview at the end of the study to assess their experience 
fostering the probe and whether new forms of care e merged. The pre -probe interviews shaped 
the questions, building on the experiences as the participants recounted them. They were also 
encouraged to report their accounts by posting photos on a shared Instagram account 
dedicated to this study. We referred t o the visuals during the post -probe interview to 
encourage the participants to recount their experiences in detail. We transcribed the interviews 
and the data was coded deductively in collaborative sessions that included both authors. We 
used the six forms  of care previously formulated as our theoretical framework, which we 
assigned to the gathered data. We use d a deductive content analysis approach as it allow ed for 
systematic analysis and identifying structures, in this case, the various forms of care, in  
different types of content (Krippendorff, 2018). The coding was not always straightforward. 
This was due to overlaps between the forms of care and the interpretative nature of the 
coding. Thus, we revisited the gathered data from the interviews in at leas t two rounds before 
assigning a primary code to the transcript.   
Figure 2.  Instagram posts with captions from April (a) and Olivia (b -c) 
 
Image: Project archive  

256 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
Analysis  
We analyse d the participants’ accounts  given  the care framework . For each form of care 
(practice , relations , noticing , decision making , response -ability , and emotion) , we first describ e 
their care for plants in general and second  their care for Juniper.  
Practices of care  
As described in the framework,  care as practice emerges through actions . Taking care of plants 
is similarly a hands -on activity, a “material vital doing ” (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017, 42). In the 
pre-probe interview , the participants mentioned various plant maintenance practices such as  
adding nutrition sticks, replanting to a bigger pot, buying nicer -looking pots, changing to fresh 
soil, watering the plant and placing it in the sun. Notably, the participants’ usual care  practices 
included looking at the plant and touching the soil to feel the humidity.   
When they engaged with Juniper, the following practices were added to the list: shifting 
location, transportation, and supplying power. First, we observed the adaptive quality of care 
as practice through the need to change location depe nding on the human’s or the plant’s 
needs. Participant Olivia, who looked into how to care for a kalanchoe plant, made sure that 
it got enough sun and water. Second, it was also necessary to transport the probe, as the 
requirement was to have it with them every time they used their computer. Olivia, Jordan, and 
Ivy were commuting to and from work with the probe. Olivia mentioned her tinkering with 
how to place it, adjusting accordingly: “I took the bag and carried it on my shoulder, but not 
as a usual bag t hat you whip at the back of your body. I kind of had it more in the front and 
occasionally cradled it and held it upright because it has this flat surface .” Third, some of the 
Instagram posts reflected the action of supplying power. We see this when April presented 
the power supply practice from the plant’s perspective, stating that it is “giving energy for a 
master thesis student ” (see Figure 2 (a)). The care work was a form of donation in order for 
her to complete her work. Similarly, Olivia follows this anthropomorphic, other -than-human 
viewpoint, speculating how the plant could practice care work by powering an electric bike 
(see Figure 2 (b)). This suggests that by adding an extra property to a plant, namely the capacity 
to supply electricity, there is a more direct physical engagement with the plant.  
Caring relations  
Human –plant care relations can be of various kinds, for instance, customary, symbolic, and 
proximal. Customary relations draw on routine practices, such as between family members, 
that have  been practised for a long time. These are socially -situated relations that sometimes 
extend over generations. We see socially -situated relations  when April mentioned her parents 
passing on their care for plants: “I am used to it because my parents have always had plants 
at their house. [...] So for me, it is something natural .” The plant can act as  a symbolic 
mediation of past or present human relations. This is what we termed proxy caring  in the 
framework  when the plant receives care on behalf of a  human . Jade, Ivy, and Jordan describe 
this type of relational care through accounts of how they became interested in plants because 
of a loved one. Jordan’s case represents the love between him and his partner:  “It feels good 
taking care of it since I kno w other people care about it. So, in that regard, by taking care of 
it, I am taking care of the other people .” Finally, relationships also depend on the proximity, 
or distance, to the object of care. For example, care for house plants differs from care for  
plants in a distant forest. Olivia states that she has a relationship with plants, although just 
those indoors:  “Sometimes I am more curious about plants that are wild, like trees [...] But I 
Ciobanu and Juhlin  257 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp mostly have a relationship with my plants indoors and also the plants that I grow for my own 
food.” Here, the distance fosters an intellectual focus, whereas the co -presence or close 
proximity grows through caring.   
New forms of relations emerge with the care of Juniper, specifically direct social sharing, 
direct nonh uman relations, and co -dependence. Direct social sharing is represented by how 
April shared the probe with her partner. She speculates how such a system could be 
introduced in more public spaces, such as libraries or group rooms:  “You could see maybe a 
plant in the middle that gives electricity for everyone that is working there [...] it could be 
something social that connects everyone together .” There is also a switch from personal or 
dyadic to collective experiences, including nonhumans, such as when Juni per became part of 
April’s “plant family .” It can also be seen in Olivia, Jordan, and Ivy’s posts that position the 
plant as “having friends ,” collaborating or spending time with humans (see Figure 2 (c) & 
Figure 3 (a –b)). Relations are also co -dependent, creating a form of interdependence when 
both sides need each other to fulfil their needs, or as Ivy says: “you need it, it needs you .”  
Figure  3. Instagram captions by Jordan (a) and Ivy (b)  
 
Image: Project archive  
Careful noticing  
Participants in the pre -probe interview stated the noticing aspect of care in that they would 
“check on” plants and “watch them grow .” They observed dropped or new leaves that 
sprouted as signs of the plant’s health . They touched the soil to notice its moisture. Noticing 
also lead s to speculations . According to  Jordan, attuning to the rhythm of  plants ma de it 
possible to visuali se the future: “They give me clues about what is going on in the world, 
short -term future, nearby , and what people and things are up .” Thus, n oticing seems to be a  
step toward practi ce. It prompted an attuned attentiveness to the ord inary doings, the 
uneventful ways of caring for plants, and what plants can show us about the future.   
Juniper added new dimensions into noticing , for instance,  the light  from the LEDs. For April, 
it was a sign of the plant ’s “breath ”: “With the lights [...] it showed you more that this is 

258 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
something living and that the lights are in some way a sign that it is breathing, that it’s there . 
[...] It feels more of a living thing than just beautiful on a stand .” This design aspect helped 
April b ridge the gap between human understanding of nonhumans and made her 
acknowledge  Juniper as a living being  that can receive and respond to care .  
Watchful decision making  
The decision -making  aspect of care was defined by participants making choices on whether 
to care that were  either voluntary or involuntary , active  or inactive, or instrumental. In 
Jordan’s case, caring for his plant is intricately linked to a voluntary decision: “I care for it 
because it feels like it is a special plant. [...] If I let  it die, it would be symbolically bad, and I 
wouldn't feel good ruining it. [...]  It was not random. It was meticulously chosen .” When 
Olivia received a plant as a gift, the choice was rather involuntary: “I started having plants 
because I received one as a gift, and it was something nice to receive. But then I didn ’t choose 
that plant, so I felt like I want to choose the plant carefully .” Jordan expresses how decisions 
on plants can be either active or passive. The caregiving is active with his plants and passive 
with the plants outdoors: “I recently got a plant that I care for explicitly at home. That 
relationship is different from other plants since I don’t explicitly care for them or build them, 
so to speak. Like I try not to hurt them by not making thei r environment bad .” Jordan’s 
decision not to actively engage with plants by avoiding harming them is what Puig de la 
Bellacasa (2017) calls conscious neglect . Decisions can also be instrumental when they 
primarily focus on the need of the human. For exampl e, Olivia grows herbs in a hydroponic 
system for cooking and Ivy grows Aloe Vera for use in skincare. Thus, care can stem from an 
active and free individual choice of whom to care for and how we should engage, forming 
reciprocal and considerate relations o f care. At other times, it is a necessary decision, such as 
receiving an object of care. We can actively engage in care while consciously neglecting others 
and caring for those most beneficial. Thus, how we have decided to care is part of caring.  
New instrumental acts of care emerged with the added feature of energy supply. Participant 
Jade reflected on the energy aspect of the probe by speculating on how the probe could be 
used in remote areas when camping or being outdoors for extended periods. Addit ionally, a 
monetary aspect would have encouraged Jade to be more engaged with the caregiving, given 
that such an artefact would be a cheaper electricity source for him. Thus, active engagement 
stems from the potential benefit gained from caring.  
Response -able care  
In the pre -probe interview , we have seen the responsibility aspect of care develop when April 
receives plants as gifts: “When someone gives me a plant, even if it is someone that we don’t 
have that big of a relationship, [...] then I kill this flo wer, then I feel bad . [...] It feels like I want 
to take care of it because that is kind of a symbol .” Caring has a moral implication that the 
caretaker can experience as a commitment, which differs from the experience of hedonic 
pleasure. For Jordan, this  responsibility is heightened because of the symbolism behind the 
plant he cares for. He protects it because it has meaning for him and his loved ones. When a 
plant is a proxy for a loved one, the sense of duty is more significant, as its symbolism fuels 
the care.  
While fostering the probe, participants felt responsible for it and the study. They felt the need 
to ensure they maintained the probe, as another participant in the study would later use it. 
They wanted to provide sufficient nurturing for the plan t to keep it alive and actively engaged 
Ciobanu and Juhlin  259 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp with Juniper and in the interview sessions.  Ivy describes how Juniper gave her a “personal 
feeling to it, made it more special in a sense .” This account points back to the work of Toombs 
et al. (201 7) on researcher –participant relations and how care is intrinsically entangled in them. 
Care here was exhibited through the sense of responsibility rather than the ability to respond.  
Emotional care  
Participants attributed emotions of various kinds, such as aesthetic, empathic, and worrying. 
A strong reason for participants’ care for plants, in general, was to have  aesthetic  experiences. 
They mentioned how plants, while being beautiful, also create a cosy atmosphere. They bring 
aliveness and a natural feeling to an indoor space. As Olivia states, it is an aesthetic visual 
experience. For April, the act of maintenance brought out empathic emotions. When she sees 
the plants grow, it makes her think they are “happy ,” which in return makes her happy. She 
thinks of her plants as her “babies ” and that she takes care of them “as if they are human .” 
Olivia gets concerned if she sees signs of worry  in the plants  and wonders what could be done 
to improve their ov erall livelihood.   
With Juniper, feelings of concern and enjoyment increased. The participants who commuted 
with the probe (Olivia, Ivy, and Jordan) were more considerate of the plant’s well -being. Olivia 
mentioned how she made sure to bike more carefully,  while Ivy felt distressed with the need 
to transport the probe: “It was slightly annoying to carry her from one place to another 
because I was afraid of damaging her .” Fostering the probe created a different experience 
than the usual plant interaction for the participants. Thus, we see more acknowledgements of 
vulnerabilities within the human -nonhuman relation by introducing new functionalities or 
requirements to a plan t. However, it also generates new ways of being with plant others and 
aids in speculating what other care worlds might be.  
Discussion  
Increased engagement with nonhumans in various forms of human –computer interaction will 
require  increased human care  and a  better understand ing of  nonhuman needs. Our study set 
out to answer the question of what forms of care are enacted by humans in human –plant 
relations, and how does care shift when digital technology is embedded in the assemblage?  It 
was thus  intended as a stepping  stone to the analysis of how human engage ment  in care affects 
the lives of nonhumans. Given the study at hand, we will discuss how the care framework 
revealed certain aspects of humans interacting with plants within cultural and soc io-technical 
contexts and how care manifested differently towards  plants  in general life  and the plant in a 
technology context . 
Human forms of care for nonhumans  
Altogether, we see that the notions of care formulated in the framework were present in our 
more-than-human study. Our study recognised six forms of human care occurring when 
engaging with nonhumans  (practice , relations , noticing , decision making , response -ability , and 
emotion) . We have described the care pr actices as the maintenance that goes into  nurturing 
plants and the adjustments needed when transporting the probe. The socially -situated care 
relations were derived from a custom or proxy, with physical limitations and some plants 
becoming embodiments of human relations. The noticing aspect of ca re manifested through 
attuned attentiveness, primarily by visual perceptions of the plant’s well -being or an attuning 
to the rhythms of plants that created opportunities to reflect on the future. With care as 
260 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
decision making, we observed how it stemmed fro m personal choice forming a reciprocal and 
considerate relationship, such as choosing the object of care, or through obligation, such as 
receiving a plant as a gift. Additionally, we can consciously choose to neglect or practice care 
towards plants that ar e useful to us. With care as response -ability, we observed  the quality of 
being responsible and committed to maintaining a nonhuman through and from care. While 
with care as emotion, it was reflected through various emotions, acknowledging the 
vulnerabilities of nonhumans, nurturing empathy through the practice o f maintenance, and 
experiencing aesthetic enjoyment.  
However, new understandings of care were conceptualised, such as the various forms of care 
as relations, e.g. , customary, symbolic , and proximal, and the aspect of conscious neglect in 
care as decision m aking. Thus, rather than setting the care framework as normative, we created 
it as more of a blueprint in which there is space for further additions and modifications.    
Expressions of care towards plants and the probe  
Participants commented on their previ ous interaction with plants and their interaction with 
the plant –technology prototype. Comparing these accounts makes it possible to identify 
similarities and differences.  First, we identified several similarities between how participants 
described their c are for plants and their care for Juniper. There were no differences between 
a plant and Juniper regarding watering or ensuring sunlight.  The type of symbolic 
anthropomorphic relation discussed by the interviewees also occurred in both cases. For 
example, Jordan described how a plant could be a proxy for kin while caring for Juniper 
extended to care for the research per se. This refers to how researchers and participants 
switched between caring for themselves, caring for the research project, or caring for research 
participants (Toombs et al., 201 7).  
Second, we identified cases where participants’ forms of care differed between plants and 
Juniper. Transporting Juniper to and from work added a new care practice referring to the 
adjustments needed to practice care. However, the energy aspect brought forward new forms 
of caring relations, such as April suggesting having it in a library and sharing the power 
between students.  The new utility seems to divert participants’ care focus away from the plant.  
According to April’s accounts, the lights became a representation of the plant as a living being. 
While an interesting aspect of care as noticing, we  cannot say that this new understanding 
changed her ways of caring . Generally, we learn that the technical s ystem overshadows the 
plant, implying that instead of paying attention to the plant, the user attunes to the added 
technology.  Even as a speculative artefact, Juniper shows how easily the main focus can switch 
from the plant to the technology and how the t echnology becomes a potent agent in the more -
than-human power relation. Thus, researchers need to consider how conditions change for 
better or worse by introducing technology to the biotic.  
Care for nonhumans in a human context  
The care framework includes previous findings on  forms of  care for both humans and 
nonhumans. We suggest that forms of care between humans are relevant when caring for 
nonhumans, as caring for nonhumans occurs in a social context. In the following, we discuss 
this suggestion and how it revealed social and cultural aspects of care when engaging with 
plants. By applying the framework, we identified three ways the social context became 
relevant: the plant as human utility, human proxy, and human per se.   
Ciobanu and Juhlin  261 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp Plants as human utility:  articulating care as decision making revealed how participants came to 
see both plants and Juniper as a utility. Our design of Juniper’s functionality as an energy 
producer seemed to have directed participants’ attention to energy production in general.   
Plants as human proxy:  articulating care as relations and response -ability revealed how 
participants came to see plants as human proxy. Care occurred when participants seemingly 
treated the nonhuman as a human or as a symbol of a human. While care usually flows 
between a caregiver and a care receiver, we noticed that the plant, while benefitting from 
various forms of care,  is only a proxy for a human. That is to say, while the plant does receive 
care, such as watering, the caring intention is directed towar ds someone else. It is a form of 
symbolic anthropomorphism (Kant, 1950, 105 -106) where the plant stands in for someone 
else.  
Plants as human:  the application of care as relations and emotion brought forward how the 
participants saw the plant as having hum an characteristics. Examples include April’s 
descriptions of her plants as “babies” or when Juniper became part of April’s “family”  and 
Olivia’s account of Juniper as having “friends .” Whether the sentience attributed to plants is 
real or imagined, it seem s to encourage caring practices. Regarding plants as humans , this 
could  also be seen as a form of empathy, an attempt to understand these plant others, or a 
projection of one’s beliefs and values , clearly seen in the Instagram posts where plants were 
repre sented as thinking and speaking through human language .  
As discussed above, the forms of care applied to participants’ accounts revealed who was 
actually being cared for. As technology is increasingly introduced to the biotic, we identified 
a need to become aware of how this affects human -nonhuman relations. We thus aim to avoid 
designed contexts in which care is leaning towards the needs of one part more than an other, 
for instance, forms of care that harm or instrumentalise, rather than improve, the life of 
nonhumans. As a first step toward avoiding these frictions, we suggest the need to account 
for how humans care. Furthermore, taking a speculative approach to this intricate topic 
allowed us to identify the three aforementioned more -than-human frictional dynamics 
without having the context as a set reality. We were able to observe how care for the plant 
and probe was enabled throughout the study with the help of  participants’ engagement in 
speculation. In addition to being a design probe, Juniper was grounding the speculation into 
a device that the participants were able to touch, see , and engage with, co -creating with the 
probe the possible future of the interac tion. In the following, we permit ourselves to discuss 
how embedding care in a “human” and social context might influence plants and, more 
generally, nonhumans.  
When formulating care as decision making, we saw a certain tension between seeing plants as 
objects and plants as subjects. Following Robin Wall Kimmerer’s (2013) ideas about gift -
giving, Juniper’s power supply can be interpreted as either a commodity from an object or a 
gift from a nonhuman subject. While gifts build community and interdependence, 
commodities are signs of individualism  and loss of power, as there is no inherent obligation 
to care for a commodified object (Kimmerer, 2013) . Thus, as a commodity, the plant is merely 
a means for obtaining energy. In contrast, if we see the energy provid ed as a gift, Juniper 
becomes a subject, namely the gift giver, which creates an “ongoing relationship ,” a bond 
where gifts have value beyond the monetary economy (Kimmerer, 2013). We see this 
difference between participants Jade and April. In Jade’s descr iptions, Juniper is a cheaper 
source of electricity, a means of obtaining what is needed for his well -being. With April, 
262 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
however, Juniper is considered a living being brought into her “plant family”  and cared for 
the same way, with the added bonus of being  an energy supply. Kimmerer’s perspective is 
relevant in social settings as it is considered harmful to treat people as objects rather than 
subjects and use them as a means to an end, especially when they depend on a caregiver. 
Similarly, if we do not see the plant as another self with its own value, there is a higher risk 
that by making it part of a technical system, the technology will overshadow the caring of the 
plant in itself.   
When the plant is considered a human, it is not understood in its own term s either. However, 
we cannot directly point out whether such anthropomorphism is harmful to a plant. In order 
to understand the consequences of such forms of care, we need either an empirical evaluation 
of the plant’s condition or a theory on plants from b iology, for instance (Pollan, 2001) , or 
bodies of work that build on critical plant studies (Charlston & Charlston, 2021) . Aspling et 
al. (2016) encourage a design direction that aims to increase plant dissemination by improving 
hedonic human -plant engagement rather than supporting abstract contemplation. Such 
understanding is aligned with seeing plants as utility or symbol for a human, provided that 
they contribute to disseminating the species. Equally, a misconception of the nonhuman as a 
human could be beneficial for their species  in terms of the care they are given . 
Conclusion  
This article presented a care framework based  on investigations in feminist studies, STS, and 
HCI.  It is composed of six forms of care:  practice,  relations , noticing,  decision  making,  
response -ability, and  emotion , which we then applied to a design study of a human –plant –
technology interaction. The s tudy investigated what forms of care are enacted by humans in 
human –plant relations, and how does care shift when digital technology is embedded in the 
assemblage?  Through the different articulations of care and a speculative approach, we were 
able to reveal three hidden dynamics between humans and nonhumans and how these 
progressed once technology became part of it. The first dynamic of viewing a plant as human 
utility was reinforced within IT -supported interactions when plants were seen as a commodity 
from the outset  as participants focused on the energy aspect of the probe . With the second 
dynamic of plants as human proxy, we observed how a symbolic anthropomorphism formed , 
the plant proxying the intended subject of care. Lastly, the third dynamic consider ed a plant 
as human, which would need further evaluations to identify whether  caring within  this type 
of more -than-human relation is harmful or beneficial for the nonhuman . We thus took a 
speculative approach to investigate this  human -plant -technology  interaction that could be part 
of a possible future. The speculative thinking was grounded by a material device and enabled 
an embodied experience for the participants. Given the difficulty of understanding other -
than-human needs, we as humans require ways to critically unpack actions that are considered 
caring and have good intent. Humans are innately part of sociotechnical and cultural settings 
that include nonhumans. Whether  in the design, use, or evaluation of a technology, we cannot 
disregard humans’ involvement, even if the intent is to design  for nonhumans or to 
understand nonhuman needs. Embedded in a culture of care, we argue for the need to unpack 
how humans care for n onhumans and what forms of care are prioritised. Our proposed care 
framework does not offer a course of action. Instead, it stands as a first measure to build a 
critical and speculative perspective of what other, more sustainable and symbiotic worlds 
could  be. Further investigations could include outlining how the forms of care build on each 
other and how they present in other sociotechnical interactions with plants or other 
Ciobanu and Juhlin  263 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp nonhumans. Our choice of a speculative design probe has an inherent utilitarian per spective 
which revealed itself through the framework. Thus, the exploration through care would reveal 
new implications by taking a different design intent, such as hedonic, which is more aligned 
with a human relation to plants.   
References  
Angelini, L., Ca parrotta, S., Khaled, O. A., & Mugellini, E. (2016). EmotiPlant: Human -plant 
interaction for older adults. Proceedings of the TEI ’16: Tenth International Conference on Tangible, 
Embedded, and Embodied Interaction  (pp. 373 –379). Eindhoven, Netherlands: Ass ociation for 
Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2856548     
Aspling, F., & Juhlin, O. (2017). Theorizing animal –computer interaction as machinations. International 
Journal of Human -Computer Studies, 98 , 135-149. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2016.05.005  
Aspling, F., Wang, J., & Juhlin, O. (2016). Plant -comput er interaction, beauty and dissemination. 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Animal -Computer Interaction  (pp. 1 -10). Milton Keynes, 
United Kingdom: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2995257. 
2995393   
Atkinson -Graham, M., Kenney, M., Ladd, K., Murray, C. M., & Simmonds, E. A. -J. (2015). Care in 
context: Becoming an STS researcher. Social Studies of Science, 45 (5), 738 -748. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715600277   
Bennett, C. L., Rosner, D. K., & Taylor, A. S. (2020). The care work of access. Proceedings of the 2020 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 1 –15). Honolulu, HI, USA: Association 
for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376568   
Budinger,  K., & Heidmann, F. (2019). Our symbiotic life: An exploration of interspecies relations. 
Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference  (pp. 1349 –1362). San Diego, CA, USA: 
Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3323698   
Charlston, L., & Charlston, D. (2021). Sympoietic art practice in co -expressive re -worlding with Hegel’s 
“Vegetal Subject. ” Journal of Posthumanism, 1(2), 153 –166. https://doi.org/10.33182/jp.v1i2.1326   
Cooley, M. (1989). Human -centred systems. In H. Rosenbrock, Designing Human -centred Technology: A 
Cross-disciplinar y Project in Computer -aided Manufacturing  (pp. 133 -143). Springer London.  
Degraen, D., Kosmalla, F., & Krüger, A. (2019). Overgrown: Supporting plant growth with an 
endoskeleton for ambient notifications. Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Hu man Factors 
in Computing Systems  (pp. 1 -6). Glasgow, Scotland UK: Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312833   
Dunne, A., & Raby, F. (2013). Speculative everything: design, fiction, and social dreaming.  MIT press.  
Dye, M., Nemer, D., Kumar, N., & Bruckman, A. S. (2019). If it rains, ask grandma to disconnect the 
nano: Maintenance & care in Havana’s StreetNet. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact., 3 (CSCW), 1 -
27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3359289  
Friese, C. (2013). Realizing potential in translational medicine: The uncanny emergence of care as 
science. Current Anthropology, 54 (S7), 129 -138. https://doi.org/10.1086/670805   
Gaver, B., Dunne, T., & Pacenti, E. (1999). Design: Cultural Probes. Interactions, 6 (1), 21 –29. 
https://10.1145/291224.291235   
Giaccardi, E. (2019). Histories and futures of research through design: From prototypes to connected 
things. International Journal of Design, 13 (3), 139 -155. Retrieved from http://ijdesign.org/index.php/ 
IJDesign/article/view/3192   
Giaccardi, E., Cila, N., Speed, C., & Caldwell, M. (2016). Thing ethnography: Doing design research 
with non -humans. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems  (pp. 377 –387). 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/29017 
90.2901905   
Haraway, D. (2008). When species meet.  University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.  
264 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
Harmon, E., Korn, M., & Void a, A. (2017). Supporting everyday philanthropy: Care work in situ and 
at scale. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social 
Computing  (pp. 1631 –1645). Portland, Oregon, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998330   
Heuts, F., & Mol, A. (2013). What is a good tomato? A case of valuing in practice. Valuation Studies, 
1(2), 125 -146. https://doi.org/10.3384/vs.2001 -5992.1312125   
Houston, L., & Jackson, S. J. (2016). Caring for the “next Billion" mobile handsets: Opening proprietary 
closures through t he work of repair. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information and 
Communication Technologies and Development  (pp. 1 -11). Ann Arbor, MI, USA: Association for 
Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909658   
Howard, D., & Irani, L. (2019). Ways of knowing when research subjects care. Proceedings of the 2019 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 1 -16). Glasgow, Scotland UK: Association 
for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300327   
Kant, I. (1950). Prolegomena to any future metaphysic s. The Liberal Arts Press.  
Karusala, N., Vishwanath, A., Kumar, A., Mangal, A., & Kumar, N. (2017). Care as a resource in 
underserved learning environments. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact., 1 (CSCW), 1 -22. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3134739   
Kaziunas, E., Ackerman, M. S., Lindtner, S., & Lee, J. M. (2017). Caring through data: Attending to the 
social and emotional experiences of health datafication. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Co nference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing  (pp. 2260 –2272). Portland, Oregon, USA: 
Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998303   
Kimmerer, R. W. (2013). Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge and the teachings of plants.  
Milkweed Editions.  
Kobayashi, H. H. (2015). Human -computer -biosphere interaction: Toward a sustainable society. In A. 
Nijholt (Ed.), More Playful User Interfaces. Gaming Media and Social Effects  (pp. 97 -119). Springer 
Singapore.  
Kocksch, L., Korn, M., Poller, A., & Wagenknecht, S. (2018). Caring for IT security: Accountabilities, 
moralities, and oscillations in IT security practices. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact., 2 (CSCW), 1 -
20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274361   
Krippendorff, K. (2018). Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology.  SAGE Publications.  
Light, A., & Akama, Y. (2014). Structuring future social relations: The politics of care in participatory 
practice. Proceedings of the 13th Participatory  Design Conference: Research Papers - Volume 1  (pp. 151 –160). 
Windhoek, Namibia: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2661435. 
2661438   
Light, L. (2020). Technology - living light . Retrieved from https://livinglight.info/technology/  
Liu, J., Byrne, D., & Devendorf, L. (2018). Design for collaborative survival: An inquiry into human -
fungi relationships. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference o n Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 1 -
13). Montreal QC, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3173574.3173614   
Liu, S. -Y. (Bardzell, J., & Bardzell, S. (2019). Decomposition as design: Co -creating (with) natureculture. 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction  (pp. 
605-614). Tempe, Arizona, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3294109.3295653   
Mancini, C. (2011). Animal -computer interaction : A manifesto. Interactions, 18 (4), 69 –73. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978822.1978836   
Martin, A., Myers, N., & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies of Science, 
45(5), 625 -641. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073   
Modi, K. (2021). Forms of intelligence: Co -species care in more -than-human worlds . Journal of 
Posthumanism, 1 (2), 245 –251. https://doi.org/10.33182/joph.v1i2.1346   
Mol, A. (2008). The logic of care: Health and the problem of patient choice.  Routledge.  
Ciobanu and Juhlin  265 
journals. tplondon.com/ jp Mol, A., Moser, I., & Pols, J. (2010). Care in practice: On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms.  Transcript 
Verlag.  
Murphy, M. (201 5). Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health 
practices. Social Studies of Science, 45 (5), 717 -737. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715589136   
Nonhuman Nonsense. (2021). Pink chicken project. Journal of Posthumanism, 1 (1), 129 -137. 
https://doi.org/10.33182/jp.v1i1.1349   
Pollan, M. (2001). The botany of desire: A plant’s -eye view of the world.  Random House.  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2009). Touching technologies, touching visions. The reclaiming of sensorial 
experience and the politics of speculative thinking. Subjectivity,  28(1), 297 –315. https://doi.org/10. 
1057/sub.2009.17   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social 
Studies of  Science, 41 (1), 85 -106. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312710380301   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2012). ‘Nothing comes without its world’: Thinking with care. The Sociological 
Review, 60 (2), 197 -216. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -954X.2012.02070.x   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. 
Social Studies of Science, 45 (5), 691 -716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017). Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds.  University of 
Minnesota Press.  
Sabie, S., & Parikh, T. (2019). Cultivating care through ambiguity: Lessons from a service learning 
course. Proceeding s of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 1 -14). 
Glasgow, Scotland Uk: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290 
605.3300507   
Schrader, A. (2015). Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: How (not) to care about deformed 
leaf bugs in the aftermath of Chernobyl. Social Studies of Science, 45 (5), 665 -690. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715603249   
Smith, N., Bardzell, S., & Bardzell, J. (2017). Designing for cohabitation: Naturecultures, hybrids, and 
decentering the huma n in design. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  (pp. 1714 –1725). Denver, Colorado, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.302 5948  
Steer, C., Robinson, S., & Jones, M. (2015). Growth, change and decay: Plants and interaction 
possibilities. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (pp. 2037 –2042). Seoul, Republic of Korea: Association for Computing 
Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732765   
Tixier, M., Lenay, C., Garibaldi, G., & Aubert, D . (2018). Rethinking the accessibility of digital content 
with perceptual supplementation system through the lens of an ethics of care. Interaction Design and 
Architecture(s) Journal (IxD&A), 38 , 140 -154. Retrieved from https://hal -utt.archives -
ouvertes.fr/hal -02939608   
Tonkinwise, C. (2014). How we intend to future: Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, 
Speculative everything: Design, fiction, and social d reaming. Design Philosophy Papers, 12 (2), 169 -187. 
https://www.doi.org/10.2752/144871314X14159818597676   
Toombs, A. L., Bardzell, S., & Bardzell, J. (2015). The proper care and feeding of hackerspaces: Care 
ethics and cultures of making. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  (pp. 629 –638). Seoul, Republic of Korea : Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702522   
Toombs, A., Gross, S., Bardzell, S., & Bardzell, J. (201 7). From empathy to care: A fem inist care ethics 
perspective on long -term researcher –participant relations. Interacting with Computers, 29 (1), 45 -57. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iww010   
Tronto, J. C. (19 93). Moral boundaries: A political argument for an ethic of care.  Psychology Press.  
Vyas, D. (2019). Altruism and wellbeing as care work in a craft -based maker culture. Proc. ACM Hum. -
Comput. Interact., 3 (GROUP), 1 -12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3361120   
266 Forms of  Care in Human -Nature -Technology Environments  
 Journal of Posthumanism  
Wallace, J., McCarthy, J., Wright, P. C., & Olivier, P. (2013). Making Design Probes Work. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 3441 –3450). Paris, France: 
Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466473   
Wong -Villacres, M., Velasquez, C. M., & Kumar, N. (2017). Social media for earthquake response: 
Unpacking its limitations with care. Proc. ACM Hum. -Comput. Interact., 1 (CSCW), 1 -22. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3134747   
Zegura, E., DiSal vo, C., & Meng, A. (2018). Care and the practice of data science for social good. 
Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCAS Conference on Computing and Sustainable Societies  (pp. 1 -9). Menlo 
Park and San Jose, CA, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3209811.3209877   
Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., & Evenson, S. (2007). Research through design as a method for interaction 
design research in HCI. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (pp. 
493–502). San Jose, California, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/1240624.1240704   
Zimmerman, J., Stolterman, E., & Forlizzi, J. (2010). An analysis and critique of research through 
design: Towards a formalization of a research approach. Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems  (pp. 310 –319). Aarhus, Denmark: Association for Computing Machinery. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858228   
