World Development 176 (2024) 106503
Available online 26 December 2023
0305-750X/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Regular Research Article 
From absences to emergences: Foregrounding traditional and Indigenous 
climate change adaptation knowledges and practices from Fiji, Vietnam and 
the Philippines 
Justin Seea,*, Ginbert Permejo Cuatonb, Pryor Placinoc, Suliasi Vunibolad, Huong Do Thie, 
Kelly Dombroskif, Katharine McKinnong 
aSydney Environment Institute and School of Geosciences (The University of Sydney), The Quadrangle, L4.00 A14, Science Rd, Camperdown NSW 2050, Australia 
bDivision of Environment & Sustainability (The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology), Hong Kong SAR, China 
cSchool of Global Studies (Thammasat University) and Institute for Culture and Society (Western Sydney University), Australia 
dMacmillan Brown Centre for Pacific Studies (University of Canterbury), New Zealand 
eVietnam Institute of Meteorology, Hydrology and Climate Change, Vietnam 
fSchool of People, Environment, and Planning (Massey University), New Zealand 
gCentre for Sustainable Communities (University of Canberra), Australia   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Climate change 
Climate change adaptation 
Decolonising climate and adaptation 
scholarship (DCAS) 
Indigenous and local knowledge 
Global South ABSTRACT  
The differential impacts of climate change have highlighted the need to implement fit-for-purpose interventions 
that are reflective of the needs of vulnerable communities. However, adaptation projects tend to favour tech-
nocratic, market-driven, and Eurocentric approaches that inadvertently disregard the place-based and contextual 
adaptation strategies of many communities in the Global South. The paper aims to decolonise climate change 
adaptation guided by the critical tenets of ‘Decolonising Climate Adaptation Scholarship ’ (DCAS). It presents 
empirical case studies from Fiji, Vietnam, and the Philippines and reveals the different ways that Indigenous and 
local knowledge (ILK) and strategies are devalued and suppressed by modernist and developmentalist ap-
proaches to climate adaptation. The paper then foregrounds some of the adaptive techniques that resist and 
remain, or have been re-worked in hybrid ways with ILK. Ultimately, this paper combats the delegitimisation of 
ILK by mainstream climate change adaptation scholarship and highlights the need for awareness and openness to 
other forms of knowing and being.   
1.Introduction: The neo-colonial takeover of climate change 
adaptation in the Global South 
Since the early 1990s, climate change adaptation has emerged as a 
dominant theme in development praxis. Governments, aid agencies, and 
nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) have mobilised a significant 
number of resources and embarked on several programmes focusing on 
climate adaptation (Mikulewicz & Taylor, 2020; Sovacool et al., 2017 ). 
Climate change is seen as an existential threat to humans everywhere 
and adaptation is consequently viewed as an urgent and almost uni-
versally recognised imperative across the globe (Atteridge & Remling, 
2018; Taylor, 2014 ). 
However, existing body of literature suggests that climate change is 
dominantly framed as particularly dangerous for communities in the Global South – or countries with relatively low economic and industrial 
development where the majority of the world ’s population live (Bond, 
2012; Fisher, 2015; Gaillard et al., 2017 ). Drawing from Said ’s (2003) 
concept of imaginative geography, critical scholars note that climate 
discourses manufacture an imaginary border between parts of the world 
that are supposedly safer (in Western Europe and North America) and 
those most regularly affected by extreme weather events in the Global 
South (Bankoff, 2001; Gaillard, 2010; Mikulewicz, 2020 ). Climate 
change is consequently depicted as a more imminent threat to a certain 
part of humanity, who therefore needs to be ‘saved ’ by the knowledge 
and expertise of the other. 
Critical scholars point out the arrogance of this artificial distinction 
between the climate vulnerability of richer and poorer regions of the 
world. Bankoff (2001) refers to the rhetoric of how places in the Global 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: justin.see@sydney.edu.au (J. See), gcuaton@ust.hk (G.P. Cuaton), pryor.placino@westernsydney.edu.au (P. Placino), vunibolasuliasi@gmail. 
com (S. Vunibola), huongtvkttv@gmail.com (H.D. Thi), k.dombroski@massey.ac.nz (K. Dombroski), katharine.mckinnon@canberra.edu.au (K. McKinnon).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
World Development 
u{�~zkw! s{yo|kro>! ÐÐÐ1ow�o �to~1m{y2w{m k�o2Ð{~wnno �!
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2023.106503 
Accepted 15 December 2023   
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
2South are rendered vulnerable to climate change as a “Western 
discourse”. He draws upon the ideas of Arturo Escobar (1995, p. 8) who 
describes development as akin to the process of ‘colonisation’ as it tends 
to create “ a subjectivity with features of powerlessness, passivity, 
poverty and ignorance… as if waiting for the Western hand to help 
subjects along…” Recently, Mikulewicz (2020, p. 1810) takes this 
further, arguing that “mainstream approaches to adaptation rely on a 
parallel ontology of vulnerability, which warrants external assistance to 
those in climate peril” (Mikulewicz, 2020, p. 1810). Bankoff (2019) also 
claims that concepts such as adaptation and resilience remain culturally 
specific to Western perspectives. 
The kind of ‘Western perspectives’ that Bankoff is referring to are 
evident in constructions that frame climate as outside human experi -
ence, positing a strict division between people and their environments 
(Wright & Tofa, 2021). Consequently, dominant climate policy in-
terventions and discourses conceptualise climate as something that can 
be controlled and understood rationally. Adaptation strategies thus 
focus on top-down, technocratic, and command-and-control strategies 
such as building infrastructures, climate modelling and projections, and 
technology-based warning systems (Remling, 2018). However, critical 
scholars argue that there is fragility associated with this imposed line-
arity and control of climate and they continue to challenge discourses 
that obscures the diverse and place-based adaptation strategies that are 
embedded in local practice (Gibson & Hill, 2022; Ireland & McKinnon, 
2013; Wright et al., 2020). There is growing evidence that approaches to 
adaptation within the era of what is varyingly known as Anthropocene 
or Capitalocene are in part responsible for producing people’s vulnera -
bilities to climate change in the first place (Eriksen et al., 2021). While it 
is true that mainstream scientific knowledges have important insights to 
guide adaptation practitioners, an increasing number of scholars have 
stressed the need to engage with plural ontologies and epistemologies as 
these have been shown to play an important role in facilitating adap-
tation and resilience in many communities (Nursey-Bray et al., 2020; 
Rarai et al., 2022). 
Drawing on case studies from Fiji, Vietnam, and the Philippines, this 
paper illustrates the value of diverse knowledge systems and practices in 
responding to the pressures of climate change. While variously referred 
to as traditional knowledges, ecological knowledges, and Indigenous 
knowledges among others, we elect to use the term Indigenous and Local 
Knowledges (ILK) because of its growing use in the literature and in 
prominent institutions like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC). By ILK, we refer to a place-specific nested knowledge 
system comprised of people’s information about local environments, 
their ways of life, as well as their values and worldviews (Rarai et al., 
2022). We also see ILK as complete knowledge systems alongside other 
knowledge systems and are inseparable from and interconnected with 
peoples’ beliefs and practices (McGregor, 2021). In the case studies that 
follow, we demonstrate the critical role that ILK plays in facilitating 
people’s adaptive capacities to climate change. 
In the next section, we situate our work within the Decolonising 
Climate Adaptation Scholarship (DCAS) (Johnson et al., 2021). In this 
positionality, we advocate for recognitional justice in climate adaptation 
scholarship by explicitly diagnosing “how land and relations to land 
have always been differently understood and enacted” (Tuck & Yang, 
2012, p. 7). Moreover, beyond the symbolic and metaphorical use of 
“decolonisation” (Tuck & Yang, 2012), we examine climate vulnera -
bility as a product of historical and on-going colonial violence and bring 
front and centre colonised and Indigenous peoples’ capacities and 
diverse adaptation strategies in our analysis. Drawing on DCAS, we then 
turn in Section 3 to our case studies. In order to examine the drivers of 
vulnerabilities in our case study communities and foreground their 
respective adaptation initiatives, we orient each of the case study dis-
cussions around two key questions: (1) what types of absences (i.e. 
silencing and suppression) are produced by Eurocentric approaches to 
climate adaptation, and (2) what types of emergences (i.e. adaptation 
initiatives and strategies) challenge the production of such absences? In Section 4, we present our key findings. Finally, we conclude by 
reflecting on the lessons our case studies offer for the adaptation in-
dustry – how adaptation approaches heavily cemented in “concrete” 
understandings and solutions (i.e. Eurocentric and modernist thought as 
well as built infrastructure) may not effectively address uncertainties 
associated with the impacts of future climate change. 
2.Decolonial approaches to climate and adaptation scholarship 
Climate change compounds many of the issues that communities in 
the Global South face including food and water insecurities, pressures on 
health and education, among others (Mbah et al., 2021; Sultana, 2021). 
We refer to the Global South as regions of Asia, Oceania, Africa, and 
Latin America that have a colonial history and are mostly low-income 
and often politically marginalised (Dados & Connell, 2012). It is 
within these regions that development models framed by Enlightenment 
ideas about modernity and progress are propagated (Cooper, 1997). 
Grosfoguel (2009) argues that the lingering effects of colonialism have 
seeped into the policies, institutions, ontologies, and epistemologies of 
Global South communities even after the end of colonial administra -
tions. Quijano (2000) popularised the notion of “coloniality” to signify 
the continuation of colonialism through the enduring geopolitical su-
premacy and economic dominance of Global North nations. To over-
come coloniality, scholars have called for a ‘decolonial option’ – an 
approach that recognises and values alternative ontologies and episte -
mologies that exists in the Global South (Escobar, 2018; Mignolo, 2018). 
Decolonisation is a continuous political project of “individual and 
collaborative action to root out the weeds of colonisation” (Mercier, 
2020, p. 43). Central to this is the decolonisation of knowledge to 
recognise and legitimise all other ontologies, epistemologies, and 
methodologies that have previously been marginalised, including ILK. 
To uproot colonial narratives, we draw attention to the physical and 
epistemic violence brought about by enduring forms of coloniality and 
highlight ILK and capacities that enable cultures, beings, and becom -
ings. To us, part of decolonisation therefore entails interrogating how 
colonialism has contributed to colonised peoples’ vulnerability and 
marginalisation (Bennett, 2014), as well as centralising their perspec -
tives and interpretations of reality (Howitt, 2020). It requires learning 
from below (Spivak, 1993) and looking from within rather than outside 
communities (Gaillard, 2019). 
Within the specific context of climate adaptation, we situate our 
work of decolonisation within the burgeoning literature called 
“Decolonising Climate and Adaptation Scholarship (DCAS)”. DCAS 
builds on decades of push-back from scholars based in the Global South 
and scholars working with ILK. Johnson et al., (2021,p. 3) argue that the 
fundamental tenets of decolonisation literature run through large tracts 
of the DCAS scholarship including “examining and transforming 
oppression, foregrounding Indigenous ontologies, and supporting 
Indigenous strengths and self-determination”. They also stress that 
DCAS represents a much-needed departure in climate adaptation 
scholarship. Many common framings of climate change obscure the 
massive destruction brought about by colonialism and capitalism 
(Wright et al., 2020). Critical scholars also observe that climate change 
discourses tend to be framed in terms of a range of dichotomies, e.g. 
natural versus human-made, us versus them, good versus bad (Davison, 
2015; O’Lear, 2016). They also emphasise that climate is framed in a 
measurable and controllable manner, enrolling adaptation into domi -
nant develop discourses wedded to biophysical science and colonial 
logics of modernity (Rarai et al., 2022; Webber, 2016). This leads to a 
pre-occupation towards a range of interventions that are technocratic 
and exclude from its frame of reference the broader colonial and 
political-economic context” (Cameron, 2012, p. 11). Moreover, such 
over-reliance on technocratic and Eurocentric expertise in relation to 
climate adaptation is generally unstable, and there are numerous studies 
showing how some interventions inadvertently exacerbate vulnerability 
and drive maladaptive outcomes (Eriksen et al., 2021; See & Wilmsen, J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
32022). For example, a case in Fiji illustrates that seawalls built to protect 
people from sea level rise have merely shifted vulnerability to people 
elsewhere and threatened the health of the marine ecosystem (Piggott- 
McKellar et al., 2020). Other research, such as that in the Marshall 
Islands, emphasises colonial and institutional structures that discourage 
local participation in adaptation programmes (Bordner et al., 2020). It is 
becoming increasingly clear that Eurocentric expertise needs to learn 
from diverse global contexts and that responding to climate change re-
quires different ways of thinking and responding. 
There are many strands of scholarship that attend to the neo-colonial 
injustices implicated in peoples’ climate vulnerabilities as well as that 
feature their highly localised and place-based responses to climate 
change. These include the work of a wide range of Indigenous and non- 
Indigenous scholars, geographers, feminists, climate change activists, 
humanists, and other academics who have problematised the dominance 
of technocratic approaches to climate adaptation and have attended to 
the diverse and culturally imbued ways that humans are co-constituted 
and co-emergent with their environment (Do & Dombroski, 2022; 
Eriksen et al., 2021; Gibson-Graham et al., 2013; Puig de la Bellacasa, 
2017; Wright et al., 2020). With this immense body of work in mind, we 
identify three dominant Eurocentric assumptions and understandings 
around climate and the way that such conceptions are being challenged 
by DCAS. 
First is a linear conception of singular time. It relates to the idea that 
history has a linear direction and that “developed countries are ahead of, 
or more progressive than, underdeveloped countries” (Akıncı et al., 
2020, p. 183). The perceived linearity of time suggests that whatever 
represents the opposite of forward is rendered backward and, thus, 
undesirable. Wright et al. (2020) argue that this strict linear formulation 
of time has extremely unjust consequences such as the silencing of the 
massive destruction brought about by colonialism upon the lands and 
seas of First Nations people across the world. In addition, when time is 
seen as singular, predictable, and model-able, too much attention is 
focused on the ability to forecast and predict the future (Natcher et al., 
2007). Wright et al., (2020,p. 298) contend that when time is seen only 
as a linear march, fear-based narratives become dominant as “ideas of 
change rock the foundations… and responses become an effort to impose 
control through the very structures that led to the problem in the first 
place”. 
In contrast, DCAS literature promotes diverse temporalities and 
suggests that time is non-linear, spiral, and connects across different 
generations (Chisholm Hatfield et al., 2018; Janca & Bullen, 2003). For 
example, Wright et al., (2020,p. 297) discusses how the Yolŋu song-
spiral, Wukun or Gathering of the Clouds, from northern Australia un-
derstands “time is not something that is distant… with the past receding 
into the distance and the future inevitably bearing down”. Instead, it 
emphasises the multiplicity of time, that the past and future co-exist in 
the present, and the impossibility of predicting or controlling climate in 
any unidirectional manner. Similarly, in her study of the relationship 
between soil science and economic productionism, Puig de la Bellacasa 
(2015, p. 693) decries the “persistence of a modern paradigm that as-
sociates the future with progress… while the past acts as a discrimina -
tory signifier of development delay”. She challenges the productionist 
linear time aimed at increasing soil’s efficiency at the expense of all 
other relations and asserts that ecological relations require taking a di-
versity of timescales into account (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017). Time is 
lived, embodied, and historically and socially situated, and the pro-
gressive and productionist mode of time is just one of the many forms of 
temporality (Adam, 1998; Bastian, 2009). 
Second, we observe that Eurocentric perspectives continue to 
dominate the framing of the climate crisis and its potential solutions. 
Critical scholars argue that climate assessments are mainly based on 
Eurocentric paradigms that do not value other ways of knowing 
(Deranger et al., 2022; Overland & Sovacool, 2020). Moreover, Tandon 
(2021) notes that the existing knowledge around climate change is 
heavily skewed towards the interests of male authors from the Global North, marginalising the perspectives of women and communities in the 
Global South. For example, Gaillard (2019) finds that most of the pub-
lished work on climate change are authored by scholars from the Global 
North. Furthermore, Eurocentric ways of knowing have long been 
accused of appropriating Indigenous knowledge for the benefit of non- 
Indigenous institutions (Smith, 2012). The dominance of Eurocentric 
perspectives in climate research forecloses on “a wealth of creative, 
innovative ideas and solutions required to transform human society” 
(Deranger et al., 2022, p. 57). 
DCAS’ underlying premise is that the epistemological and ontolog -
ical diversity of the world is both immense and important. Escobar 
coined the term ‘pluriverse’ to describe how the world is actually “made 
up of multiple worlds, multiple ontologies or reals that are far from 
being exhausted by the Eurocentric experience or reducible to its terms” 
(Escobar, 2020, p. 69). DCAS understands a pluriversal world of adap-
tation, where scholars ask how we might “take the potential of multiple 
climate ontologies and epistemologies seriously, and what the conse -
quences of this would be for climate adaptation in theory and practice” 
(Rarai et al., 2022, p. 2243). Thus, it calls for more grounded adaptation 
actions that are attuned to the perspectives and needs of local people, 
but not in terms of interpreting them into a single universalist truth or 
method. Instead, it embraces multiple worldviews and knowledges in 
climate adaptation (Ensor et al., 2019). 
Lastly, we notice that the solutions proposed in responding to the 
climate crisis revolve around ideas of economic growth through market 
forces at the expense of environmental and social sustainability. For 
example, the response to the drought experienced by communities 
across Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin were mainly “market solutions 
entrenched by intergovernmental agreements, which have seen rich 
investors buy water rights to create profit” (Howitt, 2020, p. 4). In 
Zambia, a new green revolution, focused on a private sector-led agri-
cultural development, is being pushed to the detriment of the poorest 
smallholders (Westengen et al., 2018). Bruun (2018) similarly contends 
that development agendas characterised by financial and economic 
calculation are evident within funding mechanisms such as the Green 
Climate Fund. Such dominant preoccupations with economic growth 
and efficiency do not only exclude the more-than-human lifeworlds; 
they may also result to further marginalisation of vulnerable groups 
(Eriksen et al., 2021). 
To counter this overreliance on market remedies and growth, we 
draw attention to scholarship that highlights a diversity of systems of 
production and consumption that capitalist understanding of economic 
activities and relations fail to capture (Gibson-Graham, 2008; Gibson- 
Graham et al., 2013). More specifically, we draw upon the notion of 
diverse economy in which what is usually conceived of as the main -
stream economy – capitalist enterprise, market transactions and wage 
labour – are joined by all other economic ‘others’ (such as economies of 
solidarity, barter, and cooperatives, among others) that sustain life and 
well-being (Gibson-Graham, 2005). In the context of climate adaptation, 
a number of scholars provide examples of adaptation strategies that are 
not guided by the market logic of growth, but by criteria of reciprocity 
and sufficiency (Ireland & McKinnon, 2013; See et al., 2022). Other 
diverse economy scholars emphasise adaptation actions that go beyond 
modernist developmentalism and climate infrastructure, such as 
learning to be bodily affected by climate difference (Hill, 2014) or in-
ventorying and building on diverse adaptation strategies already present 
within communities (Lopes et al., 2018). These examples counter 
grandiose visions of multinational institutions that are deeply impli -
cated in neoliberal models of economic decision-making. 
As a preliminary step in decolonising climate adaptation, we un-
dertake two important actions in this paper. First, we foreground the 
various forms of absences and suppression that invalidate non- 
Eurocentric ontologies and epistemologies in the context of climate 
adaptation. In each of the four empirical case studies presented in the 
latter part of this paper, we highlight some of the more troubling aspects 
of climate change adaptation where different initiatives seem to follow J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
4neo-colonial modernisations. Second, we highlight the diverse forms of 
emergences – the adaptive techniques and strategies that resist and 
remain, to articulate the diverse knowledges and practices that Global 
South communities are already engaged in to adapt to climate change. 
This paper seeks to contribute to the expanding literature of DCAS and 
heed Johnson et al.’s (2021) call to advance the decolonisation of 
climate adaptation scholarship and practice. It also builds on recent 
scholarship that recognises the importance of grounded and localised 
knowledge, experience and priorities in climate change research and 
planning (Khadka et al., 2021; Tschakert et al., 2017 ). We turn to our 
case studies next. 
3.Drawing Connections: Introducing case studies from Fiji, 
Vietnam and the Philippines 
Our authorial collective is led by researchers from Fiji, Vietnam, and 
the Philippines, with long-term commitments and access to knowledge 
through both formal research activities and through long-term re-
lationships. We are also part of the Community Economies Research 
Network (CERN), an international network of scholars engaging with a 
‘community economies ’ approach to make more sustainable and equi-
table forms of development possible. Inspired by the work of (Gibson- 
Graham, 1996, 2006 ), the community economies approach represents a 
commitment to identifying, gathering, and amplifying ethical economic 
practices that already exist and that prefigure the world we want to live 
in. Community economies research is interested in ‘looking for differ -
ence ’, i.e. identifying, making visible, and valuing diverse practices that 
enable communities to survive well together but are rendered invisible by dominant forms of knowing and being. This paper, a product of a 
series of exchanges and presentations during the 2021 CERN ’Liviana ’ 
Online Conference, is our collective attempt to challenge Eurocentric- 
dominated framing of climate change adaptation and open up new 
ways of seeing adaptation efforts taking place in local communities. It 
features case studies from Fiji, Vietnam, and the Philippines (Figure 1) – 
countries which the United Nations (2020) classifies as “at highest risk 
of negative outcomes from a changing climate due to their high 
vulnerability and low resilience ”. 
Fiji is located in the South Pacific, an archipelago comprised of 330 
islands, of which over 100 are permanently inhabited (Piggott-McKellar 
et al., 2019 ). It has a population of approximately 900,000, 57 % of 
which are Indigenous Fijians who live on customary land (Steven & 
Vunibola, 2022 ). Despite having mountainous terrains and a large land 
mass, climate change is increasingly affecting low-lying coastal com-
munities in the country as many are becoming uninhabitable (Nichols, 
2019 ). Additionally, recent climate-related disasters such as Category 5 
cyclone Winston in 2016 have triggered the implementation of policies 
aimed to build Fijian ’s adaptive capacities (Lagi et al., 2022 ). However, 
Lagi et al.,’s (2023,p. 315) review of climate-related policies in Fiji 
suggests that “policies … do not offer frames that fully situate sustainable 
development within a holistic understanding of socio-climate justice, or 
fully recognise … the important role that Indigenous knowledges and 
practices …play ”. This is consistent with Rarai et al.’s (2022) observa -
tion that Pacific adaptation interventions often privilege Eurocentric 
knowledges and focus on technical solutions promoted by foreign 
experts. 
In this paper, we feature the small village of Nawi which is situated 
Fig. 1.Map of the case studies.  J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
5near the Nasavu river in the district of Dogotuki in Macuata Province. 
The village comprises only 25 households and is remotely located, with 
the nearest town (Labasa) being 150 km away. Here, people largely 
depend on the land and the river for sustenance and income. For 
example, kava (piper methysticum) and taro (colocasia esculenta) are 
grown for income and food. Their main diets include crops like yam, 
wild vegetables, cassava with fish, and clams from the river. Our Fiji 
case study is led by SV, who has both family and research connections to 
Nawi. He looked at how ILK helps support climate adaptation for local 
communities in Nawi. Talanoa, a culturally aligned Pacific research 
method (Farrelly & Nabobo-Baba, 2014), was used to gather informa -
tion and community stories. Talanoa sessions were organised with 
community leaders, youths, women and teachers from the local Dogo -
tuki District School. 
Our second case study is located in Vietnam where the country’s long 
coastlines and low elevation make it geographically prone to flooding 
and sea level rise (Lindegaard, 2018). Heightened temperature ex-
tremes, salinity intrusion, and changing rainfall patterns have also been 
attributed to climate change and have caused tremendous amount of 
damage and loss of life (Christoplos et al., 2017). Several adaptation 
measures have been implemented to address these risk, which scholars 
observe tend to “follow hierarchical mechanisms of planning and are 
associated with the development programmed intended to promote 
national level sustainable development” (Dombroski & Thi Do, 2019, p. 
9). These top-down adaptation strategies have led to adverse effects on 
marginalised communities. For example, adaptation measures have 
been reported to disproportionately benefit landowners and penalise the 
landless in the Mekong Delta (Chapman et al., 2016). Other example 
include how the Ecopark green village in Hanoi was designed in a way 
that protected the local elites from climate impacts but evicted the poor 
(Thomas & Warner, 2019). 
In this paper, we focus on Thai Binh province, a rural and coastal 
area known as the ‘hometown of rice farming’ in northern Vietnam. It 
has a population of 1,873,890, equivalent to 610,777 households (Thai 
Binh Statistical Office, 2021). According to the Department of Agricul -
ture and Rural Development (2011), rice farming makes up approxi -
mately 60 % of the agricultural gross domestic product (GDP) in the 
province, making it the most important livelihood activity for its resi-
dents. Climate-related hazards such as salt intrusion, flooding, and 
drought thus pose a major threat to both rice production and livelihoods 
of its residents (Do & Dombroski, 2022). Our Vietnam case study is led 
by HTD, who has both family and research connections to Thai Binh, and 
supported by KD for over seven years. The research explored the effects 
of climate adaptation interventions on peoples’ livelihoods, with special 
attention given to farmers’ accumulated local embodied knowledges for 
adapting to climate change. Data were collected using a combination of 
focus group discussions, transect walks, and semi-structured interviews 
with farmers and local officials. 
Our final case studies are located in the Philippines, a country in 
Southeast Asia composed of more than 7,100 islands clustered in three 
major island groups and has a land area of around 300,000 square kil-
ometres (Jose & Cruz, 1999). Climate change has been a field of 
governmental intervention, with several legislations being passed that 
mandated the country’s national adaptation priorities centre around 
food and water security, ecological and environmental stability, human 
security, and climate-smart industries and services (Climate Change 
Commission of the Philippines, 2011). However, scholars argue that 
these are highly top-down policies and included marginal consultation 
with its vulnerable sectors (De Leon & Pittock, 2017). Moreover, 
empirical evidence suggest that multiple levels of governments have 
divergent, often contradicting policy interests (Nabong et al., 2021) and 
that some adaptation projects have been marred by politics and con-
troversies which lead to maladaptation (See & Wilmsen, 2020, 2022). 
Moreover, ILK and practices related to climate change adaptation have 
continued to be sidelined in government programs and services (Cuaton 
& Su, 2020, 2023). For instance, structural protection measures through the use of modernist building technologies such as concrete and steel are 
being promoted by the development industry as viable “technologies to 
support climate change adaptation in developing Asia” (Asian Devel -
opment Bank, 2014, p. 1). However, scholars claim that these materials 
are energy intensive and emit high levels of greenhouse gases, whereas 
locally available, disaster-resilient and cost-efficient bamboo are 
underutilised (Zea Escamilla et al., 2016). 
We discuss two case studies from the Philippines. The first comes 
from the municipality of Basey, in the province of Samar. Comprised of 
51 barangays (villages) with a population of 55,480, Basey is prone to 
climate-related hazards such as typhoons and flooding (Cuaton & Su, 
2020). We specifically consider the experiences of the Mamanwas, a 
displaced Indigenous cultural community in the municipality 
(Kahambing, 2018). Key informant interviews were conducted with 
community members and social workers to explore how the Mamanwas 
utilise their ILK in adapting to climate change. This study is led by GPC, a 
non-Indigenous Filipino scholar and resident of Samar who has worked 
extensively with the Mamanwas since 2013. The second case study in-
terrogates the predominance of reinforced concrete as housing material 
used for building post-disaster houses across the country. Data is drawn 
from interviews conducted with representatives from a local non- 
government organisation (NGO) called ‘Base Bahay’ that employ alter-
native building materials in a number of typhoon-hit provinces of the 
country. The interviews explored the bamboo technology the NGO has 
developed, and the projects implemented in their partner communities. 
This study is led by PP, a Southern Tagalog region-born and raised 
Filipino scholar, who undertook fieldwork and explored the NGO’s op-
erations in Tacloban and Iloilo as part of his doctoral research project. 
4.Absences and Adaptations: Detailing the knowledges both 
overlooked and emerging 
In this section, we engage in two key analytical ‘moments’: one 
where we identify instances where institutions and groups have worked 
to silence, suppress, or render invisible locally based adaptation prac-
tices, and another where we articulate the diverse knowledges and 
practices the residents are already engaged in as part of their strategies 
in adapting to climate change. Drawing upon the DCAS framework 
discussed in Section 2, we identify at least two ways in which actors or 
institutions in our study sites have worked to omit ILK as well as the 
efforts in which communities are already engaged that push back against 
Eurocentric adaptation logics and approaches. It is important to note 
that while we discuss only two instances where ILKs are silenced and 
marginalised for each case study, there were actually many more in 
evidence. 
4.1. Absences and adaptation strategies in Nawi Village, Fiji 
Our first case study looks at how ILK, including climate adaptation 
practices, are integrated and amplified in the Fijian educational system 
as well as in the small villages like Nawi. Despite the vast amount of 
literature documenting the rich local knowledge and practices that Fi-
jians have in coping with weather extremes (McNamara & Prasad, 2014; 
Piggott-McKellar et al., 2021), the schools and the national educational 
system in Fiji are not structured to recognise, support, and nourish these 
ILKs and adaptation initiatives. Talanoa sessions with the local teachers 
revealed that there is a privileging of Eurocentric worldviews in Fiji’s 
education system which puts more emphasis on the teaching of math 
and science over ILK. This is consistent with the findings of other 
scholars like Verani-Norton (2021) and Cagivinaka (2016) who contend 
that traditional Fijian ILK are given little attention in existing higher 
education curriculum. Puamau (2021, p. 94) traces this to “the intro-
duction of formal schooling when the church and colonial government 
saw Indigenous knowledge systems as primitive and unworthy for in-
clusion” and continue until today. We argue that this has flow-on effects 
into the way that Nawi residents view traditional adaptation strategies J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
6and therefore find it unsurprising that ILK are rarely part of the school’s 
learning programmes. One of the teachers we interviewed shared: “we 
rarely teach traditional Fijian knowledge and practices to our students 
anymore. Not many schools do it because our focus is oriented to something 
else: to capacitate students with skills needed for employment in the global 
economy” (personal interview, 20 November 2020). 
This lack of consideration in teaching traditional Fijian ILK has 
adversely affected the understanding and beliefs of the youth. We 
observe that there is currently a lack of understanding and appreciation 
of ILK and adaptation strategies among them. For instance, an inter-
viewee mentioned that “only the elders believe in the traditional indicators 
for incoming cyclones that our ancestors previously relied upon such as the 
appearance of sea birds in the highlands or the building of nets by the wasps 
on lower tree branches.” (personal interview, 27 November 2020). 
Additionally, the head of the School of Humanities at the University of 
the South Pacific laments that the undervaluation of Fijian ILK has also 
resulted to “Pacific islanders being unable to use their own knowledge as 
a context of thinking… which has perpetuated the thinking that indig -
enous knowledge systems are not a worthwhile context for intellectual 
pursuits” (Puamau, 1999, p. 265). No wonder one of the teachers we 
interviewed remarked: 
“It is ironic how our youths lack in-depth knowledge and survival skills in 
cases of climate catastrophes. Their parents and grandparents used to be 
able to predict when tropical cyclones would come with great accuracy, 
and they knew where to get food and supplies even if the first help was 
months away after any disaster” (personal interview, 1 December 
2020). 
Aside from favouring Eurocentric worldviews in its education sys-
tem, we also observe that officials in Nawi tend to promote market- 
based solutions in responding to climate change. After the village 
chief passed away, his siblings signed a contract with a logging company 
to create income and make way for the construction of modern houses in 
Nawi. These houses were purported to be resilient against strong winds 
and flooding. This housing modernisation project involved logging (to 
pay for these houses and for income), clearing of vegetation, and 
destruction of the mangroves along the riverbank. Moreover, heavy 
industrial machines were used to level the ground to make way for the 
construction of the modern houses which had massive impacts to the 
original landscape. The project emanates from a capitalistic standpoint 
privileging economic growth. Some of the Nawi villagers thought that 
getting more money through the exploitation of their tropical rainforest 
will build their climate resilience and improve overall well-being, 
moving from economies of direct provision to economies based on sur-
plus extraction (Vunibola et al., 2022). Little did the residents know that 
the housing project will subsequently lead to disastrous impacts for them 
and their environment. Several residents of the modern houses have 
attested that they have become more vulnerable to climate hazards as 
the trees have fallen and the mangroves meant to protect them from king 
tides and floods were no longer around. Additionally, since the topsoil 
meant to support wild foods have been scraped off, people’s access to 
climate-resilient crops like wild tropical yams have also dwindled. 
Worse, other residents have also complained that tropical cyclones have 
started to destroy some of their totem plants which are of high cultural 
and spiritual significance. This is a clear example of a privileging of 
capitalist productivity as some of the village leaders have agreed to 
extractive industries in the pursuit of short-lived financial benefits while 
living with the destruction that this caused. 
Despite the production of absences as shown in the formal education 
system and the housing modernisation project, some of its residents, 
especially the elderly and village leaders, have been asserting and 
passing on their ILK to the younger generation. For example, Fiji’s ILK 
on coping with climate change are documented and passed on to the 
next generation through talanoa, stories, chants, myths, games, and 
performing arts. In addition, a program called ‘E da daravudravua e na del 
ani vutuniyau’ (We are poor while standing on riches) was implemented by one of the authors in 2017 as an initiative to ‘heal’ the land using the 
knowledge and skills of the Nawis’ ancestors (Vunibola & Scheyvens, 
2019). 
The ‘E da daravudravua e na del ani vutuniyau’ program has three 
component. First, a public awareness campaign was initiated to high-
light the role that ILK plays in planning for disasters. Second, the process 
of ‘healing the land’ was conducted by the village elders to address the 
devastation brought about by logging (Appendix 1). Indigenous agri-
cultural knowledge and techniques were used, such as invigorating 
topsoil by adding composted sea weeds and mangrove leaves, adding 
wood ash and burnt sea shells, and planting leguminous trees and grass. 
A food forest was subsequently created, including climate-resilient crops 
like wild yams, sweet potatoes, and si’au (a tree vegetable). Other 
domesticated crops, including cassava, yams, bananas, papayas, taro, 
and leafy vegetables, were also included, thriving within a multi- 
cropping environment that resembles their natural habitat. Third, 
mangroves were re-planted throughout the river through a children’s 
game called veiviri. This refers to the well-known past time of throwing 
mangrove seed pods onto the mud. The outcome of these games, played 
by kids and adults alike, aims to protect the river front from erosion, and 
thereby reduce the impact of flooding and landslide. The residents hope 
that these initiatives will help revitalise their Indigenous livelihood 
systems, protect their ecosystems, and build their resilience to climate 
change. 
4.2. Absences and adaptation strategies in Thai Binh, Vietnam 
Our second case study explores the different state and community- 
led adaptation strategies in the context of farming in Thai Binh, Viet-
nam. We observe a privileging of modernist development interventions 
in climate adaptation strategies by the Vietnamese government. One 
example is the promotion of scientific toolkits and protocols for man-
aging water irrigation systems that ignore the existing place-based 
knowledge and traditional, yet proven farming practices of local rice 
farmers. As climate change is expected to increase flooding, salt intru-
sion, and storm surges, good water management through proper control 
of sluice gates (a type of lock used to manage water flow and level, see 
Appendix 2) is increasingly becoming important for rice farmers 
growing in irrigated paddies (Mainuddin et al., 2021). In response, the 
local government has distributed decision-support tools meant to help 
residents manage the irrigation system (including sluice gates, pitches, 
pump station, and more). Local irrigation officers have been trained to 
use test kits or handy equipment to measure the constantly changing salt 
concentration of the river water before it gets into the local paddy fields 
and harms the young rice plants (if too saline). However, these toolkits 
do not have a user-friendly interface compared to the local irrigation 
practices that have been around for decades. Moreover, the introduced 
test kits are labour-intensive as they require officers to sink specific 
equipment for at least one minute in particular water layers (surface, 
middle, and bottom), then pull them up and record the numbers even at 
night. Irrigation officers consequently complained that these methods 
were confusing and difficult, and preferred to operate their sluice gates 
in traditional ways instead. 
We also note that some adaptation interventions in Thai Binh are 
framed around linear and modernist temporality and understandings of 
progress. For instance, several government interventions have been 
conducted to ‘accelerate’ and ‘modernise’ the harvest of rice plants so 
that farmers gain an extra winter cash crop during extreme weather 
events. As a result, farmers are encouraged to shorten the interval 
needed to prepare and clean their land so that they can harvest earlier. 
This entails foregoing their traditional farming practices which involve 
packing soil for two to three weeks, taking time to observe unwanted 
changes in the growth of rice plants and in the rice fields, and being 
attentive to the needs of non-human entities (e.g., insects, river, soil) 
that affect rice growth. Instead, farmers are now being forced to prepare 
their land in under two weeks, even if the residues, insects, and pests J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
7have not undergone natural composting. Consequently, this method can 
create inhabitable and poisonous conditions for the next round of rice 
plants, which are not vigorous enough to resist diseases. In 2017 this 
triggered an epidemic of Southern rice black-streaked dwarf virus, 
making Thai Binh farmers lose 70 % of their rice yield (Do & Dombroski, 
2022 ). An interviewee complained: 
“The earthworms, bacteria, and others are like us. They need time and 
appropriate conditions to do their jobs. The officials tried to blame the 
weather conditions for the development of this epidemic, but we don’t 
think so… If our rice plants could grow well, they could perhaps better 
resist the virus.” (personal interview, 3 November 2017). 
Amidst efforts to introduce modernist toolkits in managing water 
irrigation systems, several local farmers in Thai Binh have attempted to 
assert their local knowledges and adaptation practices in their own 
ways. A number of farmers have continued with their traditional prac-
tices that involved constant listening and communicating with the river, 
other non-human entities, and the sluice gates. For instance, in one of 
the conversations we had with a sluice controller in the Quoc Tuan 
commune of Thai Binh, he explained how he has been able to success -
fully control the sluice gates for over forty years and has no plans of 
letting go of this practice. By looking at the water ’s ebbs and flows based 
on the folk tide schedule, he has been able to make a near-accurate es-
timate of how long it would take for the salt water to reach his sluice 
gates. Additionally, netting specific varieties of shrimps or fishes at a 
particular spot in the river allows him to estimate how far away the salt 
water is from his hamlet. He can then set the time to appropriately open 
the sluice gate for getting fresh water and close it right before the saline 
water comes closer. This manual and traditional, yet time-tested 
method, ensures that there is enough fresh water for the local paddy 
fields in the dry season. 
The local farmers also continue to follow decades-old ILK in planting 
and growing rice despite the local authorities ’ efforts to replace them 
with modern methods. Their farming processes involve using their or-
dinary senses and their embodied knowledges accumulated over the 
years. For instance, they can see changes in soil texture, structure, and 
fertility through their sense of touch, such as a hard setting soil as an 
indicator of poor soil quality. They can even assess the acidity of the rice 
fields by looking at their fingernails after handling the soil (e.g., yellow 
indicates high acidity). Farmers then respond accordingly by adjusting 
their actions such as manually increasing soil organic matters to 
decrease hardsetting in soil and draining out current water then irri-
gating fresh water to decrease acidity levels. Aside from adapting their 
actions to the things they observe from around them, farmers also 
explicitly signify the importance of non-humans through their persis -
tence in practicing farming rituals such as the ‘Lễ cúng cơm lúa m˘o’i’. 
This custom involves farmers offering their first and fresh bowl of rice 
harvest to their ancestors and their gods to show their gratitude and 
mutual relationship with nature and other entities (Nguyen, 2011 ). By 
engaging attentively and bodily to the non-human worlds despite being 
labelled as superstitious, Thai Binh farmers are thus continuing on with 
their adaptation practices that are existing in their community for 
decades. 
4.3. Absences and adaptation strategies in Basey, Philippines 
Our third case study discusses the ways that the ILKs of the 
Mamanwas Indigenous peoples of Basey, Philippines have been mar-
ginalised and how these have nevertheless been retained, practiced, and 
passed on to the next generations. The Mamanwas as an Indigenous 
group claim to experience a silencing of their ILK when engaging with 
the non-Indigenous residents of the town. The Mamanwas consider 
themselves closely attached to their natural environment and sensitive 
to changes in their surroundings. They have developed weather moni -
toring systems that help them predict incoming storms, including 
Typhoon Haiyan, one of the most powerful typhoons to hit the Philippines in November 2013 which left 8,000 people dead or missing, 
and displaced at least four million residents (LeComte, 2014 ). One of the 
Mamanwas interviewed explained that two weeks prior to the arrival of 
Typhoon Haiyan, “our elders were given an omen by our gods that a 
dangerous and potentially deadly event will occur ” (personal interview, 10 
March 2019). This warning prompted them to build their kurob , a 
traditional hut that serves as protective shelter during typhoons. They 
also tried to warn other residents in the municipality about the 
impending typhoon, but they were only made fun of and ridiculed. The 
non-Indigenous residents claimed that they only believed what they 
heard it from the daily weather news report. This discriminatory expe-
rience heightened the Mamanwas ’ sense of distance towards other cul-
tural groups in the area, and increased their perception that they are 
discriminated against because of their ILK. According to one of the 
Mamanwas : 
“This unpleasant experience has prompted us to just focus on ourselves 
since sharing our ILK- which we value- is futile because most non- 
Indigenous residents just think of it as a joke” (personal interview, 10 
March 2019). 
While the Mamanwas readily blame the behaviour of non-Indigenous 
residents of Basey, we argue that these general preference for scientific 
knowledge over ILK on climate disasters is one of the ways in which 
coloniality has seeped through and proliferated in the daily lives of 
many Filipinos. 
Apart from a privileging of Eurocentric views that sidelines the 
Mamanwas ’ ILK, we also observe a strict formulation of linear time that 
associates the past as a discriminatory signifier of development delay 
within Basey. This is made evident by the rendering of Mamanwas ’ ILK 
and warning systems as backward and superstitious by the Disaster Risk 
Reduction and Management (DRRM) ‘experts ’ and ‘scientists ’ in both 
local (i.e., in Basey) and national government agencies (i.e. in Eastern 
Visayas). According to a disaster risk reduction officer, there have been 
multiple failed attempts in lobbying and integrating ILK in various local 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation dialogues and 
consultative meetings. He claims that only the ‘researchers ’ and ‘ex-
perts ’ from the national government are often heard during the quar-
terly meetings of the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management 
Interagency Technical Working Group (DRRM IATWG) of Eastern 
Visayas. He attests that the technical working group privileges ‘evi-
dence-based ’ and ‘scientific knowledge ’, labelling other forms of 
knowledge held by Indigenous people as ‘unreliable ’ and ‘old-school ’. 
He aptly pointed this argument by saying that: 
“it is as if Indigenous peoples ’ ILK in relation to DRRM and climate 
change are inferior or useless even though these knowledge systems have 
kept them safe from hazards for generations ” (personal interview, 27 
June 2020). 
However, despite the apparent underappreciation of alternative 
forms of knowledge, some community-led initiatives are present among 
the Mamanwas . These were born as reactions and a form of local resis-
tance to the privileging of Eurocentric and modernist solutions often 
promoted in climate adaptation policies and programmes in Basey. We 
will focus on two of these here. 
First is at the community level which focuses on the deliberate and 
active co-learning activities among elderly and young Mamanwas . Ac-
cording to their Chieftain, their Typhoon Haiyan experience and other 
hazards that followed it are the primary catalysts for prompting their 
community to share their knowledge actively. One elder said that: “It’s 
vital that we share our ILK to the young members of our community because 
hazards are becoming stronger and more frequent ” (personal interview, 10 
March 2019). The community learning activities are done twice a month 
in their communal hut (Appendix 3). They gather the youth and children 
to share their traditional knowledge such as how to read the movements 
of the wind and interpret the noises of insects and movements of animals 
which may signal impending hazards. They also share their ILK such as J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
8how to read the movements of the wind and interpret the noises of in-
sects and movements of animals which may signal impending hazards. 
They also share their Indigenous practice of hazard-induced evacuation 
and weather forecasting. As a subsistence farming community, they also 
have an Indigenous calendar that they follow in terms of planting and 
harvesting rice and other crops (Cuaton & Su, 2020) which they actively 
teach to young Mamanwa farmers. 
In this communal sharing of ILK, they also discuss the importance of 
their religious belief systems in interpreting catastrophic calamities. 
Banking on religious beliefs, Mamanwas consider catastrophic hazards 
as Magbabadja’s (a genderless God that controls the environment and 
people’s fate) warning and punishment for humanity’s multiple and 
unbearable sins, such as never-ending human conflicts and increasing 
environmental degradation, among others. These disastrous events, they 
believe, serve as reminders to repent for these sins and to live a better 
life that balances the use of natural resources for human’s daily needs 
and the protection of the environment for human’s continuous survival 
in the future. The elders shared that these lessons are integrated into 
their members’ everyday lives through the “way they live”- for example, 
their peaceful and strong bonding ties (Cuaton & Su, 2023), and their 
practice of just taking or consuming enough so that others may also be 
able to live and survive (Cuaton & Su, 2020). 
At the national level, social workers from the Department of Social 
Welfare and Development (DSWD) have devised ways to integrate 
Mamanwas’ ILK into their programmes. For example, the Family 
Development Officer of DSWD has shared that their office has made 
efforts to document some of the Mamanwas’ ILK particularly those 
involved in predicting local weather patterns. Additionally, following 
their experience from typhoon Haiyan, Mamanwas have been actively 
and consciously co-producing learning activities together with the other 
Indigenous groups of the Eastern Visayas region. These groups are 
involved in the co-creation of the ‘Community and Family Development 
Module for Indigenous Peoples (IPs)’ under the Pantawid Pamilyang 
Pilipino Program (4Ps) of the Philippine government. This module is 
written in local and Indigenous languages and consists of general and 
overlapping topics on human rights, Indigenous peoples’ rights, chil-
dren’s rights and health, and children’s protection in times of emer -
gencies and hazards. The local social workers in Eastern Visayas have 
integrated some of the climate change-related traditional knowledges of 
Indigenous groups in this Learning Module. 
4.4. Absences and adaptive strategies in Philippine Post-Disaster housing 
Our fourth case study interrogates to what extent local and tradi-
tional materials like bamboo have been used in post-disaster housing 
projects in the Philippines. We observe that there is a widespread 
privileging of reinforced concrete for building typhoon-resilient houses 
across the Philippines (Venable et al., 2020). Modern concrete is 
considered a go-to construction material because it is seen as strong and 
durable, while plant-based materials are outright thought to be inferior 
because they are prone to deterioration from moisture and pest attacks 
(Mehta & Monteiro, 2006). For example, Venable et al. (2020) argue 
that many Filipino families from typhoon-affected provinces perceive 
that their shelter is safe from typhoons if they are built with concrete and 
less secure if they are made with wooden materials and other plant- 
based inputs like coconut lumber and woven bamboo. Yet evidence is 
increasingly supporting traditional construction as ideal because it 
makes the ethical negotiations around them visible and helps make 
Indigenous building skills and techniques become active and accessible 
for future generations to cultivate (Gibson-Graham et al., 2016). 
Aside from privileging concrete, the Philippine post-disaster housing 
as a sector is marked by linear imperatives of temporality and progress. 
The Philippines has a long history of building houses with Indigenous 
plant-based materials (e.g., nipa, cogon, bamboo), but this practice had 
begun to change during colonial occupation (Lico, 2008). The Spanish 
colonisers saw plant-based materials as a fire hazard especially in dense urban areas and had to be separated from structures made from stone 
(Huetz de Lemps, 1998). The Spaniards then introduced the bahay na 
bato (stone house) architecture. Its lower floor was made with masonry 
stones to create a strong base against earthquakes and to address the 
concerns related to the flammability of light materials, while the upper 
floor enrolled timber and other plant-based inputs (Lico, 2008). These 
houses were mainly owned by Filipino elites while ordinary families live 
in traditional bahay kubo (Nipa Hut). During the American colonial 
years, modern building materials such as steel-reinforced concrete 
became in fashion. Government buildings, schools, and commercial 
spaces were built using concrete, materialising a kind of American 
modernity based on the US benevolent assimilation policy (Lico, 2008). 
Up until today, Jimenez and Natividad (2019, p. 21) contend that 
bamboo is only widely used in rural agricultural areas and are 
commonly considered as a ‘poor man’s timber’. 
The priority given to concrete over light materials such as bamboo 
contributes to a host of environmental concerns related to its heavy 
embodied energy and highly extractive nature of production. Cement 
production uses as much as 9 % of global industrial energy (Richards & 
Agranovski, 2015) and emits from about 5 % to 7 % of global carbon 
emissions (Li et al., 2013). Concrete also requires the mining of other 
mineral inputs (e.g., silica, iron, alumina, gypsum, and lime for cement 
manufacturing; aggregate such as sand and gravel to strengthen con-
crete and provide volume stability; and iron ore and coal for 
manufacturing steel reinforcement) (Mindess et al., 2003). The unsus -
tainable intensification and expansion of quarries also contribute to the 
decline of arable lands and forested areas, losing their potential of 
functioning as a carbon sink (Akanwa et al., 2017). Concrete is rein-
forced with steel to make it stronger, but this process does not make it 
immune to damage. Without proper repair and maintenance, steel 
reinforcement is prone to corrosion and the build-up of rust and iron 
oxide in the material can contribute to concrete cracking (Mehta & 
Monteiro, 2006). The production of concrete is also implicated in pre-
carious and often illegal artisanal and small-scale mining of construction 
stones (Placino & Gibson, 2022). We assert that a climate-adaptive 
building design must not only consider the material inputs and struc-
ture of a building, but also the broader economic and ecological con-
nections they make along the upstream and downstream supply chain, 
thus putting front-and-centre the socio-technical dimensions of climate- 
adaptive construction designs. 
To help push back against the domination of concrete in disaster- 
resilient housing, an NGO called Base Bahay has begun redefining op-
portunities from bamboo’s material properties and mainstreaming its 
benefits. Through the Base Innovation Center, local builders, some of 
which are actual recipients of their housing project, were trained in 
building with bamboo (i.e., Bambusa Blumeana [kawayang tinik] and 
Dentrocalamus Asper [botong or giant bamboo]) as structural frames for 
walls and roof (Ong, 2021). In the process, bamboo’s good quality 
tensile strength becomes highlighted as comparable to wood and steel 
(Hebel et al., 2015). In particular, Base Bahay has engineered their 
bamboo frames to provide flexibility and strength against typhoon 
winds of about 220 km per hour and 6.4 magnitude earthquake (Base 
Bahay, n.d.). The bamboo frames are encased in a metallic mesh and 
covered with thin layer of cement plaster to help protect them from the 
rain. They are also elevated from the ground using a concrete foundation 
to prevent flood and soil moisture seeping in. As of 2016, 226 units (52 
in Metro Manila, 94 in Iloilo, 77 in Tacloban, and 3 test houses in Albay) 
for at least 147 families had been built by the organisation (Hilti 
Foundation, n.d.). Base Bahay also ensures that their local partners have 
been consulted about the design of the cement-bamboo frame housing so 
that the latter is made capable to undertake repair and maintenance of 
their houses in the long-term (Base Bahay, n.d.). This socio-technical 
intervention and other similar building innovations have helped push 
the building governance in the Philippines to become responsive in 
accrediting them as an alternative to mainstream house building system 
and in promoting the viability and adoption of these new technologies J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
9for future low-cost housing projects (National Housing Authority, 2021). 
Lastly, Base Bahay helps combat the progressivist mode of futurity in 
Philippine post-disaster housing by making bamboo more relevant to the 
needs of contemporary Filipino households. They help ensure that the 
cultivation of bamboo does not only contribute to the building industry 
but also become responsive to the livelihoods of both humans and Earth 
others. They emphasise the opportunities for the local economy of 
bamboo, being abundant and fast growing in tropical countries like the 
Philippines (Roxas, 2012). The use of bamboo helps in lessening the 
amount of imported steel to be used in buildings, thus lowering the cost 
from such an expensive material (Hebel et al., 2015). The bamboo stems 
(culms) enrolled in building Base Bahay projects are planted by farming 
communities in Batangas and Negros Occidental. Bamboo cultivation in 
these areas create additional livelihoods and therefore source of income 
for workers, such as those who dry and treat/process the bamboo culms 
to avoid insect infestation and moulding. In addition, bamboo forests 
serve as a carbon sink, help mitigate soil erosion, and provide a habitat 
for different species (Yuen et al., 2017). In this example, bamboo in-
novations, such as the way it was utilised by Base Bahay, act as versatile 
building material that decentres a singularity of steel-reinforced con-
crete construction in local Philippines housing industry. Lastly, bamboo 
also acts as a generator of diverse livelihoods for both humans and Earth 
others as an approach for building sustainably and equitably in a 
climate-changing world. 
5.Discussion and conclusion 
This paper engages in a reframing of climate change adaptation, 
drawing on the lived experiences of our case study communities in Fiji, 
Vietnam, and the Philippines. It seeks to contribute to DCAS, an 
“ongoing ethical and political project that seeks to analyse and rethink 
the world from the perspective of Indigenous and other colonised peo-
ples” (Johnson et al., 2021, p. 4). The paper involves two key analytical 
‘moments’: one where it identifies instances where institutions and 
groups have worked to silence, suppress, or render invisible locally 
based adaptation practices, and another where it articulates diverse 
knowledges and practices the residents are already engaged in to adapt 
to climate change. In doing so, we attempt to respond to Tuck and 
Yang’s (2012) call to move beyond the metaphorical use of the term 
‘decolonisation’ by foregrounding the many place-based approaches 
that are often overlooked and downplayed within mainstream climate 
adaptation scholarship. 
Our four case studies highlight how ILK and relationships with other 
species and ecosystems tend to be overlooked and suppressed in adap-
tation policy and practice. We see three different monocultures or pro-
cesses that contribute to this omission: (1) privileging mainstream and 
scientific ways of knowing, (2) linear and progressivist timelines that 
associate the future with progress, and (3) pursuit of growth and market 
driven responses to climate change. We provide a summary of the 
different types of silencing encountered across our case studies that 
contribute to the marginalisation of ontologies and epistemologies of the Global South (Table 1). 
We observe a theme running through the four case studies based on 
concrete, not only as an infrastructure but also as a metaphor for the 
rigidity and fixity of mainstream approaches to adaptation that depend 
on Eurocentric knowledge systems alone. We not only see the prolifer -
ation of concrete-based infrastructure such as those in the modern 
houses in Fiji or in the post-disaster houses in the Philippines; we also 
see a preference given to concrete knowing such as the promotion of 
scientific toolkits for managing irrigation systems in Thai Binh and for 
making weather predictions for the non-Indigenous neighbours of the 
Mamanwas in Samar. We argue that adaptation strategies that mainly 
rely on Eurocentric and modernist rationalities tend to favour concrete 
infrastructures and concrete forms of knowing, and that these do not 
work well with the current uncertainties of future climate change 
impacts. 
Such pre-occupation with concrete leads to the suppression of ILK 
and adaptation strategies, which in turn, results to increased vulnera -
bilities and marginalisation of our case study communities. For instance, 
the building of modern houses to flood-proof Nawi village in Fiji has 
resulted to more flooding and the eventual destruction of totem plants 
that have high cultural and spiritual significance. In Thai Binh, local 
authorities’ efforts to promote aggressive farming techniques eventually 
led to an increase in the incidence of plant disease and a decrease in 
farmers’ yield. In Basey, the Mamanwas are looked down upon and 
disrespected for their traditional beliefs, resulting to their disenfran -
chisement, and perception of being left out of the wider community. 
These lived experiences suggest that some of the adaptation-related and 
development-oriented interventions meant to assist local communities 
are, in fact, creating new or exacerbating their pre-existing vulnerabil -
ities to climate and hazard risks. 
However, in this research, we go beyond framing our case study 
communities as helpless victims of climate risks. Our case studies 
illustrate Indigenous and local people’s agency — that there are diverse 
ways in which they understand, manage, and respond to climate change. 
We find that communities are attempting to shape policy and planning 
responses to climate change. For instance, Thai Binh farmers continue to 
follow decades-old ILK in planting and growing rice despite attempts of 
local authorities to introduce modern farming techniques. Similarly, 
Base Bahay is working to revolutionise housing construction in the 
Philippines by actively promoting the benefits of using bamboo as a 
mainstream construction material. Its efforts are starting to bear fruit as 
bamboo has recently been accredited by the national government as one 
of the reliable and sustainable building materials in the country. These 
examples contest existing framings of vulnerability in the literature and 
instead assert people’s resilience and adaptive capacities that draw upon 
ILK, practices, and materials (Makondo & Thomas, 2018; Nursey-Bray 
et al., 2020). 
In addition, our findings challenge popular discourses that dismiss 
traditional and Indigenous forms of adaptation as backward and inef-
fective (Smith, 2007). We stress that people’s ILK are actually assets that 
assist them in better adapting to climate change. For example, the 
Table 1 
Summary of the absences experienced and the adaptation initiatives of local communities across the four case study sites.  
Case Study Types of Absences Emergences 
1: Nawi Village, Fiji Undervaluation of ILK and adaptation 
strategies in the formal education 
system Prioritisation of growth oriented and 
market driven solutions Passing on local knowledge through various mediums (talanoa, chants, 
stories, etc.); ‘Healing the Land’; Re-planting trees and mangroves  
2: Thai Binh, 
Vietnam Promotion of scientific toolkits for 
managing water irrigation systems Regarding traditional farming practices 
as underdeveloped and backward Asserting traditional water irrigation practices; Being sensitive and 
attentive to non-humans and other entities; Continuing the practice of 
cultural rituals 
3: Basey, 
Philippines Privileging scientific and evidence- 
based ways of knowing Rendering ILK as superstitious and 
unreliable Inter-generational community learning activities; Sharing of 
traditional ecological knowledges; Integration of Indigenous 
perspectives into local government programmes 
4: Post-Disaster 
Housing, 
Philippines Preference for concrete in post- 
disaster housing Seeing traditional housing materials, 
such as bamboo, as inferior and of lower 
quality Promotion and incorporation of bamboo in Base Bahay’s housing 
projects; Advocating for the accreditation of bamboo in government 
housing projects; Innovating construction applications of bamboo  J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
10traditional weather monitoring system of the Mamanwas in Basey helped 
them prepare for typhoon Haiyan weeks before it hit their community. 
Moreover, Indigenous agricultural knowledge and techniques among 
the residents of Nawi did not only heal their land from the adverse ef-
fects of logging, but they also helped cultivate and grow climate resilient 
crops. These empirical examples and lived experiences of our case study 
communities support the marginal, yet critical and vital body of schol -
arly works that assert the value of ILK, and ways they help societies 
adapt and thrive in a wide range of environmental risks and hazards 
(Ford et al., 2020; McNamara & Prasad, 2014 ). 
Finally, our empirical findings highlight that there is more to climate 
change adaptation apart from its technocratic, concrete-oriented, and 
‘science ’-dominated framings. In this paper, we show that effective 
adaptation strategies can also emanate from unexpected and peculiar, 
yet ‘working ’ practices, such as being attentive and responsive to other 
species and ecological processes (as shown in Thai Binh, Vietnam), or 
through a children ’s game of throwing mangrove seed pods into the 
river (as shown in Nawi, Fiji), or by living simply as inculcated by the 
Mamanwa elders to their children (as shown in Basey, Philippines). We 
stress that a decolonial approach to climate adaptation moves away 
from needing concrete(ness) to listening and adapting with awareness 
and openness to other forms of knowing and being (Cameron et al., 
2014; Hill, 2014 ). Like Lopes et al. (2018) , we contend that there is a 
need to focus less on hard infrastructures or modernist devel -
opmentalism and to hone in more on inventorying and building on the 
diverse range of adaptation strategies that already exist within 
communities. 
In summary, there is much to learn from traditional and Indigenous 
approaches to climate change adaptation in the Global South particu -
larly in terms of adaptive practices, materials, and dispositions that 
resist the concrete – both literally and metaphorically. We identify three 
lessons that our case studies offer for the adaptation industry. First is the 
need to recognise that the legacies of imperial violence from colonial 
eras live on (Sultana, 2022 ) and that promoting recovery and healing 
from on-going systemic injustices is critical. Second is the need to 
highlight the important role that ILK play in facilitating peoples ’ adap-
tive capacities to climate change. More effective adaptation plans and 
policies can be generated from diverse epistemologies, ontologies, and 
approaches (Goldman et al., 2018 ). Third is the need to go beyond 
technical fixes that limit our imagination and narrow potential adap-
tation responses (Nightingale et al., 2020 ). A greater exploration of 
diverse pathways to adaptation that create openings for alternative 
possibilities is urgently needed. Moving forward, we believe that there 
ought to be a place for learning from such traditional and Indigenous knowledges and practices to guide climate change adaptations, not just 
in these communities but more broadly. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Justin See: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original 
draft, Writing – review & editing. Ginbert Permejo Cuaton: Formal 
analysis, Methodology, Validation, Writing – original draft, Writing – 
review & editing. Pryor Placino: Formal analysis, Methodology, Vali-
dation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Suliasi 
Vunibola: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, 
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Huong Do Thi: 
Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation, Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. Kelly Dombroski: Conceptualization, 
Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
Katharine McKinnon: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing – 
original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the organisers and participants of 
the Liviana II Online Conference for the opportunity to connect and 
share our current research on climate change adaptation. We are also 
grateful to the members of Community Economies Research Network 
(CERN) and CERN-Asia for the valuable comments and feedback. The 
authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for the 
helpful feedback on an earlier draft. 
Funding 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.  
Appendices 
 
J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
11Appendix 1: A photo taken of ‘Healing the Land ’ programme showing tei veicurumaki (multicropping farming technique) in Nawi, Fiji 
Source: SV. 
  
Appendix 2: Some of the sluice gates in Thai Binh, Vietnam 
Source: HTD. 
Appendix 3: A communal hut of the Mamanwas in Basey, Philippines 
Source: GPC. 
References 
Adam, B. (1998). Timescapes of modernity: The environment and invisible hazards . 
Routledge, 10.4324/9780203981382 . 
Akanwa, A. O., Okeke, F. I., Nnodu, V. C., & Iortyom, E. T. (2017). Quarrying and its 
effect on vegetation cover for a sustainable development using high-resolution 
satellite image and GIS. Environmental earth sciences, 76(14), 1–12. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s12665-017-6844-x 
Akıncı, Z. S., Bilgen, A., Casellas, A., & Jongerden, J. (2020). Development through 
design: Knowledge, power, and absences in the making of southeastern Turkey. 
Geoforum, 114, 181–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2020.06.011 
Asian Development Bank. (2014). Technologies to Support Climate Change Adaptation in 
Developing Asia. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/149400/ 
technologies-climate-change-adaptation.pdf. 
Atteridge, A., & Remling, E. (2018). Is adaptation reducing vulnerability or redistributing 
it? Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. Climate Change, 9(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/wcc.500 
Bankoff, G. (2001). Rendering the world unsafe: ‘Vulnerability ’ as western discourse. 
Disasters, 25(1), 19–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-7717.00159 
Bankoff, G. (2019). Remaking the world in our own image: Vulnerability, resilience and 
adaptation as historical discourses. Disasters, 43(2), 221–239. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/disa.12312 
Base Bahay. (n.d.). Socialized housing made sustainable. [PowerPoint Slides] . 
Bastian, M. (2009). Inventing nature: re-writing time and agency in a more-than-human 
world. Australian Humanities Review, 47(47), 99–116. https://doi.org/10.22459/ 
AHR.47.2009.10 
Bennett, H. (2014). Health and equity impacts of climate change in Aotearoa-New 
Zealand, and health gains from climate action. New Zealand Medical Journal, 127 
(1406), 16–31. Bond, P. (2012). Politics of climate justice: Paralysis above, movement below . University of 
Kwazulu-Natal Press .  
Bordner, A. S., Ferguson, C. E., & Ortolano, L. (2020). Colonial dynamics limit climate 
adaptation in Oceania: Perspectives from the Marshall Islands. Global Environmental 
Change, 61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102054 , 102054-102010. 
Bruun, J. A. (2018). Climate changing civil society: the role of value and knowledge in 
designing the Green Climate Fund. In S. Bracking, A. Fredriksen, S. Sullivan, & 
P. Woodhouse (Eds.), Valuing Development, Environment and Conservation: Creating 
Values that Matter . Routledge. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.4324/ 
9781315113463 . 
Cagivinaka, V. (2016). Reorienting education and indigenous Fijian ecological 
knowledge: An analysis of indigenous Fijian students ’ traditional ecological 
knowledge of environmental sustainable practices. International Journal of 
Educational Research and Development, 5(1), 10–18. 
Cameron, E. S. (2012). Securing Indigenous politics: A critique of the vulnerability and 
adaptation approach to the human dimensions of climate change in the Canadian 
Arctic. Global Environmental Change, 22(1), 103–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
gloenvcha.2011.11.004 
Cameron, J., Gibson, K., & Hill, A. (2014). Cultivating hybrid collectives: Research 
methods for enacting community food economies in Australia and the Philippines. 
Local Environment, 19(1), 118–132. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13549839.2013.855892 
Chapman, A. D., Darby, S. E., Hồng, H. M., Tompkins, E. L., & Van, T. P. D. (2016). 
Adaptation and development trade-offs: Fluvial sediment deposition and the 
sustainability of rice-cropping in An Giang Province, Mekong Delta. Climatic Change, 
137(3–4), 593–608. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1684-3 
Chisholm Hatfield, S., Marino, E., Whyte, K. P., Dello, K. D., & Mote, P. W. (2018). Indian 
time: Time, seasonality, and culture in Traditional Ecological Knowledge of climate 
change. Ecological Processes, 7(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13717-018-0136- 
6 J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
12Christoplos, I., Ngoan, L. D., Sen, L. T. H., Huong, N. T. T., & Lindegaard, L. S. (2017). 
The evolving local social contract for managing climate and disaster risk in Vietnam. 
Disasters, 41(3), 448–467. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12215 
Climate Change Commission of the Philippines. (2011). National Climate Change Action 
Plan (NCCAP) 2011-2028. https://climate.emb.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2016/ 
06/NCCAP-1.pdf. 
Cooper, F. (1997). Modernizing bureaucrats, backward Africans, and the development 
concept. In International development and the social sciences: Essays on the history and 
politics of knowledge (pp. 64–92). 
Cuaton, G. P., & Su, Y. (2020). Local-indigenous knowledge on disaster risk reduction: 
Insights from the Mamanwa indigenous peoples in Basey, Samar after Typhoon 
Haiyan in the Philippines. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 48, Article 
101596. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101596 
Cuaton, G. P., & Su, Y. (2023). Potentials and pitfalls of social capital ties to climate 
change adaptation: An exploratory study of Indigenous Peoples in the Philippines. 
Third World Quarterly, 44(7), 1565–1585. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
01436597.2023.2197204 
Dados, N., & Connell, R. (2012). The Global South. Contexts, 11(1), 12–13. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1536504212436479 
Davison, A. (2015). Beyond the Mirrored Horizon: Modern Ontology and Amodern 
Possibilities in the Anthropocene: Beyond the Mirrored Horizon. Geographical 
Research, 53(3), 298–305. https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-5871.12123 
De Leon, E. G., & Pittock, J. (2017). Integrating climate change adaptation and climate- 
related disaster risk-reduction policy in developing countries: A case study in the 
Philippines. Climate and Development, 9(5), 471–478. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17565529.2016.1174659 
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. (2011). The report on operation of the 
agriculture and rural development sector in 2011, and directions and tasks for 2012 in 
Thai Binh province. 
Deranger, E. T., Sinclair, R., Gray, B., McGregor, D., & Gobby, J. (2022). Decolonizing 
Climate Research and Policy: Making space to tell our own stories, in our own ways. 
Community Development Journal, 57(1), 52–73. https://doi.org/10.1093/cdj/ 
bsab050 
Do, T. H., & Dombroski, K. (2022). Diverse more-than-human approaches to climate 
change adaptation in Thai Binh, Vietnam. Asia Pacific Viewpoint, 1–15. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/apv.12329 
Dombroski, K., & Thi Do, H. (2019). The affect of effect: Affirmative political ecologies in 
monitoring climate change adaptation interventions. Nordia Geographical 
Publications, 47(5). 
Eriksen, S., Schipper, E. L. F., Scoville-Simonds, M., Vincent, K., Adam, H. N., Brooks, N., 
… West, J. J. (2021). Adaptation interventions and their effect on vulnerability in 
developing countries: Help, hindrance or irrelevance? World Development, 141, 
Article 105383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105383 
Escobar, A. (1995). Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third 
World. Princeton University Press.  
Escobar, A. (2018). Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, Autonomy, and the 
Making of Worlds. Duke University Press.  
Escobar, A. (2020). Pluriversal Politics: The Real and the Possible. Duke University Press.  
Farrelly, T., & Nabobo-Baba, U. (2014). Talanoa as empathic apprenticeship. Asia Pacific 
Viewpoint, 55(3), 319–330. https://doi.org/10.1111/apv.12060 
Fisher, S. (2015). The emerging geographies of climate justice. Geographical Journal, 181 
(1), 73–82. https://doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12078 
Ford, J. D., King, N., Galappaththi, E. K., Pearce, T., McDowell, G., & Harper, S. L. 
(2020). The resilience of indigenous peoples to environmental change. One Earth 
(Cambridge, Mass.), 2(6), 532–543. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.05.014 
Gaillard, J. C. (2010). Vulnerability, capacity and resilience: Perspectives for climate and 
development policy. Journal of International Development, 22(2), 218–232. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/jid.1675 (Journal of International Development) 
Gaillard, J. C. (2019). Disaster studies inside out. Disasters, 43(S1), S7–S17. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/disa.12323 
Gaillard, J. C., Sanz, K., Balgos, B. C., Dalisay, S. N. M., Gorman-Murray, A., Smith, F., … 
a.. (2017). Beyond men and women: A critical perspective on gender and disaster. 
Disasters, 41(3), 429–447. https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12209 
Gibson, K., & Hill, A. (2022). Living with flux in the Philippines: Negotiating collective 
well-being and disaster recovery. Asia Pacific Viewpoint, 63(1), 126–137. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/apv.12334 
Gibson-Graham, J. K. (1996). The End of Capitalism (as we knew it): A Feminist Critique of 
Political Economy. Blackwell Publishers.  
Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2006). A Postcapitalist Politics. University of Minnesota Press.  
Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2008). Diverse economies: Performative practices for other 
worlds. Progress in Human Geography, 32(5), 613–632. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0309132508090821 
Gibson-Graham, J. K., Cameron, J., & Healy, S. (2013). Take Back the Economy: An 
Ethical Guide for Transforming Our Communities. University of Minnesota Press. 
https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816676064.001.0001 
Gibson-Graham, J. K., Hill, A., & Law, L. (2016). Re-embedding economies in ecologies: 
Resilience building in more than human communities. Building Research and 
Information : The International Journal Of Research, Development And Demonstration, 
44(7), 703–716. https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2016.1213059 
Gibson-Graham, J. K. (2005). Surplus Possibilities: Postdevelopment and Community 
Economies. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, 26(1), 4–26. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/j.0129-7619.2005.00198.x 
Goldman, M. J., Turner, M. D., & Daly, M. (2018). A critical political ecology of human 
dimensions of climate change: Epistemology, ontology, and ethics. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews. Climate Change, 9(4), e526-n/a. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
wcc.526 Grosfoguel, R. (2009). A decolonial approach to political-economy: Transmodernity, 
border thinking and global coloniality. Kult, 6(1), 10–38. 
Hebel, D. E., Heisel, F., Javadian, A., Wielopolski, M., & Schlesier, K. (2015). 
Constructing bamboo: Introducing an alternative for the construction industry. FCL 
Magazine Special Issue, 10–21. 
Hill, A. (2014). Moving from “matters of fact” to “matters of concern” in order to grow 
economic food futures in the Anthropocene. Agriculture and Human Values, 32(3), 
551–563. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-014-9576-5 
Hilti Foundation. (n.d.). Social responsibility—for a strong society. . http://www.hilti- 
companyreport-2015.com/en/social-responsibility. 
Howitt, R. (2020). Decolonizing People, Place and Country: Nurturing Resilience across 
Time and Space. Sustainability (Basel, Switzerland), 12(15), 5882. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/su12155882 
Huetz de Lemps, X. (1998). Materiales ligeros vs. materiales fuertes: The conflict 
between nipa huts and stone buildings in 19th-century Manila. The Philippine 
revolution and beyond: Papers from the international conference on the centennial of the 
1896 Philippine Revolution (Vol. 1,, 160–172. 
Ireland, P., & McKinnon, K. (2013). Strategic localism for an uncertain world: A 
postdevelopment approach to climate change adaptation. Geoforum, 47, 158–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.01.005 
Janca, A., & Bullen, C. (2003). The Aboriginal concept of time and its mental health 
implications. Australasian Psychiatry : Bulletin of the Royal Australian and New Zealand 
College of Psychiatrists, 11(s1), S40–S44. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1038- 
5282.2003.02009.x 
Jimenez, J. J. P., & Natividad, R. A. (2019). Development of Arc-Laminated Bamboo 
Lumber. Philippine Journal of Science, 148(1), 21–31. 
Johnson, D. E., Parsons, M., & Fisher, K. (2021). Indigenous climate change adaptation: 
New directions for emerging scholarship. Environment and Planning. E, Nature and 
Space. https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486211022450, 251484862110224 (Print). 
Jose, A. M., & Cruz, N. A. (1999). Climate change impacts and responses in the 
Philippines: Water resources. Climate Research, 12(2–3), 77–84. 
Kahambing, J. (2018). Diaspora as vanishing mediator: Emancipation of identity for the 
Mamanuas of Basey, Samar. Philippines and Asian Studies: Expositions, Explorations, 
and Expectations, 183–200. 
Khadka, A., Li, C. J., Stanis, S. W., & Morgan, M. (2021). Unpacking the power of place- 
based education in climate change communication. Applied Environmental Education 
and Communication, 20(1), 77–91. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
1533015X.2020.1719238 
Lagi, R., Veisa, F., Robaigau, A., Laupepa, S., Raisele, K., & Waqailiti, L. (2022). Climate 
change in higher education in Fiji: a literature review. Transforming Universities for a 
Changing Climate, Working Paper Series No. 9., Issue. http://repository.usp.ac.fj/ 
13952/. 
Lagi, R., Waqailiti, L., Raisele, K., Tyson, L. S., & Nussey, C. (2023). ‘Curui’: Weaving 
climate justice and gender equality into Fijian educational policies and practices. 
Comparative Education, 59(2), 305–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
03050068.2023.2188370 
LeComte, D. (2014). International weather highlights 2013: Super typhoon Haiyan, super 
heat in Australia and China, a long winter in Europe. Weatherwise, 67(3), 20–27. 
Li, J., Tharakan, P., Macdonald, D., & Liang, X. (2013). Technological, economic and 
financial prospects of carbon dioxide capture in the cement industry. Energy Policy, 
61, 1377–1387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.082 
Lico, G. (2008). Arkitekturang Filipino: A history of architecture and urbanism in the 
Philippines. University of the Philippines Press.  
Lindegaard, L. S. (2018). Adaptation as a political arena: Interrogating sedentarization as 
climate change adaptation in Central Vietnam. Global Environmental Change, 49, 
166–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.02.012 
Lopes, A. M., Healy, S., Power, E., Crabtree, L., & Gibson, K. (2018). Infrastructures of 
Care: Opening up “Home” as Commons in a Hot City. Human Ecology Review, 24(2), 
41–60. https://doi.org/10.22459/HER.24.02.2018.03 
Mainuddin, M., Karim, F., Gaydon, D. S., & Kirby, J. M. (2021). Impact of climate change 
and management strategies on water and salt balance of the polders and islands in 
the Ganges delta. Scientific reports, 11(1), 7041. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 
021-86206-1 
Makondo, C. C., & Thomas, D. S. G. (2018). Climate change adaptation: Linking 
indigenous knowledge with western science for effective adaptation. Environmental 
Science & Policy, 88, 83–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.06.014 
Mbah, M., Ajaps, S., & Molthan-Hill, P. (2021). A systematic review of the deployment of 
indigenous knowledge systems towards climate change adaptation in developing 
world contexts: Implications for climate change education. Sustainability, 13(9). 
McGregor, D. (2021). Indigenous Knowledge Systems in Environmental Governance in 
Canada. KULA, 5(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.18357/kula.148 
McNamara, K. E., & Prasad, S. S. (2014). Coping with extreme weather: Communities in 
Fiji and Vanuatu share their experiences and knowledge. Climatic Change, 123(2), 
121–132. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-1047-2 
Mehta, P. K., & Monteiro, J. M. (2006). Concrete: Microstructure, properties, and materials 
((3rd edition)). McGraw-Hill.  
Mercier, O. R. (2020). What is decolonisation? In R. Kiddle, M. Jackson, B. Elkington, 
O. R. Mercier, M. Ross, J. Smeaton, & A. Thomas (Eds.), Imagining decolonisation (pp. 
40–82). Bridget Williams Books.  
Mignolo, W. D. (2018). What does it mean to decolonize? In C. E. Walsh, & 
W. D. Mignolo (Eds.), On decoloniality: Concepts, analytics, praxis (pp. 105–134). 
Duke University.  
Mikulewicz, M. (2020). The discursive politics of adaptation to climate change. Annals of 
the American Association of Geographers, 110(6), 1807–1830. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/24694452.2020.1736981 J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
World Development 176 (2024) 106503
13Mikulewicz, M., & Taylor, M. (2020). Getting the Resilience Right: Climate Change and 
Development Policy in the ’African Age’. New Political Economy, 25(4), 626–641. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2019.1625317 
Mindess, S., Young, J. F., & Darwin, D. (2003). Concrete (2nd ed.). Pearson Education .  
Nabong, E. C., Whiteford, L. M., Arias, M. E., & Mihelcic, J. R. (2021). Climate change 
adaptation priority strategies in the Philippines: differences between local 
government decision makers and marginalized coastal communities. Environmental 
Engineering Science, 38(5), 367–376. https://doi.org/10.1089/ees.2020.0285 
Natcher, D. C., Huntington, O., Huntington, H., Chapin, F. S., Trainor, S. F., DeWilde, L., 
& o.. (2007). Notions of Time and Sentience: Methodological Considerations for 
Arctic Climate Change Research. Arctic anthropology, 44(2), 113–126. https://doi. 
org/10.1353/arc.2011.0099 
National Housing Authority. (2021). Manual Manual on Accreditation of Innovative 
Technologies for Housing (AITECH) . 
Nguyen, K. X. (2011). Tín ng u’~ong lúa n u’ ˘o’c vùng đkaˇất tổ. Faiths in wet rice farming in the 
father land. Times Publishing House .  
Nichols, A. (2019). Climate change, natural hazards, and relocation: Insights from 
Nabukadra and Navuniivi villages in Fiji. Climatic Change, 156(1), 255–271. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02531-5 
Nightingale, A., Eriksen, S., Taylor, M., Forsyth, T., Pelling, M., Newsham, A., … 
Whitfield, S. (2020). Beyond technical fixes: Climate solutions and the great 
derangement. Climate and Development, 12(4), 343–352. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17565529.2019.1624495 
Nursey-Bray, M., Palmer, R., Stuart, A., Arbon, V., & Rigney, L.-I. (2020). Scale, 
colonisation and adapting to climate change: Insights from the Arabana people, 
South Australia. Geoforum, 114, 138–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geoforum.2020.05.021 
O’Lear, S. (2016). Climate science and slow violence: A view from political geography 
and STS on mobilizing technoscientific ontologies of climate change. Political 
Geography, 52, 4–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2015.01.004 
Ong, C. (2021). Base Bahay Foundation: Building Homes . BluPrint: One Bamboo at a Time. 
https://bluprint.onemega.com/base-bahay-foundation-building-homes-one- 
bamboo-at-a-time/ . 
Overland, I., & Sovacool, B. K. (2020). The misallocation of climate research funding. 
Energy Research & Social Science, 62, Article 101349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
erss.2019.101349 
Piggott-McKellar, A., McMichael, C., & Powell, T. (2021). Generational retreat: Locally 
driven adaption to coastal hazard risk in two Indigenous communities in Fiji. 
Regional Environmental Change, 21(2), 1–14. 
Piggott-McKellar, A. E., McNamara, K. E., Nunn, P. D., & Sekinini, S. T. (2019). Moving 
People in a Changing Climate: Lessons from Two Case Studies in Fiji. Social Sciences, 
8(5). https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci8050133 
Piggott-McKellar, A. E., Nunn, P. D., McNamara, K. E., & Sekinini, S. T. (2020). Dam(n) 
Seawalls: A Case of Climate Change Maladaptation in Fiji. In W. Leal Filho (Ed.), 
Managing Climate Change Adaptation in the Pacific Region (pp. 69–84). Springer 
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-40552-6_4 .  
Placino, P., & Gibson, K. (2022). Making a living in the diverse economy of concrete: 
Commoning in a contested quarry. Asia Pacific Viewpoint . 
Puamau, P. (1999). Affirmative Action and Racial Inequalities in Education: The Case of Fiji. 
Brisbane: University of Queensland] .  
Puamau, P. (2021). Rethinking education in Fiji: issues and solutions in the 21st century. 
In F. Pene, A. M. Taufe‘ulungaki, & C. Benson (Eds.), Tree of Opportunity: Re-thinking 
Pacific Education (pp. 86–103). the Institute of Education (IOE), The University of the 
South Pacific .  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity pace of 
care. Social studies of science, 45(5), 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0306312715599851 
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017). Matters of care : Speculative ethics in more than human 
worlds . University of Minnesota Press .  
Quijano, A. (2000). Coloniality of Power and Eurocentrism in Latin America. 
International sociology, 15(2), 215–232. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0268580900015002005 
Rarai, A., Parsons, M., Nursey-Bray, M., & Crease, R. (2022). Situating climate change 
adaptation within plural worlds: The role of Indigenous and local knowledge in 
Pentecost Island, Vanuatu. Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 5(4), 
2240 –2282. https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486211047739 
Remling, E. (2018). Depoliticizing adaptation: A critical analysis of EU climate 
adaptation policy. Environmental Politics, 27(3), 477–497. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09644016.2018.1429207 
Richards, G., & Agranovski, I. E. (2015). Air emission from the co-combustion of 
alternative derived fuels within cement plants: Gaseous pollutants. J Air Waste 
Manag Assoc, 65(2), 186–196. https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2014.984084 
Roxas, C. A. (2012). Handbook on erect bamboo species found in the Philippines . 
Said, E. W. (2003). Orientalism . Penguin .  
See, J., McKinnon, K., & Wilmsen, B. (2022). Diverse pathways to climate change 
adaptation through a postdevelopment lens: The case of Tambaliza Island, 
Philippines. Climate and Development , 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17565529.2022.2029340 See, J., & Wilmsen, B. (2020). Just adaptation? Generating new vulnerabilities and 
shaping adaptive capacities through the politics of climate-related resettlement in a 
Philippine coastal city. Global Environmental Change, 65, Article 102188. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102188 
See, J., & Wilmsen, B. (2022). A multidimensional framework for assessing adaptative 
justice: A case study of a small island community in the Philippines. Climatic Change, 
170(1), 16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-021-03266-y 
Smith, H. A. (2007). Disrupting the Global Discourse of Climate Change: The Case of 
Indigenous Voices. In M. E. Pettenger (Ed.), The social construction of climate change: 
Power, knowledge, norms, discourses (pp. 197–215). Routledge .  
Smith, L. T. (2012). Decolonising Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples ((2nd rev. 
edn).). Zed Books .  
Sovacool, B. K., Linn˘er, B.-O., & Klein, R. J. T. (2017). Climate change adaptation and the 
Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF): Qualitative insights from policy 
implementation in the Asia-Pacific. Climatic Change, 140(2), 209–226. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10584-016-1839-2 
Spivak, G. C. (1993). Interview with Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak. In N. Srivastava, & 
B. Bhattacharya (Eds.), The Postcolonial Gramsci (pp. 233–244). Routledge .  
Steven, H., & Vunibola, S. (2022). The resiliency of Indigenous entrepreneurial settings 
in the South Pacific: Notions of solesolevaki and wanbel in the case of Fiji and Papua 
New Guinea. In H. N. Weaver (Ed.), The Routledge International Handbook of 
Indigenous Resilience (pp. 362–378). Routledge .  
Sultana, F. (2021). Climate change, COVID-19, and the co-production of injustices: A 
feminist reading of overlapping crises. Social & Cultural Geography, 22(4), 447–460. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14649365.2021.1910994 
Sultana, F. (2022). The unbearable heaviness of climate coloniality. Political Geography, 
99, Article 102638. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2022.102638 
Tandon, A. (2021). Analysis: The Lack of Diversity in Climate-Science Research (Carbon 
Brief, Issue. https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-the-lack-of-diversity-in-climate- 
science-research. 
Taylor, M. (2014). The Political Ecology of Climate Change Adaptation Livelihoods, agrarian 
change and the conflicts of development . Taylor and Francis .  
Thai Binh Statistical Office. (2021). Dkan số tỉnh Th˘ai Bình n˚am 2021 chia theo huyện vˇa 
thˇanh phố [The 2021 population of Thai Binh province and its districts and town] . 
Thomas, K. A., & Warner, B. P. (2019). Weaponizing vulnerability to climate change. 
Global Environmental Change, 57, Article 101928. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
gloenvcha.2019.101928 
Tschakert, P., Barnett, J., Ellis, N., Lawrence, C., Tuana, N., New, M., … Pannell, D. 
(2017). Climate change and loss, as if people mattered: Values, places, and 
experiences. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews. Climate Change, 8(5), e476-n/a. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.476 
Tuck, E., & Yang, K. W. (2012). Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization: 
Indigeneity Education & Society, 1(1), 1–40. 
United Nations. (2020). About the UN Climate Partnerships for the Global South . Retrieved 
30 December from https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/scpibackground/. 
Venable, C., Javernick-Will, A., & Liel, A. B. (2020). Perceptions of post-disaster housing 
safety in future typhoons and earthquakes. Sustainability (Basel, Switzerland), 12(9), 
3837. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12093837 
Verani-Norton, E. E. (2021). Fiji at the crossroad: Is the Indigenous community ready for 
school, family, community partnerships. The International Education Journal: 
Comparative Perspectives, 20(3), 45–60. 
Vunibola, S., & Scheyvens, R. (2019). Revitalising rural development in the Pacific: An 
iTaukei (indigenous Fijian) approach . https://crawford.anu.edu.au/rmap/devnet/dev- 
bulletin.php. 
Vunibola, S., Steven, H., & Scobie, M. (2022). Indigenous enterprise on customary lands: 
Diverse economies of surplus. Asia Pacific Viewpoint, 63(1), 40–52. https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/apv.12326 
Webber, S. (2016). Climate Change Adaptation as a Growing Development Priority: 
Towards Critical Adaptation Scholarship. Geography Compass, 10(10), 401–413. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12278 
Westengen, O. T., Nyanga, P., Chibamba, D., Guillen-Royo, M., & Banik, D. (2018). 
A climate for commerce: The political agronomy of conservation agriculture in 
Zambia. Agriculture and human values, 35(1), 255–268. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10460-017-9820-x 
Wright, S., Suchet-Pearson, S., Lloyd, K., Burarrwanga, L., Ganambarr, R., Ganambarr- 
Stubbs, M., … Maymuru, D. (2020). Gathering of the Clouds: Attending to 
Indigenous understandings of time and climate through songspirals. Geoforum, 108, 
295–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.05.017 
Wright, S., & Tofa, M. (2021). Weather geographies: Talking about the weather, 
considering diverse sovereignties. Progress in Human Geography, 45(5), 1126 –1146. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132520982949 
Yuen, J. Q., Fung, T., & Ziegler, A. D. (2017). Carbon stocks in bamboo ecosystems 
worldwide: Estimates and uncertainties. Forest Ecology and Management, 393, 
113–138. 
Zea Escamilla, E., Habert, G., & Wohlmuth, E. (2016). When CO2 counts: Sustainability 
assessment of industrialized bamboo as an alternative for social housing programs in 
the Philippines. Building and Environment, 103, 44–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
buildenv.2016.04.003 J. See et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
