History and Anthropology
ISSN: 0275-7206 (Print) 1477-2612 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ghan20
From the anthropocene to the planthroposcene:
Designing gardens for plant/people involution
Natasha Myers
To cite this article: Natasha Myers (2017) From the anthropocene to the planthroposcene:
Designing gardens for plant/people involution, History and Anthropology, 28:3, 297-301, DOI:
10.1080/02757206.2017.1289934
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/02757206.2017.1289934
Published online: 01 Mar 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 4392
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 42 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ghan20
From the anthropocene to the planthroposcene: Designing
gardens for plant/people involution
Natasha Myers
Debbora Battaglia ’s essay opens portals to entire worlds that turn around plants, sites in
which people and their attendant techniques, technologies, and magic get caught in
the spiralling whorl of plant beings and doings. Plants are, like their roots, entangling.
Nourishing, aromatic, sensitive, and sentient, plants entice entire ecologies of other crea-
tures to participate in their care and their propagation: they have the know-how to entrainothers in service of their rhythms, their wiles, and desires (Hustak and Myers 2012 ). And, as
it turns out, people might be the best equipped of all other creatures, to respond to their
every whim.
As Battaglia ’s stories attest, these plant/people intimacies are often mediated –and
even enhanced –through techniques and technologies: a simple pole supports a
plant ’s tropic turn to the light; nutrient mists microns in diameter quench the thirst of
the thinnest root hairs; select sources of light excite a plant ’s photosynthetic organs; a
magical prism erected here, an incantation recited there. A well-tended garden,whether in a bucket or on board a space station, provides a stage for plants and people
to perform their entangled powers.
Gardens are sites where it is possible to get a feel for the momentum that propels
people to involve themselves with plants. Where evolution describes those longue
durée events that find species diverging from one another, involution offers a way to
story the ongoing, improvised, experimental encounters that take shape when beings
as different as plants and people involve themselves in one another ’s lives (Hustak and
Myers 2012 ). Involution describes a ‘reciprocal capture ’(Stengers 2010 ) that binds
plants and people in projects of co-becoming. Turning tropically to one another, plantsand people are both in-the-making in sites like gardens.
Gardens are for me poignant sites for anthropological inquiry into the various ways that
people stage relations with plants –whether these relations are intimate, extractive, violent,
or instrumentalizing. Battaglia ’s accounts of gardens –experimental, exhibitionist, capital-
intensive, magical, ancient, modern, urban, and in orbit –can teach us important lessons
about the ways that people are staging relations to plants today, in these uncertain times.
Garden design matters. Plants surely have such a firm hold on our lives (think food, fuel,
fodder, fibres, pharmaceuticals, and more), that one could even say that ‘we are only
because they are ’(Myers 2016 ). And yet, in the plant/people power nexus, humans
remain the ones who draw up the designs: we have the buckets, bulldozers, concrete,glass, metal, fertilizers, pesticides, soil assays, scaffolding, harvesting techniques, hunger,
and aesthetic desires. For me, the ethnographic question becomes: how do people
choose to stage their relations with plants? We could even ask: What is a given garden
© 2017 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Natasha Myers nmyers@yorku.ca York University, Toronto, ON, CanadaHISTORY AND ANTHROPOLOGY, 2017
VOL. 28, NO. 3, 297 –301
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02757206.2017.1289934
designed for? And what interbeing relations does a garden propagate? Battaglia is right to
insist that ethics in the gardens she documents are ‘in suspension ’, and perhaps they
should remain so: before we can ask questions about what is right, good, just, or proper
for the plants or the people (and I would assert we do not yet know what is proper to a plant
–plants might love the quenching rush of those aeroponic mists!), first we need to see
what relations these gardens set in motion. And as Donna Haraway ( 1991 ) keeps remind-
ing me, we must never forget to ask: ‘for whom and at what cost ’?
Where my own work examines the aesthetics and politics of garden enclosures and
ecological restoration projects (Myers 2015a , in press a, in press b), Battaglia ’s itinerary
through gardens aeroponic and otherwise draws attention to the scaffoldings andsupport systems that gardeners (including labourers, engineers, architects, and others)
craft inside these enclosures. Garden infrastructures matter, and not only to the plants.
They not only enforce biopolitical regimes that dictate who can and cannot live insideor outside the enclosure (think weeding, pesticides, etc.). Garden infrastructures also
shape how plants and people get entrained to one another ’s lives. Consider the
migrant labourer hanging from a 42-m mountain in the simulated Cloud Forest conserva-
tory I document at Singapore ’s Gardens by the Bay (Myers 2015a ). Or the sky rise infra-
structures for urban aeroponic farming that Battaglia describes here. How do thesegarden infrastructures entrain both plant and human lives? What is it like to labour inthese gardens? As a plant? As a gardener? What kinds of plant/people relations are in-the-making? These are some further questions to ask when we take as given that
gardens are ‘life support systems ’for both their plants and their people. If gardens are
also worlding projects , we can ask, not only what worlds are we cultivating in our
gardens, but also, what worlds are our gardens designed to reproduce? Into whichfutures are we taking root?
Dismantling designs for the anthropocene
To follow through on these questions, I want to hold in suspension just one claim that Bat-taglia takes as ‘given ’in this paper, and add something to the series of claims she places
‘under arrest ’. Here I ask what if ‘Marked expressions across sites of an anthropocenic con-
sciousness of finitude ’were not given for this analysis. What if this anthropocenic con-
sciousness were itself placed under arrest and made strange? What difference would
this make for an anthropological analysis of gardens and gardening?
Debates about where to place the golden spike for the onset of this new geological era
wage on. And yet, whenever one chooses to mark the inception of the Anthropocene –
whether one locates its origins at the invention of agriculture; the ravages of colonialism
(Todd 2016 ); the industrial revolution and the vast expansion of plantation agriculture and
forms of accumulation by dispossession (e.g. Tsing 2015 ); petrocapitalism ’s extractive
‘exuberance ’(e.g. Murphy 2016 ); or agriculture ’s chemical and industrial revolutions
(Hetherington 2013 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ; Gordillo in press) –all have had devastating
consequences for both plants and their people. Many criticisms have been waged against
these periodizations and the name chosen to signify the cause and effects of the destruc-
tion. Much of that criticism has to do with naming ‘Man ’as singular agent. This move flat-
tens differences and renders invisible other ways of doing life by lumping all humans
together, as if all peoples everywhere share the same destructive tendencies (e.g. de la298 N. MYERS
Cadena 2015 ). This name also keeps intact Western assumptions that pit ‘man against
nature ’, perpetuating a fundamental split between humans and nonhumans, nature and
culture. As geographer Eric Swyngedouw ( 2010 ) has shown, the Anthropocene has also
become a post-political site for the cooptation of environmental action by a neoliberalism
caught in the thrall of the carbon economy and the technological fix: ‘we ’got ourselves
into this mess, and ‘we ’can get ourselves out of it through more of the same (geoengi-
neering, sustainable infrastructures, responsible innovations, etc.). These technological
fixes do nothing to challenge the very conditions that precipitate the ongoing destruction.
In all cases, the Anthropocene ’s singular focus on human agency forgets both that we are
not one , and that we are not alone .
If the Anthropocene has been thoroughly marked by the extractive logics of capitalism
and the destructive power of colonialism, then perhaps it is in our best interests to get our-
selves out from under its shadow. Perhaps one lesson we can learn is that it is time to stopdesigning for the Anthropocene ; to stop locking ourselves into futures bound to these
forces. What would Epcott ’s aeroponic gardens look like if they did not reproduce the
same extractive, capitalist logics that are accelerating the very climate conditions thatthis form of ‘responsible innovation’ is supposed to mitigate? How might the zucchini
experiments in space be staged if that project was not part of an exit strategy from afuture earth that will have been scorched (on the future anterior, see Povinelli 2011 ).
What if Singapore’ s Gardens by the Bay were not designed to profit from the very destruc-
tion of lands and bodies that its mausoleum-like ‘Lost World ’is meant to remember? Why
should we cave to the allure of ‘man ’s tragic detumescence ’(Haraway and Kenney 2015 ),
and let anthropocenic logics define how we have and will continue to cultivate futureswith plants?
Here I would suggest that anthropologists find ways to make strange the inevitability of
anthropocenic futures by doing just what Battaglia has done here: by foregrounding otherways that people cultivate relations with plants. I see the Trobriand Islander ’s urban gar-
deners among those many other ‘anthropos-not-seen ’, which Marisol de la Cadena
(2015 ) has so poignantly drawn attention to: those peoples and ways of doing life that
have been violently written out of the past, present, and future. There are so manyother ways to cultivate gardens and grow worlds, and so perhaps anthropologists could
be on the lookout for ‘marked expressions across sites ’that stage livable futures for both
plants and people. I read the Trobriand Islander ’s gardens, as well as many of the
gardens cultivated by Indigenous peoples, subsistence farmers, urban gardens, artists,activists, and others (see Myers in press a) as evidence of the remarkable ways that
people the world over are learning how to conspire with the plants (on conspiracy, see
Choy 2016 ). I see these gardens as evidence of a range of radical solidarity projects that
take as ‘given ’that we
are of the plants ; that our futures hinge on creating liveable
futures with the plants.
What I want to see taking root in the ruins of Anthropocene thinking, is what I half
cheekily and half seriously want to call the Planthroposcene . This is an aspirational epis-
teme and way of doing life in which people come to recognize their profound interimpli-cation with plants. Crucially, the Planthroposcene does not name a time-bound era. Ratherthan signalling a temporal period after the fact, this formulation pivots around a generous
reading of the suffix ‘-cene ’. I hear ‘-cene ’in multiple registers: both through Donna Har-
away ’s(2015 , 167) attention to the ‘root meanings of –cene/kainos ’which she interprets asHISTORY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 299
a‘temporality of the thick, fibrous, and lumpy ‘now ’, which is ancient and not ’; and in its
homophonic vibrations with the terms ‘seen ’, and ‘scene ’(de la Cadena 2015 ; Pandian
2015 ; Howe and Pandian 2016 ). I am particularly interested in the ways some garden
designs have the potential to stage both new scenes of, and new ways to see (and
even seed) plant/people involutions.
The Planthroposcene is a call to change the terms of encounter, to make allies with
these green beings. And so, what I would place ‘under arrest ’is any assumptions about
what is proper to a plant , aeroponic or otherwise. Even as plant scientists reach into the
vegetal sensorium for evidence of plant sentience, we do not yet know what a plant
wants or what a plant knows (see Myers 2015b ). And yet, we must find better ways to
get to know plants intimately and on their terms, even if that demands extensive techno-logical prostheses (see Myers in press b). And so we do need a planthropology to docu-
ment the affective ecologies taking shape between plants and people, so we can learn
to listen to their demands for unpaved land and, as Maria Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2015 )
reminds us, for a time outside of the rhythms of capitalist extraction. We need to tapinto their desire for forms of life that are not necessarily for us. To do this, we mightwant to find ways to vegetalize our all-too-human sensorium (Myers 2014 ), and learn
how to involve ourselves with the plants. This might be one way to constitute a planetfit for what Anna Tsing ( 2015 ) might call ‘collaborative survival ’. If not, their undoing
will truly be our undoing.
References
Choy, Tim. 2016 .“Breathers Conspire –On Drawing Breath Together. ”Presentation on the
Elements Thinking Panel (co-organized by N. Myers, M. Puig de la Bellacasa, and
D. Papadopoulos) at the Society for Social Studies of Science, Annual Meeting, BarcelonaSpain, September 2016.
de la Cadena, Marisol. 2015 .“Uncommoning Nature.” E-Flux Journal 56th Biennale . August 22, 2015.
Accessed May 4, 2016. http://supercommunity.e-flux.com/authors/marisol-de-la-cadena/ .
Gordillo, Gastón R. in press. “The Forests Destroyed by Bulldozers: An Affective Geometry of the
Argentine Soy Boom. ”InInfrastructure, Environment, and Life in the Anthropocene , edited by
Kregg Hetherington. Durham: Duke University Press.
Haraway, Donna J. 1991 .Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature . New York:
Routledge.
Haraway, Donna. 2015 .“Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin. ”
Environmental Humanities 6 (2015): 159 –165.
Haraway, Donna, and Martha Kenney. 2015 .“Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Chthulucene.” InArt in the
Anthropocene: Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies , edited by
Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, 255– 270. London: Open Humanities Press.
Hetherington, Kregg. 2013 .“Beans Before the Law: Knowledge Practices, Responsibility, and the
Paraguayan Soy Boom. ”Cultural Anthropology 28 (1): 65– 85.
Howe, Cymene, and Pandian, Anand. 2016 .“Lexicon for an Anthropocene Yet Unseen. ”Theorizing
the Contemporary, Cultural Anthropology website, January 22, 2016. https://culanth.org/
fieldsights/803-lexicon-for-an-anthropocene-yet-unseen .
Hustak, Carla, and Natasha Myers. 2012 .“Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the
Sciences of Plant/Insect Encounters. ”Differences 23 (3): 74– 118.
Murphy, Michelle. 2016 .“To What Extent is Embodied Knowledge a form of Science and Technology
by Other Means? ”Keynote Lecture at the Society for Social Studies of Science Annual Meeting,
Barcelona, 
Spain, September 2016.300 N. MYERS
Myers, Natasha. 2014 .“A Kriya for Cultivating Your Inner Plant. ”Centre for Imaginary Ethnography,
Imaginings Series http://imaginativeethnography.org/imaginings/affect/sensing-botanical-sensoria/ .
Myers, Natasha. 2015a .“Edenic Apocalypse: Singapore’ s End-of-Time Botanical Tourism. ”InArt in the
Anthropocene: Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies , edited by
Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin, 31– 42. London: Open Humanities Press.
Myers, Natasha. 2015b. “Conversations on Plant Sensing: Notes from the Field. ”Nature Culture 3: 35–
66.
Myers, Natasha. 2016 .“Photosynthesis. ”In“A Lexicon for an Anthropocene Yet Unseen, ”Theorizing
the Contemporary ,Cultural Anthropology Website, January 21, 2016. http://culanth.org/
fieldsights/790-photosynthesis .
Myers, Natasha. in press a. “From Edenic Apocalypse to Gardens Against Eden: Plants and People in
and After the Anthropocene.” InInfrastructure, Enviornment, and Life in the Anthropocene , edited
by Kregg Hetherington. Durham: Duke University Press.
Myers, Natasha. in press b. “Becoming Sensor in Sentient Worlds: A More-than-natural History of a
Black Oak Savannah.” InTowards and Artful Anthropology , edited by Gretchen Bakke and
Marina Peterson. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Pandian, Anand. 2015 .Reel World: An Anthropology of Creation . Durham: Duke University Press.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. 2011 .Economies of Abandonment: Social Belonging and Endurance in Late
Liberalism . Durham: Duke University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015 .“Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of
Care. ”Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691 –716.
Stengers, Isabelle. 2010 .Cosmopolitics I . Minneapolis: Univ of Minnesota Press.
Swyngedouw, Erik. 2010 .“Apocalypse Forever? Post-Political Populism and the Spectre of Climate
Change. ”Theory,
Culture & Society 27 (2 –3): 213 –232.
Todd, Zoe. 2016 .“Relationships.” Theorizing the Contemporary, Cultural Anthropology website,
January 21, 2016. https://culanth.org/fieldsights/799-relationships .
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. 2015 .The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in
Capitalist Ruins . Princeton: Princeton University Press.HISTORY AND ANTHROPOLOGY 301
