 
 
 
Concentric: Literary and Cultural Studies  43.1 
March 2017: 165- 195 
DOI: 10. 6240/concentric.lit.2017.43.1.09 
 
Haste and Waste in the City:  
Rekindling Care about and for Trees in Another Time  
 
Shruti Desai 
Department of Media and Communications 
Goldsmiths College, University of London, UK 
 
Abstract  
Environmental time is one of the most pivotal yet least explicated issues raised 
by anthropogenic environmental change. This essay contributes an 
understanding of this issue by exploring the temporalities of ethical regard and 
disregard for trees in the context of urban timescapes. The exploration of ethical 
urban temporalities is organized around three digital artistic interventions 
focused on Paris ( One Heart One Tree ), New  York City ( PopUP Forest ), and 
London ( Trees on Sidewalks ). These interventions are examined as ecocritical 
case studies, which aim to confront and subsequently rearticulate human-tree 
relations, using the city as a material and symbolic site to facilitate ecological 
awareness and disruption. Each case study is discussed with respect to how 
environmental time is at once magnified and muted, foregrounded and 
marginalized, by a given intervention, whose timespan and relationship with 
the temporalities of urban living are as much ethical considerations as is the 
temporal logic of capitalism that mediates against inhabiting human-tree 
relations with care and consideration. The use of digital media in each case is 
discussed with respect to how the interventions differentially make urban 
ecological temporalities (in)visible. The essay suggests ways in which the 
interventions stimulate reflection on employing digital media technologies in 
art, research, and everyday life to make empirically accessible and theoretically 
meaningful the elusive but substantial role of time in facilitating human care 
about and for trees. 
 
Keywords 
Anthropocene, care, digital, ecocriticism, environmental art, time, trees, city 
  

 
 
 
166  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
Introduction  
 
In 1982, 7000 four-foot tall basalt columns were placed on the front lawn of 
the Museum Fridericianum in Kassel, Germany. The basalt stones were key pieces 
of a planned urban sculpture, 7000 Oaks (7000 Eichen ), conceived by the artist 
Joseph Beuys, who envisioned planting 7000 oak trees in the city. For each tree 
planted, a stone was to be removed from the lawn and set beside a corresponding 
tree. Explaining the sculpture’s  local purpose to promote “green  urban renewal”  
(“7000  Oak Trees”),  Beuys said: “I think the tree is an element of regeneration which 
in itself is a concept  of time. The oak is especially so because it is a slowly growing 
tree with a kind of really solid heartwood”  (qtd. in Demarco 46).  Since its completion 
in 1987, the living art sculpture has been adapted on more modest scales by other 
cities,1 keeping alive Beuys’s  overarching vision of a future when “the world [would 
be] a big forest”  and “towns and environments forest- like”  (Demarco 46 ). 
Beuys’s  artwork and urban-inspired ecological vision are stimulating topics to 
introduce an essay that seeks to make intelligible and vital, the ethical task of re-
imagining the place of trees —and  a place for trees —in cities, together with the place 
of cities in ecological thinking. While taking to heart the possibility that cities may 
foster both nonhuman (tree) and human flourishing, I argue for attending more 
closely to how, as Gary Snyder observes, cities may be “exclusive  in the matter or 
who and what they give shelter to” and tolerate (12). I propose a temporal ethic of 
care that problematizes the pace of life and horizon of development that underwrite 
urban capitalism. Whereas capitalist production pivots on the “efficient  management 
of the present”  and the objectification and homogenization of time to achieve future 
goals (Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making  Time”  700, 692-93), care “requires  attention 
and fine-tuning to the temporal rhythms of an ‘other’  and to the specific relations that 
are being woven together”  (704-05). In turn, I argue that Beuys’s  proposed task of 
remaking urban landscapes and asserting their role in  enacting trans-local social and  
environmental change  requires attending to the specific type and quality of 
encounters with trees that urban timescapes encourage. Following Barbara Adam, I 
understand “timescape”  to signify the weave of temporal rhythms that characterize 
particular creatures, things, or societies in particular places and eras (10). I select 
three ecocritical case studies to examine the digital and aesthetic mediation of 
                                                 
1 Other sites that have adapted Beuys’s  sculpture include Baltimore (Philpot), Minneapolis 
(“Walker”),  New York City (“Joseph  Beuys”),  Oslo (Lowenstein), Paris (Ackroyd and Harvey), 
Scotland (Wendling), Sydney (Cooke), and Venice (Healy). An exception is Ireland, where 7000 
native Irish oaks were planted on the Hill of Uisneach (Strauss).  

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   167 
 
 environmental time in Paris, New York City (NYC), and London. I select these cities 
for both their status as iconic world cities, long situated at the forefront of urban 
capitalism, as well as their ties to recent environmental campaigns that promote 
planting and appreciating trees, both around the world (in the case of Paris) and in 
their respective urban environments (in the cases of NYC and  London). 
I begin by discussing why temporal thinking is central to rereading ethical 
urban-tree relations in the Anthropocene, and with what implications for caring about  
and for trees. Thereafter, I address criticisms of the use of digital media and digital 
art to engage  with environmental activism and promote ecological understandings. 
Through the three case studies, I show how a material ecocritical approach adapted 
for digital analysis can help make human-tree relations visible, matter, and 
contestable. I conclude the essay with reflections on the usefulness of time and care 
for narrating the city in  terms of human-tree relations. 
 
Thinking Agency, Time, and Care  in the Anthropocene 
 
As the proposed name for the current geo-historical epoch, the term 
“Anthropocene ” is frequently invoked to highlight the devastating ecological impact 
of humans’  “unprecedented  resource use and waste generation”  (Seitzinger et al. 787) 
over the past 150 years. In particular, increased fossil fuel consumption and 
deforestation during the ascent of industrialization in  the latter part of the 1800s and  
the proliferation of information and communication technologies and creation of 
international free trade networks post-World War II (a time period also known as 
“the Great Acceleration”)  (Bonneuil and Fressoz 50-52) are emphasized as pivotal 
historical culminations that, among other pernicious effects, led to the release of large 
amounts of CO 2, N2O, and CH 4 gases  into the earth’s  atmosphere, warming the earth 
for centuries to  come (Steffen et  al. 850, 854).  
Given these facts, recent scholarship on the Anthropocene stresses that thinking 
ecologically requires thinking temporally. Thinking temporally here entails activities 
other than devising temporal metaphors to dramatize the stakes of taking 
environmental action to protect the future of life on Earth (e.g., “[a]t the current rate, 
20 per cent of the planet’s species will have disappeared by 2030,”  Bonneuil and 
Fressoz 7) or monitoring a doomsday ticker that warns individuals: “The  world is  in 
trouble, but it’s not too late” to take action to avert a 2-degree Celsius rise in the 
global average temperature ( The Countdown 2° Clock).  Whereas these examples 
imagine environmental time as a set of divisible, abstract quantities projected into a 
future, “the conception of time as linear, externalised, and absolute”  effectively 

 
 
 
168  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
mutes the possibility for other-than-human timescales to  exist (Bastian 99). Positing 
an “externa l nature, slow, immense”  and “infinitely  old” (Bonneuil and Fressoz 30, 
204), fails to come to terms with the fact that human and nonhuman “lives  knit into 
a kind of collective landscape architecture”  (Purdy 607, 22), which is enacted, 
moreover, through more-than-human agencies. Accordingly, scholars have 
foregrounded the task of rethinking history as a “marriage” (Harrison 208) of human 
and nonhuman timescales and forces (Chakrabarty 214; Moore, “Anthropocene  or 
Capitolocene?”  3). As Christophe Bonneuil and Jean-Baptiste Fressoz assert: “If our 
future involves a geological swing of the Earth into a new state, we can no longer 
believe in  a humanity making its  own history by itself”  (33). 
It follows that the designation of the Anthropocene, far from establishing the 
primacy or the privileged place of the human, is meant to precipitate a shift into post-
anthropocentric thinking (Zylinska 20; Castree 240-41), where this designation 
should function “first  and foremost as an ethical pointer rather than as a scientific 
descriptor”  (Zylinska 19). The Anthropocene, far from “a simple question of fact”  
(Purdy 2), directs critical attention to reimagining nonanthropocentric ways of 
perceiving and valuing ecological others and environments (6-7). Michelle Bastian 
argues that “when  one understands time as agency, seeing nature as without 
significant changes, without time, is to also see it as without agency”  (102-03). In the 
case of thinking ethical urban timescapes of human-tree relations, appreciating the 
timescales of nonhuman natures encourages an awareness of trees as ethical subjects 
in cities and cities as places orchestrated by tree and human agencies. At the same 
time, it is necessary to highlight the element of contingency in how these agencies 
evolve and are acknowledged. The Anthropocene is not simply the doing of 
humankind, much less a “fictitious  human unity”  (Moore, “Capitalocene”  4). It is the 
result of deciding that humans should live in particular ways, and in relation to 
ecological others. A recognition of the element of historical contingency in patterns 
of consumption and production (Chakrabarty 216-17) has led some scholars to 
persuasively argue that it was subscribing to a specifically profit-oriented system of 
capitalism which “represent[ed]  time as linear, space as flat, and nature as external”  
(Moore, “Capitalocene”  4), that “swung  the Earth system into the Anthropocene”  
(Bonneuil and  Fressoz 222). 
From a temporal perspective, challenging the role of capitalist productive 
processes in mediating urban moments of relation with nonhuman nature involves 
interrogating “the linear temporal logic of capitalist production” as a logic that does 
not make time for “care  time” (Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time”  691). Tellingly, 
time for caring is not only excluded from “the frenetic pace of life” because “giving  

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   169 
 
 and receiving care involves slowness: ‘being  there’”  (Wajcman 14, 129). More 
fundamentally, care has not historically been considered an  economically legitimate 
labor activity (Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making  Time”  707). In contrast to capitalist 
time, care time cannot  be mapped as a linear progression. Rather, it varies in kind 
“depending  on who or what is being cared about”  (Johns-Putra 129; emphasis 
removed). Nor can it be abstracted or objectified, as caring demands attention to the 
relational, felt, and material aspects of encounters with “all kinds of others”  (Whyte 
and Cuomo 235).  To analyze the potentials of digital artistic interventions in terms 
of expressing and mobilizing concern, I understand care in terms of what are 
generally agreed to be its two fundamental senses: care about (an attitude, feeling, or 
otherwise disposition of care) and care for (a practice) (Held 42; Tronto 194, 118-
19). In both of these senses, I take care to be an agential force (Johns-Putra 126, 134), 
which brings certain kinds of carers and subjects of care into being at the time of care 
(Puig de la Bellacasa, “Ethical  Doings”  163). By choosing to emphasize care as the 
enactment of a dynamic more-than-human agency  rather than the exercise or 
bettering of a preconceived relation as such, I am suggesting that care be understood 
in this essay as participating in imagining and recrafting urban timescapes and 
environments —at the same time that it appears to arise or take place in a pre-given 
city. In the next section, I develop this reasoning by arguing that the digital mediation 
of care merits attention as not only an activist undertaking, but also a material and 
ecological force. 
 
Digital Ecocritical Methods: The (In)Visible Matter  of Urban  
Timescapes 
 
In using digital media to orient critiques of urban timescapes of care, I am aware 
that my receptive attitude toward the eco-activist potentials of digital media may be 
unpopular with scholars skeptical of the use of digital media as an agent of change. 
Such scholars contend that digital activism, the “use of digital technologies —mobile 
phones and Internet-enabled devices, for example —in campaigns for social and 
political change”  (Joyce vii), condones “a technological form”  of “easy -come easy-
go politics where you are only ever one click away from a petition (clicktiv ism)” and 
are seduced by design into “shift[ing]  focus from one issue to another or one website 
to another with little commitment or even thought (slacktivism)”  (Fenton 44). 

 
 
 
170  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
Whereas these contentions may prove true in certain cases, it is necessary to consider 
the specific societal contexts of technology appropriation and  use.2  
Some studies show that constructive and  skillful uses of such digital platforms 
as Twitter (i.e., beyond tweeting the minutiae of one’s  daily routine) can advance 
efficacious forms of environmental politics that conjoin individual and collective 
action. Alex Lockwood, for example, discusses how UK residents, with no local or 
community ties, banded together with Twitter from October 2010 to February 2011 
to successful ly protest the UK government’s  plans to sell and privatize ancient 
woodlands and forests of scientific interest. Observing how the protest formed 
through residents’  responses to one another’s  tweeted feelings and concerns, 
Lockwood argues that microblogging platforms may afford an effective means of 
expressing “real  and symbolised love for trees” to further environmental activism 
(51). Other notable examples include the use of web campaigns and social media 
platforms to mobilize the public to protect the Tasmanian native forest (Wallis and 
Given), protest the Keystone Oil Pipeline (Hodges and Stocking), and participate in 
climate protests (Segerberg and Bennett). 
Apart from social media, many scholars are examining digital gameplay, 
focusing on the ways it may not only influ ence ecological understandings but also 
inform the design of sustainable environments (Chang; Klisanin 1124). In the case 
of tree planting, for instance, a variety of mobile (e.g., Tree Story Game ), social 
media (e.g., Ecotopia ), and web-based games (e.g., JohnnyAppl ) have already been 
used to plant hundreds of thousands of trees (e.g., the Korean game Tree Planet  alone 
has funded the planting of half a million trees). Other creative uses of digital media 
include more specifical ly art installations and applications. The Indeterminate 
Hikes+ mobile phone application aims to represent “un-wild environments in new 
ways”  (Nadir and Peppermint 175) through app-led walking tours that remap a 
physical space as a series of spontaneous encounters, such as photographing 
“something  wild that may not be here tomorrow” (“Indeterminate  Hikes+”).  The 
artist-activist creators of the app seek to “reappropriate smartphone technologies, 
which are generally used as devices for rapid communication and consumerism, as 
tools for meditation and slowing down”  (Nadir and Peppermint 177). A final 
intriguing example is the work of artist Char Davies, whose installations have sought 
to undermine a three-dimensional Cartesian environmental aesthetic and thus, the 
experience of an objectified environment, by matching a spectator’s  breathing pattern 
                                                 
2 This line of reasoning is developed at length with respect to digital activism in Earl and 
Kimport; see also Fenton 26; Segerberg and Bennett 198, 213. 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   171 
 
 to their experience of a simulated environment, such as a forest stream (Davies and 
Bailey). 
These examples of creative and strategic uses of digital media suggest an 
entwined discursive and material function of environmentally themed digital 
activism and  art, especially to  disrupt and renegotiate ways of treating environments 
and reimagining ecological understandings (Holmes; Keifer-Boyd). I would argue, 
therefore, that the study of digital media in this context necessitates a material 
ecocritical sensibility (Alaimo, “Material  Engagements”  71), whereby such media 
are understood not only as tools for human communication and manipulation, but 
environmentally (Heise, “Unnatural Ecologies” 165; Peters 2-5, 8, 14), with more-
than-human material effects —e.g ., electronic waste, or e-waste —(Maxwell and 
Miller 331-32, 336-39). Given that different and even identical digital media may 
yield dissimilar environmental outcomes, I select three aesthetic interventions that 
employ overlapping but also distinct modes of mediating human-tree relations. While 
all three interventions mediate timescapes of care, they have unique goals for what 
the digital medium should do, namely, coordinate collective environmental action 
(Paris), promote nature appreciation (conservation education) (NYC), and conduct 
urban environmental research (London). 
In choosing to analyze these cases together, I endeavor to demonstrate how a 
comparative set of cases and the combination of different methods can enable a 
coherent account of digitally mediated timescapes of care as multidimensional 
material ecologies. To show how and why the various digitally mediated imprints of 
environmental time matter, I propose an extension of the existing ecocritical category 
of waste by articulating the digital mediation of timescapes of care through the 
category of haste. As Serenella Iovino explores in the case of Naples, waste has many 
ecological ethi cal inflections: 
 
We can in fact talk of waste which denotes loss, dissipation, missed 
opportunity, desolation, imperfect consumption, interrupted 
potentiality; “waste”  means an unreali zed past, a past which is not 
“perfect”  (perfectum meaning, in Latin, “fully  completed,”  
“finished” ). We can talk of trash (or rubbish ): something to which no 
future is bestowed, the meaningless, the filthy, the impure, the 
contaminating. Finally, also in reference to humans, we can talk of 
outcast : something thrown out, excluded, discarded, cast out, 

 
 
 
172  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
indifferent to future. Within the city, also nature (and natural life) can 
be a form of outcast. (341; emphasis in  original) 
 
In addition to representing a historical sign of what has mattered, waste is a 
reminder of what must matter, such as the need to admit and deal with the products 
of human waste, whether manufactured or biophysical, lest we humans begin to 
“imagine  ourselves as rarefied rational beings distinct from nature’s  muck and 
muddle”  (Alaimo, Bodily Natures 8). Wast e, too, implies a manner of regard for 
nonhumans, as well as humans deemed unsavory, surely below the threshold for 
ethical consideration. In synthesizing the timescapes of care about and for trees 
suggested in each case study, I accordingly use waste as a material correlate to the 
category of haste. That is, waste mediates the interpretation of material imprints as 
quantities and qualities of care time. To show that “there  is never a time in which the 
human can be anything but trans- corporeal”  (Alaimo, Bodily Natures 12), I trace how 
the pace and rhythms of human actions always matter in ways that are more-than-
human. 
To make timescapes of human-tree relations materially perceptible, I start from 
the premise that, akin to “hyperobjects,”  nonlocal phenomena, such as global 
warming, which cannot  be grasped or even fathomed on a human scale, but rather 
and yet, “leave  footprints everywhere”  (Morton  88), human-tree relations are 
comprehensible neither in their entirety nor as a generic phenomenon. Instead, they 
become partly “legible  through the[ir] many imprints”  upon the human perceptual 
field (Biemann 124). These apparent imprints embody particular histories of coming 
into form that can  only ever be implied (Morton 91). 
The content and form of the “imprints”  vary depending on the intervention. The 
first two case studies (Paris and NYC) are similar in that they are based on specific 
digital artistic interventions and their accompanying online campaigns. Both 
campaigns are also being waged over the Internet, where their interventions can be 
experienced (Paris) or previewed (NYC). For these two cases, I analyze multimodal 
forms of data from online publicity (e.g., weblogs, news articles), social media feeds 
(e.g., Facebook, YouTube), and the campaigns (e.g., campaign websites, 
Kickstarter). I examine how the interventions use various communicative forms 
(images, video, text, sound) to construe the temporal limits and range of action, 
responsibility, and concern that interdependently characterize each city’s  implicit and 
apparent relationship with trees. 
In contrast to the first two case studies, which seek to ascertain how 
preconstructed interventions afford and promote time to care about  and for trees, the 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   173 
 
 third case study is designed to be more exploratory and reflective, indicating 
opportunities digital media may introduce for witnessing real-time temporal flows. 
Nonetheless, this study also constitutes a response to recent large-scale planting 
campaigns in London ( “For the Love of Trees” ), and in this response, echoes the 
other two  case studies’  focus on recent initiatives centered on tree planting and care. 
For this third case, I adapt Walter Benjamin’s  dialectical materialist method, whose 
aims are both critical and constructive, not only picking apart the givenness of what 
is captured through the technological lens, but with the intention of remediating the 
past to encounter the present in a non-habituated way (Benjamin 471). I use digital 
photography to visualize timescapes of care for closer viewing. As I elaborate in this 
case study, these visualizations, along with my own reflections, narrate my 
ethnographic walks through the city observing humans’  encounters with  trees. 
Over the next three sections, I discuss each case study in turn, followed by a 
reflection on the use of digital media to debate and affect the possibility of caring 
well about  and for trees in  cities.  
 
One Heart  One Tree , Paris  
 
One Heart One Tree (1H1T ) is a new media citizen artwork conceived by Paris-
based Belgian-Tunisian artist Naziha Mestaoui. Launched in Paris in 2015, it is an 
ongoing effort to foreground and interlink concern for forests and climate change  by 
“transform[ing]  some of the world’s  most iconic monuments into forests of light”  (“1 
Heart 1 Tree Goes Global”) through a global tour scheduled to begin in 2017 
(Facebook message from 1H1T , 28 June 2016), featuring possible visits to New York 
City, Rio, Seoul, San Francisco, Dubai, and Hollywood (Mestaoui). It originated as 
One Beat One Tree  (1B1T ), an interactive digital art installation that has been running 
since 2012.3 1B1T  senses each spectator’s  pulse as they stand before a screen. The 
pulse is rendered as a cool neon green digital tree, which results in a tree being 
planted through one of the organization’s  seven partnering forestation projects in 
Australia (biodiversity), Senegal (ecosystem restoration), India (island reforestation), 
Peru (rainforest protection), France (agroforestry), Brazil (indigenous reforestation), 
and the Ivory Coast (reforestation). So far, participation in 1B1T  has financed the 
planting of 15,000 trees across these projects ( 1 Heart 1 Tree , “Seed  of Light”  
section ). 
                                                 
3 For a demonstration, see “One  Beat One Tree.”  

 
 
 
174  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
In its newest form as 1H1T , 1B1T is now a smartphone app, which prompts 
users to select one of the seven planting projects, then asks, “Are you ready to 
generate your own seed of light?”  Users are subsequently instructed to “Concentrate  
on your tree and breath consciously” while placing their finger on the phone’s camera 
sensor, which records their heartbeat. The app displays a pulse and tree readout on 
the phone screen just as the readout would appear  on the large screen in  1B1T . With 
the app, though, users can add their name and a positive message after purchasing a 
tree for 10 euros. Citizen participation from November 29 through December 4, 2015, 
turned the Eiffel Tower into “a forest of light” ( 1H1T  Facebook page; for a day- by-
day replay, see 1 Heart 1 Tree , “Replay” section ), illuminated in green by the names 
and messages of smartphone users, who together funded the planting of 55,000 trees 
in less than a month. The event was endorsed by such international figures as UN 
Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon ( 1H1T  Facebook page) and celebrities such as 
Leonardo DiCaprio ( IH1T  Twitter feed). The event also involved the acti ve work of 
ambassadors including environmental philosopher Ervin László and Felix 
Finkbeiner, the youth pioneer of the UN Environment Program’s  Billion Tree 
Planting campaign (see 1 Heart 1 Tree , “Ambassadors”  section).  
From the perspectives of urban environmental time and care, a few aspects of 
1H1T are interesting. First, in the move from 1B1T  to 1H1T , the artwork became 
mobile, carving out new urban and virtual niches of encounter by reaching 
individuals in locations beyond Paris. To this end, the choice of the Eiffel Tower, 
which one writer called “the  emotional heart of Paris”  (Peltier n. pag. ), as the site of 
projection seems particularly symbolic when considered alongside the timing of the 
projection, which followed the November 13th terrorist attacks and preceded the 
December COP21 Climate Change Conference in Paris. In one respect, therefore, the 
project suggests that hope for a greene r, more peaceful future can be planted, so to 
speak, through solidarity in Paris and beyond, echoing Beuys’s  own vision of a world 
forest. 
Second, in gaining mobility thus, the artwork appears to be tying the urban 
more generally to care about  forests and environmental futures. Mestaoui’s  
conviction in the 1H1T project’s  power “to synchronise our heartbeats to collectively 
inspire our future”  (1 Heart 1 Tree , “Presentation” section) echoes  throughout social 
media comments. Consider how the following tweet (Fig. 1) favorably frames 
Mestaoui’s  intent to  seamlessly turn virtual reality into living reality: 
 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   175 
 
 Fig. 1. 1H1T  Twitter feed. 
 
The figurative interlacing of human artifacts with trees and a seed with the pulse 
of a heartbeat presents two issues worth commenting on. The first issue concerns the 
ethics of representing care time as if it could be resolved through digital time, with 
an essential question  being the probable longevity and earnestness of involvement. 
The brief duration of the projection —a few days—gained anticipatory momentum 
through online and social media, which account for the significant turnout (via 
phone) over the course of a few weeks. Does this turnout and the 1H1T  movement 
exemplify “presentism,”  as Rob Nixon has perceptively underlined in  pondering the 
possible pitfalls of digital eco-activism? As digital media become incorporated in 
more facets of work and non-work life, Nixon reasons that digital media play a 
profound role in “how  we perceive and inhabit environmental time” (Nixon 277). He 
suggests a tension between how social media such as Twitter encourage 
“presentism,”  or valuing what happens now (as Twitter prompts users, “What’s  
happening?” and invites them to “[s]ee what’s  happening right now”),  and the need 
to stretch humans’  temporal horizon beyond the present to address environmental 
issues effectively (277). 
By raising this issue of the plausible durability of concern and activism, I am 
not implying that the 1H1T event and app did not prompt care or make time for care. 
Rather, I am attempting to tease out the temporal and caring affordances of IHIT ’s 
use of Twitter, the digital art projection, and the smartphone app. Clearly, the 
duration of the app experience is not exactly conducive to developing a nuanced 
understanding of the awareness that the 1H1T  campaign seeks to  raise regarding the 
situation of deforestation, its links to climate change,  and the interconnectedness of 
living situations and livelihoods around the world. Users are most apt to experience 
an abbreviated temporality of action that may last only a few seconds, both in one’s  
palm as one purchases a tree and upon a cultural monument, which flashes one’s  
name and  message, after which the image promptly dissolves into dormant code.  By 

 
 
 
176  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
contrast, the act of planting, which requires preparation and tending to, and the task 
of orchestrating and completing the planting projects, are actions lasting days to 
months to years. Such actions, like digital actions, are reduced in the 1H1T campaign 
to a timescale of visible moments, illustrated through snapshots and social media 
updates. As this aesthetic of readily digestible information exemplifies “the  kinds of 
glancing reading and viewing that the Internet engenders”  (Houser 331), it is 
reasonable to wonder if, in fact, the campaign is too firmly hitched to an abstract, 
linear sense of time. When  the smartphone app was first released, individuals around 
the world were invited to install and spread the word on Twitter and Facebook, as the 
following tweet (Fig. 2) urges: 
 
 
Fig. 2. 1H1T  Twitter feed. 
 
This tweet was undoubtedly intended to excite users into backing the 1H1T 
cause. Against the backdrop of a profusion of click- to-care campaigns in recent years 
(e.g., www. care2.com) and criticism that such campaigns exemplify neoliberal 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   177 
 
 attempts to foist social and environmental responsibility upon individuals while 
trivializing (even as they profit from) individual action (Büscher 729, 734-37),  it is 
possible to read the 1H1T campaign as exploiting the ease of embedding itself in  the 
routine digital immersion of the average user. With “the now” becoming increasingly 
enveloped by digital media actions and experiences (Crary 127-28), it would be 
convenient to argue that 1H1T is failing to disrupt the capitalist ethic of making each 
moment productive (Agger), such that any time invested in caring about  trees through 
the app is a unit of time that could be traded for any other. This cynical perspective, 
however, misses the unique temporal calibration that, in addition to the awareness 
raised about  tree planting and the opportunities to donate, is perhaps the most 
promising feature of the 1H1T app  and the 1B1T installation. 
Like Davies’s  breath-based installation works mentioned earlier, 1H1T 
arguably builds a sympathetic bridge between a human heartbeat and the growth of 
nonhuman (tree) life. Certainly, the campaign could do more to foreground tree 
agency, as its rhetoric of “the virtual becomes the real”  is predicated on a certain 
human control of the future: “It is the heartbeat of a person that gives birth, through 
technology, to another life, a tree”  (1 Heart 1 Tree , “Presentation”  section ). By 
comparison, consider the long-term sculpture endeavor, Beuys’  Acorns , curated by 
the artist duo Heather Ackroyd and Dan Harvey, who have gathered and planted 
hundreds of acorns from the trees planted in Kassel. The duo headlined a series of 
public discussion events over three months before the 2015 Paris climate talks, 
culminating in a “tree  ceremony,”  which featur ed a single evergreen oak tree 
symbolizing a prime “actor”  in a collective civic effort to address “an urban drama 
of increasing temperatures, damaging flood waters, polluted air and bio-diversity 
loss”  (Ackroyd and Harvey). In strategically naming trees as social, environmental, 
and political actors and making time for the tree, this eco-art endorses a narration of 
cities as more-than-human agencies, while embracing an ethic of planting in which 
care about  the tree is  rendered through a post-anthropocentric gesture.  
1H1T showcases an encouraging and innovative use of digital media to expand 
understandings of the urban environment beyond cityspaces and times. Nevertheless, 
it remains to be seen if future 1H1T  performances can better acknowledge the time 
and agency of trees. 
 
PopUP Forest , New  York  City  
 
PopUP Forest (PF) is a month-long digitally mediated artistic installation 
planned for NYC’s Times Square in May 2017. It aims to redirect attention from the 

 
 
 
178  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
commonly cited “benefits”  of the urban canopy  (Hartig et al. 128-29), such as 
shading and cooling pedestrians and buildings, cleansing atmospheric impurities, 
improving well-being and mood, and brightening the city’s  veneer, toward an 
immersive experience of a forest habitat. PF was conceived and is being coordinated 
by the organizers of NYC’s  Wildflower Week  (NYCWW), an annual event 
celebrating the city’s  778 plant species, led by NYCWW founder and urban 
conservation biologist Mariellé Anzelone ( PopUP Forest ; for a preview and 
summary, see Anzelone, “Build a PopUP Forest”).  With the assistance of digital and 
networking technologies, the sounds of the nearby Inman Hill Park will  be streamed 
live into the exhibit, which aspires to foster ecological awareness, concern, and 
wonder in residents and visitors within a public plaza. The plaza strikes Anzelone as 
perfectly poised to  deliver an  emotional “‘punch’” ( “The PopUP Forest Project ”) by 
“‘[g]rabbing public space, and setting up a forest in the most incongruous place 
imaginable’”  (qtd. in  Core n. pag. ), a place etched into the public imagination as  the 
commercial heart of NYC ( PopUP Forest ), an image the PF seeks to soften by 
providing “a neighborhood’s  worth of living, breathing nature”  (“The  PopUP Forest 
Project”).  
A distinguishing feature of the PF  campaign is  its aim to  “give  nature a voice”  
(Anzelone, “Build a PopUP Forest”), underscoring the city’s  situatedness in  a forest 
ecosystem. This attempt to let nature speak does not ascribe environmental agency 
to humans to change the terms of how trees and humans coexist in the city. Instead, 
it appears that humans are being asked to learn to hear the forest, a recurrent theme 
in Anzelone’s  work on urban forest issues beyond the PF campaign. In a series of 
seasonal pieces for The New York Times  on urban nature in NYC, her language 
reconstructs the experience of being in the forest surrounding the city, while teaching 
readers about ecological processes and the subtle visual and biochemical changes  
that announce  the dawn of a new season. In the following excerpt of a piece on the 
impending arrival of winter in Inman Hill Park, one feels gently yet generously led 
into uncommon territory. While visible to the average human eye, this snapshot of 
the park withholds a significance that Anzelone’s eye is trained to impart: “Mosses  
creep up the trunks of trees. Mosses spread along the surface of stones. Mosses 
blanket the flat distance in between. These primal plants have been here all along—
the park has the largest expanse of mosses in Manhattan—but we were busy charting 
changes  in more recently evolved flora”  (Anzelone, “Visiting  a Forest”).  Her 
writings, while thoroughly descriptive and educational, are infused with an activist 
appeal  to overwrite the image of NYC as “Skyscraper  National Park”  (Vonnegut 74; 
PopUP Forest ), changing how urban denizens and  city planners imagine the city, as  

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   179 
 
 a place of abundant and lively nonhuman natures: “We can define New York City as 
a city, full stop, or more expansively to include places for chestnut oaks to grow, 
places for metallic sweat bees to buzz and places for us to take it all in. . . . Go outside, 
and watch it unfold ” (Anzelone, “Manhattan  Forest”; ellipsis added ). 
The city’s  poetry materializes in Anzelone’s intellectually grounded yet 
sensuously evocative accounts of the continual, tiny, and  geological transformations 
in the urban forest landscape. The forest is not something humans primarily plant and 
create; on the contrary, it grows into its place in the city. An emphasis on the inclusion 
of tree temporalities in narrating a sense of place is similarly asserted by geographers 
Owain Jones and Paul Cloke, who compare how “three  tree- places”  in England 
transform over the course of a century or longer (93-94). Interweaving photos and 
historical research, they illustrate how “the active materialities and capacities of the 
trees have been significantly influential, not only on how sites have developed but 
also on human practices and performances within them”  (93; see also 88-92). In  PF, 
a consonant regard for tree capacities is evident. Not just plots in space or trunks of 
wood, trees, PF stresses, “are alive”  (The PopUP Forest Project ); they act, move, 
and can be sensed—in  time. Likewise, care about and for trees itself is meant to grow 
“over  time,”  such that “people  . . . care to the point where they are also vested in this 
future, and  speaking for the trees”  (Anzelone, Interview n.  pag.; ellipsis added ). 
In thus arguing against the normative urban (dis)regard for trees as “urban  
infrastructure instead of a biological thing”  (“The  PopUP Forest Project”),  PF offers 
a counterbalance to the focus on trees as ecosystem agents and members of human  
habitats by the city’s  now completed MillionTreesNYC planting campaign, which 
involved governmental employees, non-profit organizations, and city residents 
planting a combined one million trees along streets and in green spaces to meet 
sustainability targets (“About  MillionTrees NYC”).  More specifically, PF helps show 
that there is a relationship to be had with  trees and nature more generally. However, 
PF does not then link this relationship to making time to care for trees in the city, 
which is part of a broader issue mediating against the campaign’s  aspiration to breach 
the city’s  environmental timescape permanently, exacting “long-lasting changes  
where urbanites see, talk about, and are connected to local biodiversity”  (Anzelone, 
“Build a PopUP Forest”).  
Whereas the aim to unpack the city as an urban natural environment is 
repeatedly claimed throughout the PF campaign, curiously, recognizable cultural 
symbols and city monuments, such as the Statue of Liberty, are nowhere mentioned 
in Kickstarter, publicity, and social media. This effective erasure of the urban from 
urban nature sits awkwardly with the professed sincerity in undermining the 

 
 
 
180  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
contradiction between city and forest that Anzelone believes is etched into residents’  
urban imagination. For instance, Anzelone confesses her own naiveté prior to 
pursuing urban ecology in college and later as a career, when she believed very little 
nature existed in the city —or could exist, especially in NYC. Anticipating that 
Anzelone’s  experience is not unique, the organizers hope to remind New Yorkers 
that “[n]early  1/8 of the Big Apple is  forests, marshes, and  meadows, mo re than any  
other city in North America”  (PopUP Forest ). The personal narrative interwoven 
with statistics makes for a sincere, informed appeal  to reconsider NYC  as more than 
an artificially constructed environment. Nevertheless, the campaign does not 
integrate visions of the city with those of the forest, inadvertently reinforcing an 
antithetical relation between trees and cities. At times, to be sure, PF appears to argue 
for a more capacious understanding of nature that admits “products  of human action 
and intention”  (Snyder 9). Yet these products seem to be in tension with a 
surrounding nonhuman environment, as in the assertion that the re-emergence of 
flowers, plants, and trees in urban landscapes is a “signal  of hope in a concrete 
landscape”  (Anzelone and Hollender n. pag. ). Although this assertion gestures to the 
fact that “beneath  the structures of civilization”  is already “a world of wild nature”  
(Benfey 124), a heightened sensitivity to the forest is not then tied to a renewed sense 
(and narration) of place. In other words, greater engagement with and awareness of 
trees and the forest are not thereafter used to narrate the city as a place for trees. Thus, 
although PF depicts the city more fluidly, opening it up—analogously to the 
Indeterminate Hikes+  app—to surprising meetings with unexpected nonhuman 
elements and encounters, it does not amply justify how the city and forest coincide. 
Specifically, the times and experiences of the urban and the forest are inadequately 
linked. Apparently, for residents to learn how to “love”  trees (Anzelone, Interview n. 
pag.), they must leave the city rather than experience it differently.  
PF has received requests for an installation and expressions of interest from 
“Istanbul, Lima, London, Hong Kong, and Paris”  (Anzelone, “Build  a PopUP 
Forest”). If PF travels, the project’s  desire to bring the forest back to the city stands 
to share an experience of environmental time displaced from its servitude to urban 
capitalism. Still, it must make a stronger case for how a temporal interval can  irrupt, 
not simply pause, the city’s  fast-paced, concrete environment. 
 
Trees on Sidewalks , London 
 
Trees on Sidewalks (TS) proposes a research-based digital approach to studying 
the real-time flows and pasts of human encounters with urban trees in innermost 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   181 
 
 London. In contrast to the first two case studies, TS is based on my own critical and 
creative attempts to narrate haste and waste through digital photography. What  I 
report here is a highly condensed distillation of photographic and handwritten field 
notes amassed over two three-month periods in central London from April through 
June 2014 and November 2014 through January 2015. From January through June 
2016, I revisited the same areas, with similar findings. I chose areas that offered a 
selection of heavily frequented work, entertainment, and tourist spaces, including the 
South Bank, Bloomsbury, King’s  Cross/St. Pancras, Paddington, and the Strand. 
Whereas my field notes assume the form more of a photographic essay, my 
commentary inhabits a simultaneously personal and critical perspective, reflecting 
from a place of care, as researcher and urban inhabitant, on the method of digital 
photography for conveying and  exploring urban timescapes of human-tree relations. 
 
Excerpts from Field Notes 
 
As a pedestrian adjacent to honking and jam-packed streets, I readily witness 
movement, mostly of human bodies, though some nonhuman animal bodies —dogs, 
horses, and rats, along with insects and birds —do appear. Moving yet more briskly 
are machine-assisted bodies: bicycles, automobiles, trucks, and sometimes a plane 
overhead, which appears, in its distance from the ground, to move more lazily than 
all the rest. Amid the incessant to and fro appear  other structures and bodies that stand 
still; if they do move, it is too slowly to detect, overshadowed by the speed of the 
other, frantic movements. Trees are among the slowest, it seems. They are urban 
outliers, residing in a place where they are unwanted, or where they rarely enjoy 
hospitality. Trees pierced with pushpins and nails, in varieties of worn and rusted and 
freshly minted; needles with  no purpose, needles without flyers and  notices, needles 
jamming expired or forgotten advertisements into the tree. Trees embellished with 
hundreds of staples, stacked in columns as  if arranged with  practice (Fig. 3). 
 

 
 
 
182  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
 
Fig. 3. Pins on bark, dangling keys. Photo taken outside the School of African and 
Oriental Studies on May 26, 2016.  
 
Tree trunks, like lamp posts or common parking street signs, make handy 
resting places for plastic garbage bags and stable landmarks for pickup trucks. 
Loosely tied recycling bags nestle against the trunk, staying put even as half their 
contents are blown down the street, though some stay —so  thoughtful they are —and  
keep the tree plot warm on a windy night. There is room for all creatures, inorganic 
and organic, processed and fecal, upon the soil that should nurture the tree. Cola, 
beer, juice, and water, in their plastic, glass, and aluminum shelters, kicked about 
until they roll exactly to the foot of a tree. Litter of all shapes and  sizes, textures and 
densities, is a street tree’s  most faithful companion. Countless cigarette butts in a 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   183 
 
 single plot; perhaps they can evolve and decompose into soil-enriching matter (Fig. 
4). 
 
 
Fig. 4. A garden of cigarettes. Photo taken at  Covent Garden on April 4, 2014. 
 
And then, newly planted trees, supported at the waist till they are sufficiently 
old and seasoned to weather the litter storm that frequents the city during the day and 
stays the night, overstaying its welcome in a city too accelerated to notice. Though 
these trees, too, are home to temporary stays (Fig. 5). Invaluable practice for the years 
ahead —if they su rvive. 
 

 
 
 
184  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
 
Fig. 5. A bicycle, wearied and  caught  in the storm, finds a tree to  support its  weight. 
Photo taken in front of the Royal Courts of Justice on November 3, 2014. 
 
Commentary  
 
Among major cities, London is well known for its green cover, which amounts 
to approximately 47% of the total area of the city (“Key  London Figures”).  London 
has more trees —8.3 million —than does any other city, a crucial statistic that has 
fueled the current proposal to grant London status as a National Park City (“The 
Proposal ” 9). With nearly as many trees as people (8.6 million), human-tree relations 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   185 
 
 are vital to forming and comprehending the city’s  ecological outlook. My 
observations of passersby, however, suggest that minimal interactions occur. People 
pause, linger, and use a tree as they might a lamp post while waiting for a friend or 
scrolling through text messages on their mobile phones. Figure 5 is a testament to 
this obliviousness to trees as other than “street  furniture”  (Streetscape Guidance 
207), mere design elements on a road or at an intersection. As an urban prop, the tree 
is not the living sculpture that Beuys envisaged would grow with and rejuvenate 
cities, but a symbol of decay and neglect. 
At the same time, a peculiar irony persists in the kinds of treatment of trees that 
urban denizens do make time for. This irony is strongly suggested in figure 3. While 
the single pushpin for the key may serve some function (though an  unreliable one, if  
the goal is safekeeping), the other pins arranged in clusters in two places higher up 
the bark (left and upper middle) seem not only cruel but senseless: why squander 
time that could be used to care by creating more caring labor to undo the lack of care 
(maiming the tree)? This photo urges an ethical response to the question of what 
matters and lives are cared about, enough to make time for them. The fact that the 
human imprints left on trees indicate a consistent lack of care time only agitates this 
urgency. Figure 4, for instance, suggests that no time is available to appropriately 
dispense with human refuse, or, alternatively, insufficient time to care about  waste 
disposal. 
While digital photography fulfilled a strategic aim in inferring the quality and 
extent of caring for trees, the limits  of photographic capture and representation 
brought into question my own ethical relationship with and responsibility to the 
project. These limits suggested a way to take care and take time in studying and 
representing urban timescapes. In collecting traces of past human interactions with 
trees, I became aware of the need, specifically, to consider how photography can 
likewise regard the trees’  agencies as living testimonies. Of the three photographs 
included here, figure 3 best articulates this ethical issue. In this photo, I endeavored 
to frame the tree as an active, strong, towering presence, not a passive victim of the 
harm done to it. To encourage keener attention to tree agency, it is worth spending 
time consulting depictions and images of trees that do take care in how they position 
the tree as an actor. John Constable’s  oil painting Study of the Trunk of an Elm Tree , 
pictured below, is  instructive here. 
 

 
 
 
186  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
 
Fig. 6. John Constable,  Study of the Trunk of an Elm Tree  (circa 1821); ©  Victoria 
and Albert Museum, London. Used by permission. 
 
As Robert Pogue Harrison notes of the elm’s  posture in the painting: “It stands 
there as the embodiment of something that has come to appearance, . . . that somehow 
gives itself in itself before it gives itself over to representation”  (208; ellipsis added ). 
Analogously, continuations of TS might experiment with imparting a sense of the 
tree standing and  growing for itself, for more-than-human reasons. 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   187 
 
 Showing care in re-presenting trees does not concern only methods. It is 
analytically significant that trees are overlooked on the urban sidewalk. Displaced in 
the blink of a footstep, the sidewalk concretizes the fact that capitalist time is 
everywhere afoot. As Karl Marx writes: “Capital by its nature drives beyond every 
spatial barrier. Thus the creation of the physical conditions of exchange —of the 
means of communication and transport —the annihilation of space by time —becomes 
an extraordinary necessity for it” (Grundrisse  524). As time rather than space thus 
offers a prime source of capital accumulation, the growth of capitalism itself requires 
speeding up the pace of human life (Luke 324-26), a requirement insinuated in the 
most trivial, though telling, of choices: the choice to remember to unpin an event 
poster from a tree trunk or to break one’s  fingernails while removing a stubborn nail. 
Urban dwellers must ask themselves, would they be as willing to accelerate their 
movements through the city if doing so meant leaving human bodies in such a state? 
This question is made more urgent by the fact that these data on how trees are 
used and abused in London from 2014 are not temporally hermetic, but continue to 
haunt and characterize the city’s  practices and attitudes with respect to trees as 
recently, as similar artifacts, from cigarette lighters and broken liquor bottles to 
chewing gum and oxidized metals, can be routinely found encircling, resting against, 
or stuck (in)to trees. Setting an ecological agenda for caring about  and for trees in 
London requires retaining, indeed retracing, past and habitual interactions. Enriching 
this exploratory mapping may involve a considered leveraging of other digital media. 
Considering an emerging class of digital apps for facilitating more sustainable urban 
environments and citizen action, such as mapping tools that rate the walkability of 
urban neighborhoods (Dörk and Monteyne 3), encouraging and exchanging the use 
of photographic and video footage of urban trees among a wider network of users 
and researchers may offer a useful means to  share time for care. 
 
Conclusion  
 
“While  space,”  Barbara Adam proposes, “is  associated with  visible matter and  
sense data, time is the invisible ‘other ,’ that which works outside and beyond the 
reach of our senses”  (9). This essay has worked to prove this association otherwise, 
showing, through three case studies, how time materializes in the spaces of encounter 
between human-tree relations. In their efforts to portray the timescapes of human-
tree relations in relation to Paris, NYC, and London, the case studies suggest that the 
timelines and rhythms across which these relations are forged and unfold are 
precisely what require communicating and living in more material and affecting 

 
 
 
188  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
ways. They encourage a nuanced appreciation of digital devices and platforms as 
among the “materials  and technologies”  that individuals increasingly use to  “inhabit  
particular places”  (Heise, Sense of Place 76) and that, by the same token, offer 
important aesthetic opportunities for reimagining a sense of place that fosters 
cohabiting with trees in cities in more meaningful, caring, and focused ways. Each 
digital artistic intervention represents a concerted effort to fracture the image of the 
city as a constructed human accomplishment by bringing into focus a more-than-
human urban timescape. This effort is  noticeable in , for example, the deployment of 
Paris as  a material and  symbolic vehicle for provoking responses to  local and  global 
incidents of deforestation and climate disruption; the appeal  to NYC residents to slow 
down and sense the rhythms of the urban forest; and the use of digital photography 
to expose the waste accumulating in London on account, partly, of being out of step 
with tree time. 
In these cases, the ecocritical matter of waste is, in an important respect, a call 
to act upon this awareness of unsustainable and ecologically polluting haste. It is a 
call to attune the city to the temporalities of trees as well as humans, and to the fact 
that “time  entangles us all” (Rose 139), for there is no “away” in the Anthropocene 
(Morton 109). Attempts to escape may temporarily banish the experience of haste,4 
while  waste  silently  sounds  an unmissable  reminder.  Reserving  no time for care 
means  withholding time to renew  relations  vital for life, boding a future  when  
“[h]umans  can no longer  destroy  [waste]  but only be destroyed  by it” (Bragard  462).  
Taking time to care means  making time to narrate more- than-human  “stories  that 
awaken  ethical  sensibility  in this time when  so much is happening  so rapidly  and 
seemingly  so unstoppably”  (Rose  139).  
 
 
Works Cited 
“About  MillionTrees NYC.” MillionTreesNYC . 18 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.milliontrees nyc.org/html/about/dpr.shtml>. 
Ackroyd, Heather, and Dan Harvey. Beuys’  Acorns . Ackroyd & Harvey: Works . N.p., 
n.d. 12 Dec. 2016. <https://www.ackroydandharvey.com/beuys-acorns>. 
Adam, Barbara. Timescapes of Modernity: The Environment and Invisible Hazards . 
London: Routledge, 1998. 
                                                 
4 In early November 2016 , I walked along a canal leading away from Paddington, where several 
transit links converge, supplying swift and ready access out of and into central  London.  There  I 
noticed  the following  sign, advertising  a new commercial  development:  “A waterside square/Relax  
by the canal,  in/a traffic -free oasis,  where/the  pace of life feels  that/little  bit less frenetic.”  

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   189 
 
 Agger, Ben. “Time  Robbers, Time Rebels: Limits to Fast Capital.” 24/7: Time and 
Temporality in the Network Society . Ed. Robert Hassan and Ronald E. Purser. 
Stanford: Stanford UP, 2007. 219-34. 
Alaimo, Stacy. Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material Self . 
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2010. 
—. “Material  Engagements: Science Studies and the Environmental Humanities.”  
Ecozon@: European Journal of Literature, Culture and Environment  1.1 
(2010): 69-74. 
Anzelone, Mariellé. “Build  a PopUP Forest in Times Square, NYC.”  Kickstarter . 
Kickstarter, Apr. 2015. 12 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/popupforest/build-a-popup-forest- in-
times-square-nyc>. 
—. Interview by Aaron Reiss. City Atlas . City Atlas, 17 Apr. 2013. 12 Dec. 2016. 
<https://newyork.thecityatlas.org/people/marielle-anzelone>. 
—. “Manhattan  Forest, Now Barren, Is Far from Lifeless.”  City Room: Blogging from 
the Five Boroughs. The New York Times, 23 Dec. 2011. 16 Dec. 2016. 
<https://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/12/23/manhattan-forest-now-
barren- is-far-from-lifeless/#more-384577>. 
—. “Visiting a Forest at Its Most Elemental.”  City Room: Blogging from the Five 
Boroughs . The New York Times, 16 Dec. 2011. 16 Dec. 2016. 
<https://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/12/16/autumn-unfolds-visiting-a-
forest- at-its-most-elemental>. 
—., and Wendy Hollender. “When  New York City Bloomed.” The New York Times . 
The New York Times, 26 Mar. 2011. 11 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/03/25/opinion/20110326-
opart.html?scp=1&sq=wildflower&st=cse#>. 
Bastian, Michelle. “Inventing  Nature: Re-Writing Time and Agency in a More-Than-
Human World.”  Australian Humanities Review  47 (2009): 99-116.  
Benfey, Christopher. “The  Critter Poet.” American Audacity: Literary Essays North 
and South . Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 2008. 116-25.  
Benjamin, Walter. The Arcades Project . 1988. Trans. Rolf Tiedemann  and Kevin  
McLaughlin.  Cambridge : Belknap,  1999.  
Biemann, Ursula. “Deep  Weather:  The Audiovisual  Text in Times  of Global  
Warming.”  Elemental:  An Arts and Ecology  Reader . Ed. James Brady.  
Manches ter: Gaia  Project , 2016. 124- 27. 
Bonneuil, Christophe, and Jean-Baptiste Fressoz. The Shock of the Anthropocene: 
The Earth, History and Us. Trans. David Fernbach. Brooklyn: Verso, 2015. 

 
 
 
190  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
Bragard, Véronique. “Introduction:  Languages of Waste: Matter and Form in Our 
Garb- Age.”  Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment  20.3 
(2013): 459-63. 
Büscher, Bram. “Nature  2.0: Exploring and Theorizing the Links between New 
Media and  Nature Conservation.”  New Media & Society  18.5 (2016):  726-43. 
Castree, Noel. “The  Anthropocene and the Environmental Humanities: Extending the 
Conversation.”  Environmental Humanities 5.1 (2014): 233-60. 
Chakrabarty, Dipesh. “The  Climate of History: Four Theses.”  Critical Inquiry  25 
(2009): 197-222. 
Chang, Alenda Y. “Think  Galactically, Act Microscopically? The Science of Scale 
in Video Games.”  Sustainable Media: Critical Approaches to Media and 
Environment . Ed. Nicole Starosielski and  Janet Walker. New York: Routledge, 
2016. 290-313. 
Cooke, Lynne. “Joseph  Beuys, 7000 Oaks.”  Dia Art Foundation . Dia Art 
Foundation, 21 Feb. 2006. 12 Dec. 2016. 
<http://www.diaart.org/media/_file/brochures/beuys-joseph-7000-oaks-
new.pdf >.  
Core, Liz. “This Ecologist Wants to Plant a ‘Pop -Up’ Forest in Times Square.”  Grist . 
Grist, 16 Mar. 2015. 11 Dec. 2016. <https://grist.org/cities/this- ecologist-wants-
to-plant-a-pop-up-forest- in-times-square>. 
The Countdown 2° Clock . Human Impact Lab. Human Impact Lab, n.d. 16 Dec. 
2016. <https://climateclock.net >. 
Crary, Jonathan. 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep . New York: Verso, 
2013. 
Davies, Char. Interview by Nick Bailey. “Technology  at the Service of Art.”  Trans. 
Susanne van Nierop. Creatie  9.3 (2012): 44-47. 
Demarco, Richard. “Conversations  with Artists.”  Studio International  195.996 
(1982): 46. 
Dörk, Marian, and David Monteyne. “Urban Co-Creation: Envisioning New Digital 
Tools for Activism and Experimentation in the City.”  ACM CHI Politics and 
the City Workshop. ACM, Vancouver. 7-12 May 2011. Address. 1-4. 
<http://mariandoerk.de/urbancocreation/hpc2011.pdf> 
Earl, Jennifer, and Katrina Kimport. Digitally Enabled Social Change: Activism in 
the Internet Age . Cambridge: MIT P,  2011. 
Ecotopia . Talkie. 2008. Facebook game. 
Fenton, Natalie. Digital, Political, Radical . Malden: Polity, 2016. 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   191 
 
 “For the Love of Trees –London.”  Mayor of London . Greater London Authority, n.d. 
16 Dec. 2016. <https://www.london.gov.uk/WHAT- WE-
DO/environment/parks-green-spaces- and-biodiversity/trees- and-
woodlands/love-trees-london>. 
Harrison, Robert Pogue. Forests: The Shadow of Civilization. Chicago: U of Chicago 
P, 1992. 
Hartig, Terry, et al. “Health  Benefits of Nature Experience: Psychological, Social 
and Cultural Processes.”  Forests, Trees and Human Health. Ed. Kjell  Nilsson 
et al. Dordrecht:  Springer, 2011. 127- 68. 
Healy, Patrick. “La Difesa della Natura.”  Free International University Amsterdam . 
Free International University Amsterdam, n.d. 14 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.fiuamsterdam.com/html/patrick_healy_-_la_difesa_dell.html>. 
Heise, Ursula K. Sense of Place and Sense of Planet: The Environmental Imagination 
of the Global . Oxford: Oxford UP, 2008. 
—. “Unnatural  Ecologies: The Metaphor of the Environment in Media Theory.”  
Configurations  10.1 (2002): 149-68. 
Held, Virginia. The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and Global . Oxford: Oxford 
UP, 2006. 
Hodges, Heather E., and Galen Stocking. “A Pipeline of Tweets: Environmental 
Movements’  Use of Twitter in Response to the Keystone XL Pipeline.”  
Environmental Politics  25.2 (2016): 223-47. 
Holmes, Tiffany. “Environmental  Awareness through Eco-Visualization: Combining 
Art and Technology to Promote Sustainab ility.”  NeMe. NeMe, 14 Dec. 2006. 
12 Dec. 2016. <https://www.neme.org/texts/environmental-awareness>. 
Houser, Heather. “The  Aesthetics of Environmental Visualizations: More Than 
Information Ecstasy.”  Public Culture  26.2 (2014): 319-37. 
“Indeterminate Hikes+.”  EcoArtTech . Leila Nadir + Cary Peppermint, 2012. 17 Dec. 
2016. <https://www.ecoarttech.net/project/indeterminate-hike>. 
Iovino, Serenella. “Naples 2008, or,  the Waste Land: Trash, Citizenship, and an Ethic 
of Narration.”  Neohelicon  36.2 (2009): 335-46. 
JohnnyAppl . Anton Doos, Mike Hogan, and Zeeshan Khalid. 2015. Web trivia game. 
Johns-Putra, Adeline. “Environmental  Care Ethics: Notes toward a Materialist 
Critique.”  symplokē 21.1-2 (2013): 125-35. 
Jones, Owain, and Paul Cloke. “Non -Human Agencies: Trees in Place and Time.”  
Material Agency: Towards a Non-Anthropocentric Approach . Ed. Carl 
Knappett and  Lambros  Malafouris. Berlin: Springer, 2008. 79-96.  

 
 
 
192  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
“Joseph  Beuys, 7000 Oaks .” Dia Art Foundation . Dia Art Foundation, n.d. 12 Dec. 
2016. <https://diaart.org/visit/visit/joseph-beuys-7000-oaks>. 
Joyce, Mary. Preface. Digital Activism Decoded: The New Mechanics of Change . Ed. 
Mary Joyce. New York: International Debate Education Association, 2010. vii-
xi. 
Keifer-Boyd, Karen. “reStAG E<deep breadth>activist art/disruptive t echnologies.”  
The Journal of Social Theory in Art Education  30 (2010): 38-48. 
<https://scholarscompass.vcu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1365&context=j
stae>. 
“Key  London Figures.”  Greenspace Information for Greater London. GIGL, 2015. 
1 Dec. 2016. <www.gigl.org.uk/our-data-holdings/keyfigures>. 
Klisanin, Dana. “Exploring  the Design of Conscious Media.”  Futures 42 (2010): 
1119-25. 
Lockwood, Alex. “Affecting Environments: Mobilizing Emotion and Twitter in the 
UK Save Our Forests Campaign.” Environmental Conflict and the Media . Ed. 
Libby Lester and Brett Hutchins. New York: Peter Lang, 2013. 49-60. 
Lowenstein, Oliver. “Everyone  Is an Artist.”  Greenmuseum . greenmuseum.org, 
2004. 14 Dec. 2016. 
<https://greenmuseum.org/generic_content.php?ct_id=180>. 
Luke, Timothy W. “‘Moving  at the Speed of Life?’  A Cultural Kinematics of 
Telematic Times and Corporate Values.”  Cultural Values 2.2-3 (1998): 320-39. 
Marx, Karl. Grundrisse: Foundations of the Critique of Political Economy . Trans. 
Martin Nicolaus. London: Penguin Books in Association with New Left Review , 
1973. 
Maxwell, Richard, and Toby Miller. “Ecological  Ethics and Media Technology.”  
International Journal of Communication  2 (2008): 331-53. 
Mestaoui, Naziha. “1 Heart 1 Tree International Tour.”  Vimeo . Vimeo, Jan. 2016. 1 
Dec. 2016. <https://vimeo.com/152356928>. 
Moore, Jason W. “Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and the Crisis of 
Capitalism.”  Introduction. Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and 
the Crisis of Capitalism . Ed. Jason W.  Moore. Oakland: PM, 2016. 1-11.  
—. “The Capitalocene Part II: Abstract Social Nature and the Limits to Capital.”  
Jason W. Moore . Jason W. Moore, June 2014. 1-52. 15 Dec. 2016. 
<http://www.jasonwmoore.com/uploads/The_Capitalocene___Part_II__June_
2014.pdf >.   
Morton, Timothy. Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World. 
Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2013. 

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   193 
 
 Nadir, Leila C., and Cary Peppermint. “Indeterminate Hikes+ : Hiking through the 
Urban Wilderness.”  Performance on Behalf of the Environment . Ed. Richard D. 
Besel and  Jnan A. Blau. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2014. 175-89. 
Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge: 
Harvard UP, 2011. 
NYC WWW Team. NYC Wildflower Week . Torrey Botanical Society, n.d. 1 Dec. 
2016. <https://nycwildflowerweek.org>. 
“One Beat One Tree.” YouTube . YouTube, 29 June 2014. 16 Dec. 2016. 
<https:// www.youtube.com/watch?v= ie80LvSpIpk>.  
1 Heart 1 Tree . Seed of Light, n.d. 17 Dec. 2016. <https://www.1heart1tree.org>. 
“1 Heart 1 Tree Goes Global: Forest Climate Action v ia Your Smartphone.”  UN 
Climate Change Newsroom . UNFCCC, 24 Feb. 2016. 1 Dec. 2016. 
<https://newsroom.unfccc.int/unfccc-newsroom/1-heart-1-tree-goes-global>.  
Peltier, Elian. “Eiffel  Tower Goes Green for Climate Talks.”  The New York Times . 
The New York Times, 29 Nov. 2015. 1 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/projects/cp/climate/2015-paris-climate-
talks/eiffel-tower-goes-green-for-climate-talks>. 
Peters, John Durham. The Marvelous Clouds: Toward a Philosophy of Elemental 
Media . Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2015. 
Philpot, Susan. “Joseph  Beuys Sculpture Park.”  The Rest of the Story . Blog, 26 Apr. 
2015. 16 Dec. 2016. <https://history-susanphilpott.org/uncategorized/joseph-
beuys-sculpture-park>. 
“The  PopUp Forest Project: The Forest amidst the Lights and Billboards of Times 
Square.”  The Daily Dot . The Daily Dot, n.d. 11 Dec. 2016. 
<https://citykickstarts.dailydot.com/popupforest?tw=dd>. 
PopUP Forest: Times Square . NYCWW, 2015. 1 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.popupforest.org>.  
“The  Proposal.”  Let’s  Make London a National Park City . Greater London National 
Park City Initiative, July 2015. 1 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.nationalparkcity.london/proposal>. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Ethical  Doings in Naturecultures.”  Ethics, Place and 
Environment  13.2 (2010): 151-69. 
—. “Making  Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care.”  Social 
Studies of Science 45.5 (2014): 691-716. 
Purdy, Jedediah. After Nature: A Politics for the Anthropocene . Cambridge: Harvard 
UP, 2015. 

 
 
 
194  Concentric  43.1   March 2017 
 
Rose, Deborah Bird. “Multispecies  Knots of Ethical Time.”  Environmental 
Philosophy  9.1 (2012): 127-40. 
Segerberg, Alexandra, and W. Lance Bennett. “Social  Media and the Organization 
of Collective Action: Using Twitter to Explore the Ecologies of Two Climate 
Change Protests.”  The Communication Review  14.3 (2011): 197-215. 
Seitzinger, Sybil P., et al. “Planetary  Stewardship in an Urbanizing World: Beyond 
City Limits.”  Ambio 41.8 (2012): 787-94. 
“7000  Oak Trees.”  Tate Modern. Tate Modern, n.d. 16 Dec. 2016. 
<https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/beuys-7000-oak-trees-ar00745>. 
Snyder, Ga ry. The  Practice of the Wild. Berkeley: Counterpoint, 1990.  
Steffen, Will, et al. “The  Anthropocene: Conceptual and Historical Perspectives.”  
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A  369.1938  (2011): 842-67. 
Strauss, David Levi. “Beuys  in Ireland.”  From Heart to Head: Art and the Manual . 
New York: Oxford UP, 2010. 33-37. 
Streetscape Guidance . 3rd ed. Mayor of London and TfL, 2016. 1 Dec. 2016. 
<https://content.tfl.gov.uk/streetscape-guidance.pdf>. 
Tree Planet . Tree Planet. 2010. Mobile game series. 
Tree Story Game . ZigZagZoom. 2015. Mobile game. 
Tronto, Joan C. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . New 
York: Routledge, 1994. 
Vonnegut, Kurt. Slapstick, or, Lonesome No More . New York: Vintage, 2008. 
Wajcman, Judy. Pressed for Time: The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capitalism . 
Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2016. 
“Walker  Art Center’s  Tree-Planting Project.” Walker Art Center . Walker Art Center, 
n.d. 12 Dec. 2016. 
<http://www.walkerart.org/archive/9/A143E5F68AFD50EC6177.htm>. 
Wallis, Jake, and Lisa M. Given. “#digital  activism: New Media and Political 
Protest.”  First  Monday  21.2 (2016): n. pag. 12 Dec. 2016. 
<https://uncommonculture.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/5879/5197>. 
Wendling, Caroline. “Oaks & Amity.”  Deveron Projects . Deveron Projects, n.d. 12 
Dec. 2016. <www.deveron-projects.com/caroline-wendling>. 
Whyte,  Kyle  Powys , and Chris  J. Cuomo.  “Ethics  of Caring  in Environmental  Ethics:  
Indigenous  and Feminist  Philosophies.” The Oxford  Handbook  of 
Environmental  Ethics.  Ed. Stephen  M. Gardiner  and Allen  Thompson. New 
York:  Oxford UP, 2017. 234 -47. 
Zylinska,  Joanna. Minimal  Ethics  for the Anthropocene . Ann Arbor:  Open  
Humanities , 2014.  

 
 
 
Shruti Desai   195 
 
 About the Author  
Shruti Desai is a PhD Candidate in Media and Communications at Goldsmiths College, 
University of London. Her research interests include environmental art and philosophy, 
feminist and material ecocriticism, human-tree relations, and space and time. She is currently 
completing her dissertation, which examines how care about and for trees is promoted and 
facilitated by digital campaigns for global and local afforestation and reforestation projects. 
 
[Received 1 July 2016;  accepted 11 November 2016] 

