Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Rural Studies
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jrurstud
‘Herding is his favourite thing in the world ’: Convivial world-making on a
multispecies farm
Kelly Donati1
University of Melbourne, Faculty of Science, School of Geography, 221 Bouverie St. Parkville, VIC, Melbourne, 3010, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
ConvivialityAgriculture
Animal-human relations
CareGastronomyMultispecies ethnographyABSTRACT
At its etymological roots, conviviality attends fundamentally to the question of how to live well together. This
multispecies ethnography of a small multispecies farm in Victoria, Australia employs conviviality as a lens
through which to explore the co-constituted world of agriculture and the possibilities of its multispecies plea-
sures. Engaging with literature in science and technology studies, cultural anthropology and human geography,the farm is approached as a lively site of conviviality, with the writings of nineteenth-century socialist utopianCharles Fourier employed as an alternative imaginary for making sense of animal-human relations in agriculture.
Exploring themes of breed, work and care, this paper draws on strategic anthropocentrism to posit a vantage
point from which to recognise how animals and their pleasures co-produce the social worlds of farming. Therelational dynamic between humans, working dogs, cows, sheep and chickens tells a lively story of material and
aﬀective entanglement but also reveals how the intimacies of a ﬀection and care sit uncomfortably alongside the
reality of slaughter. These social dynamics are explored to propose that the good life in livestock production is
one that is co-produced and judged by animals themselves and that a more convivial agriculture is contingent on
humans and animals being on better working terms.
1. Introduction
Agriculture is always a more-than-human endeavour. In an industry
that too often conceptualises life in mechanistic and economic terms,
new stories of farming are needed that transcend humanist and in-
strumentalist approaches to living and working with others, an alter-
native currency by which agricultural labour —and its social pleasur-
es—might be valued and accounted for. Drawing on a case study of a
small multispecies farm in Victoria, Australia, this paper employsconviviality as a lens through which to explore the co-constituted social
worlds of farming. At its etymological roots, conviviality ( conmeaning
‘together ’and vivere meaning ‘to live ’) attends fundamentally to the
question of how to live well together. Foundational to the social
ﬂourishing of the table, it enacts a gastronomic ‘ritual of survival ’and
commensal practice that ‘cannot be celebrated by oneself ’(Montanari,
2012 , 124). Yet taking seriously the question of co- ﬂourishing —with
loved ones, neighbours, urban denizens, citizens of nations or even, asDonna Haraway puts it, other ‘terran critters ’(2008, 294) —extends the
ethical and political signi ﬁcance of conviviality far beyond the table.
My discussion situates itself amongst scholars who make a case for
the transformative and utopian potential of doing and, importantly,feeling food di ﬀerently ( Carolan, 2016 ;Stock et al., 2015 ). As a projectthat leans more toward a politics of hope than critique, my own com-
mitment is to engender new stories of agriculture and gastronomy that
move beyond ‘rendering a bad food world more visible ’and contribute
instead, as Hugh Campbell suggests, to making ‘a better food world
more thinkable ’(Campbell, 2015 , 196). To this end, I explore the in-
tersubjective pleasures emerging from the ‘co-constructed a ﬀectivity, a
shared approach to life ’that comes through humans and animals living
together and, in the case of farm life, working together ( Porcher, 2014,
4). Themes of breed, work and care come to the fore in ways thathighlight the conditions by which the agency of animals might be re-
cognised in attempts to live well amongst species di ﬀerence. My paper
oﬀers an empirical account of farming that constitutes, as Haraway
suggests, a kind of ‘worlding ’with
 the potential for ‘richer and more
responsive invention, speculation, and proposing ’in which humans
might cultivate new forms of attentiveness to nonhuman pleasure
(2008, 92 –93). As a practice that feeds humans but also determines the
conditions by which many species live, eat and die, agriculture is one ofthe most fundamental of such worlding projects.
Within cultural geography, animal studies and the environmental
humanities, there has been signi ﬁcant focus on contesting human ex-
ceptionalism through methodological approaches that explore the pol-itics of living well amongst species di ﬀerence ( Kirksey and Helmreich,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2018.12.008
Received 9 April 2018; Received in revised form 11 October 2018; Accepted 15 December 2018E-mail address: Kelly.donati@angliss.edu.au .
1Present address: William Angliss Institute, Faculty of Higher Education, 555 La Trobe Street, Melbourne VIC, Australia 3000.Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
Available online 18 January 2019
0743-0167/ Crown Copyright © 2019 Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
2010 ;Rose, 2005 ,2015 ;Van Dooren and Rose, 2012 ). This exploration
of multispecies entanglements has given over to concerns with the
purposive killing of animals for food as well as the commodi ﬁcation of
life in systems of capitalist production ( Coles, 2011 ;Pachirat, 2011;
Higgin et al., 2011; Porcher, 2017). Within this scholarship, theoretical
debates and critical tensions play out between animal welfare literaturefocused on improving the conditions under which animals live ( Buller
and Roe, 2018) and critical animal geography with explicit commit-ments to animal liberation or abolitionism ( Best, 2009 ). This paper
supports and is situated within this important body of work on thepolitics of living and dying in animal agriculture by exploring the af-
fective socialities —as well as the tensions —that shape how humans and
animals live, and work, together.
Nonhuman pleasure has until recently been neglected or denied
within both animal welfare science and agriculture itself, focusing in-stead on reducing su ﬀering and other negative a ﬀective states without
due attention to the unique pleasures of animal worlds ( Balcombe,
2009 ). At the same time, animals and their emotional worlds increas-
ingly appear as ‘free’or‘happy ’in marketing discourse or, conversely,
sad and con ﬁned in animal welfare campaigns. I remain conscious of
the all-too-easy assumptions behind discourses of ‘happy meat ’(Coles,
2011 ;Miele, 2011; Pilgrim, 2013) but remain uneasy with attempts to
disentangle the social worlds of humans and animals in agriculture.This exclusionary gesture potentially risks overlooking how animal
husbandry —or animal care work, as Buller and Roe (2018) prefer —is
critical to the story of how humans and animals have lived together andenabled one another over millennia, a relationship in which mutuality
and collaboration sits alongside exploitation and brutality. Conviviality,
I propose, o ﬀers one way of making sense of agriculture's social rela-
tions without reducing these to technoscienti ﬁc solutions for improving
animal welfare. As such, I join animal sociologist Jocelyne Porcher in
exploring ‘the pleasure of being with animals ’as‘a utopia, an im-
possible country ’(2017, xiv), as she puts it, to ensure that the world-
making experiences of humans and animals as currently practiced in arange
of farming settings are not obscured within broader debates
about the exploitative relations of livestock production, industrial orotherwise.
With this utopia in mind, my paper draws inspiration from nine-
teenth-century writer Charles Fourier whose utopian imaginary posi-
tions agriculture as central to the project of re-imagining the economic,
social, sensory and gastronomic relations of early capitalism. In
drawing inspiration from Fourier (without ﬁdelity to the full spectrum
of his ideas), my case study encounters the animal farm as a site forconvivial world-making. Porcher's research on animal labour and
Vinciane Despret's philosophical ethology inform my empirical analysis
in not only recognising how animals ‘engage themselves subjectively in
the work ’on farms but also how they bring their own judgement to bear
on the conditions of co-existence created by farmers ( Porcher and
Schmitt, 2012 , 55). Just as Haraway explores how to ‘share the con-
ditions of work, including the su ﬀering ’(2008, 70), I argue that the
shared pleasures of social relations are equally important, even if thesepleasures are not equivalent, and propose that imagining convivial
pleasure beyond the human might productively destabilise dominant
conﬁgurations of animal-human relations in agriculture.
Theﬁrst part of this paper brie ﬂy introduces the ontological com-
mitments and methodological approaches following the ‘species turn’
and emergence of multispecies ethnography, which have generated aﬂourishing of new questions about the entangled social and metabolic
worlds of animals, fungi, plants and microbes. After elaborating on theanalytical commitments of multispecies ethnography, I then draw on
Fourier's convivial imaginary to challenge the instrumentalisation of
animal-human relations engendered by capitalist production. The case
study in the third section elucidates how these ideas play out on a small
multispecies farm where the relational dynamic between humans,
working dogs, sheep, cows and chickens tells a lively story of convivial
pleasures. The fourth section explores the possibilities of strategicanthropomorphism for overcoming the ‘species barrier ’of pleasure
between humans and other terrans critters and for fostering greateropenness to the a ﬀective experiences and pleasures of animals on farms
(Charles, 2014). Yet, in considering what it means to take seriously
animals as active participants in the making of convivial worlds, there
remains a gap between conviviality on the farm and the conviviality of
the table within which killing happens. Resolving this gap goes beyond
the scope of this paper, but the penultimate section explores the limits
of conviviality. I conclude by exploring the ethical possibility for a more
radical anthropomorphism.
2. Researching multispecies conviviality
2.1. Allies in disrupting human exceptionalism
The rich arena of ‘postdualist ’scholarship has expanded ontological
deﬁnitions of who and what might constitute a subject and sought to
resist the epistemological framing of nonhumans as spoken of and for
but never as active subjects ( Latour, 2004; Braun, 2008 ;Castree, 2012).
These conceptual frameworks have ‘stretch[ed] prevailing modes of
subjectivity ’beyond human concern ( Connolly, 2013 , 400). The lively
scholarly terrain of multispecies ethnography has proven critically,conceptually
and methodologically rich for troubling the humanist
dualisms and species boundaries of western metaphysics, along withproductively accounting for the histories, minglings, transformations
and dislocations of living and dying which co-produce social worlds
(Kirksey et al., 2014; Van Dooren et al., 2016 ).
2Bennett's vital mate-
rialism similarly provides important ontological and epistemologicalstrategies for imagining how to ‘devise new procedures, technologies
and regimes of perception that enable us to consult nonhumans moreclosely, or to listen and respond more carefully to their outbreaks, ob-
jections, testimonies and propositions ’in imagining politics anew
(2010, 107). Of particular interest in this paper is how humans andanimals o ﬀer up such propositions to each other and how animals in
livestock agriculture might even 'judge the work' of human caregivers(Despret, 2008 , 133).
Within this context, cultural geographers Hinchli ﬀe and Whatmore
consider the ontological and epistemological implications of con-viviality for articulating ‘a more broadly conceived accommodation of
diﬀerence, better attuned to the comings and goings of the multiplicity
of more-than-human inhabitants ’with whom humans live and work,
knowingly and unknowingly (2006, 125). This politics of convivialityexpands ‘civility’ to encompass the ‘practical intercorporeality of civic
associations in which particular kinds of individual entities thrive incombination with others whose capacities and powers enhance their
own’ (Hinchli ﬀe and Whatmore, 2006 , 135). However, as van Dooren
and Rose note, rethinking interspecies living-togetherness places theonusﬁrmly on humans to ‘ﬁnd multiple, life-enhancing ways of sharing
and co-producing meaningful and enduring multispecies ’arrangements,
including how humans live and work with animals (2012, 18 –19). A
‘commitment to ﬂourishing biosocial conviviality ’must take seriously
the aﬀections, pleasures and charms of working with nonhumans while
acknowledging their needs, desires and interests ( Rose, 2015, 130).
Within agriculture, this necessitates new methodological approaches
and material practices for engaging with and making sense of the
2Just as the ﬁgure of the “human ”is contested within postdualism scholar-
ship, Kirksey & Helmreich highlight how the notion of ‘species ’—multispecies
ethnography's ‘hidden ontology ’—is also up for contestation (2010, 563).
Rather than o ﬀering stable ontological categories for describing and sorting life
forms, species are better conceived as ‘discernible forms animated by life’ that
reﬂect epistemological projects as much as reproduction, behaviour, mor-
phology or location ( Hartigan, 2016 ). Species distinctions are not merely a
question of taxonomy but represent a material formation that cannot be set
apart from the entangled histories with other life forms that gave rise to it. Or,
as Haraway puts it, ‘every species is a multispecies crowd ’(2008, 165).K. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
120
creaturely relations of food and farming.
2.2. Methodological approaches
The standard toolbox of ethnographic methods goes some way in
providing descriptive and interpretive accounts of how people make
meaning from their worlds. However, an ongoing challenge for re-
searchers is to develop ethnographic accounts that also ‘appreciate the
multi-sensory energies and intelligences of human and nonhumanbodies, gestures and events’ (Lorimer, 2013 , 63). The particular, de-
scriptive and heuristic nature of the case study focuses on speci ﬁc
problems or questions of everyday life, often mobilising narrative ap-
proaches to enable new framings of a phenomenon in vivid detail ( Yin,
2009 ). The value of the singular case here is not its generalisability but
its detailed exploration of species entanglements —that is, as Haraway
suggests, the ‘here, not there; there, not here; this, not everything; at-
tachment sites, not case studies for the general ’(2010, 53). This paper's
‘attachment site ’oﬀers an entry point into the convivial possibilities of
agriculture, in full acknowledgement that such stories are always par-
ticular and, at best, partial.
While the attachment site of this paper focuses on a particular farm,
it is predated by a cultural history and landscape that has long nour-
ished the Dja Dja Wurrung people for whom an epistemology that is
open to nonhuman subjectivity is not new. Australia's history of dis-
possession and genocide is inextricably entangled with agriculture
through, amongst other things, the political and legal doctrine of terra
nullius by which Indigenous lands were declared devoid of people due
to the ostensible absence of cultivation and land ownership that ac-
corded with European legal and agricultural epistemologies, despitestrong evidence of sophisticated precolonial systems of Indigenous
agriculture and aquaculture ( Gerristen, 2010 ;Pascoe, 2014 ). Within the
Indigenous concept of ‘nourishing country ’, the nonhuman world is not
an object to be brought into production but acts as ‘a self-organising
system that brings people and other living things into being, into action,into sentience itself ’(Rose, 2005, 303). There remains much work to be
done in understanding how Indigenous epistemologies for livingamongst species di ﬀerence might inform a politics of more-than-human
conviviality that works to decolonise agricultural policy, practice andknowledge systems in Australia more broadly.
3
Drawing on the analytical leanings of multispecies ethnography, my
study is based on semi-structured interviews and informal conversa-
tions with Brian. Over multiple visits to his farm, discussions focused on
his personal background and commitments to animal welfare; the
pleasures, challenges and ethics of farming; his formative experiences
in agriculture and how, collectively, these ideas, experiences and
practices relate to his hopes for the future. This case study sits within a
broader research project with producers in regional Victoria, Australia
across 2014 and 2015, preceded and informed by six months of living
and working on a farm. This was not a period of detached observation
but a ‘bodily and sensual apprenticeship ’(Wacquant, 2011 , 88) in
working with many species.
This embodied conditioning with the vital ‘force of things ’schooled
me in ‘becom[ing] more perceptually open ’to nonhuman agency andthe social and metabolic entanglements inherent to farm life ( Bennett,
2010 , 14). In particular, I became acutely aware of the constant
struggle for life and livelihood amongst the voraciousness of nonhuman
appetites. Rabbits ran amok eating crops; I watched horri ﬁed as cats
hunted the youngest and then regurgitated them, partially digested, onthe kitchen ﬂoor. When I fed kitchen scraps to the chickens, I observed
the hierarchies of colour and texture by which they eat. Making mymorning omelette meant negotiating with a shed full of hens ﬁercely
protecting their eggs. As I cracked eggs into a bowl, their blood tem-perature recalled the feathered bodies I had stolen from. Earwigs sought
refuge and sustenance in the coolness of lettuce hearts picked for
dinner. During the drought, an explosion of pill bugs —which normally
eat decaying matter in soil —turned their appetites to young seedlings,
munching them to the ground before they could grow. When rain came,
powdery mildew ﬂourished on the leaves of zucchini and cucumber
plants. As I adapted to the rhythms of watering needed to sustain thesoil's vitality during the drought, my body developed a feel for farming
and, at the same time, became attuned to the ‘local, situated conditions
necessary for tolerable, sustainable, shared lives ’(Lorimer, 2005, 91).
These visceralities of farming followed me in my analysis, while
multispecies ethnography o ﬀered a framework for making sense of how
more-than-human life worlds and socialities were both ‘emotive and
embodied ’(Law, 2004, 3). I became aware of my own species limita-
tions in what I could know, or never know, about the worlds of others.
As my theoretical orientations increasingly leaned towards the vital
assemblages around me ( Kirksey and Helmreich, 2010 ;Ogden et al.,
2013 ), my writing and reading —including of Fourier —lingered on how
diﬀerent species resist or collaborate with human attempts to live with
them.
2.3. Fourier's convivial imaginary
The discussion that follows represents only a limited engagement
with the vastness of Fourier's wildly imaginative work.
4I focus on two
important and related ideas within his critical treatises and satires of
early industrial capitalism: ﬁrstly, the theory of ‘attractive labour ’and
secondly, the signi ﬁcance of gastronomy —orgastrosophy , as he de-
scribes it —in organising social and political life. Fourier's cosmology
actively rebu ﬀs the gastronomic writing of his contemporary Jean-An-
thelme Brillat-Savarin (1994) for its lack of critique of what he per-
ceives as the corruption of not only the economy but also systems ofalimentation, or nourishment, focused on the frivolous connoisseurship
of the elite. What makes Fourier's unique ideas germane to this dis-cussion is that the pleasures of food emerge not through the perfor-
mance of connoisseurship but rather from heterogeneous associations
bound up in the act of farming and eating. His framework for organising
taste, pleasure, ingredients, agricultural labour, politics and social life
oﬀers, as Haden notes, a ‘prototypical ecology of connoisseurship ’and,
importantly, ‘an alternative vision of gastronomy and taste for which
there have been no takers ’(2011, 257– 258).
Centuries before Slow Food and local food movements advocated
for the ‘reconnection ’of agriculture and consumption, ‘gastrosophy ’or
the‘art of allying the re ﬁnements of consumption and production ’
proposes them as mutually constitutive (Fourier, cited in Sipe, 2009,
220 [my translation]). In his utopian ideal aptly named ‘Harmony ’,
gastrosophy's four threads of practice —‘agriculture, preservation, coo-
kery, and gastronomy ’(Levi 2015 , 45) —serve as a sensual weapon
against contemporary political, economic and moral frame-
works —otherwise known disparagingly as ‘Civilisation ’—that Fourier
believes su ﬀocate the sensory and social pleasures upon which human3The ongoing implications of the doctrine of terra nullius are evident in the
Our North, Our Future: White Paper on Developing Northern Australia
(Commonwealth of Australia, 2015 ) which proposes to ‘unlock [the] full po-
tential ’of remote landscapes and communities through industrial agriculture
and mining ( Commonwealth of Australia, 2015 , 5). Northern Australia, which
covers approximately one-third of the entire country, is represented as vastland, empty and underdeveloped —a new colonial frontier of late capitalism.
Here human progress (read: economic development) is framed as hindered bythe‘red tape ’that comes with the requirement of industry to consult with
traditional landowners. This document is perhaps one of more nefarious ways
in which the doctrine of terra nullius remains alive and well in contemporary
agricultural policy.4It also does not critically attend to more problematic ideas such as his cel-
ebration of the ‘noble savage ’which, consistent with Romantic inclinations of
the period, is presented as untainted by the social ills and economic dysfunctionof postrevolutionary France.K. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
121
happiness depends ( Haden, 2011 ). In Harmony, conviviality —the so-
cial dimension of gastronomy —begins in ﬁelds, paddocks and orchards
rather than the table, enlivened by multisensory and multispecies as-
sociations of agricultural work.
Fourier takes aim at the wretched drudgery of industrialised work
and agricultural labour for its absence of ‘intrigue, charm and variety ’
(Fourier, cited in Beecher and Bienvenu, 1971, 290). His writings an-
ticipate Marx's critique of the alienation of workers in capitalist pro-
duction from the potential pleasures of labour: ‘the less he is attracted
by the nature of the work, and the mode in which it is carried on, …the
less, therefore, he enjoys it as something which gives play to his bodily
and mental powers, the more close his attention is forced to be ’(Marx,
1906 , 127 –128). This a ﬀective estrangement applies as much to non-
humans as humans for, as Watts (2004) notes, industrial capitalism's
‘deepening of the market ’in the nineteenth century is accompanied by
the brutal enclosure of animals in agriculture and the commodi ﬁcation
of their bodies and lives, manifesting most egregiously in today's factoryfarms.
Fourier's ‘attractive labour ’takes inspiration from what he perceives
as the convivial pleasures of animal ‘industry’ :
Labor, nevertheless, forms the delight of various creatures, such as
beavers, bees, wasps, ants [ …] God has provided them with a social
mechanism which attracts to industry, and causes happiness to befound in industry. Why should he not have accorded us the same
favor as these animals? (cited in Salvadori, 1968 , 92)?
Fourier does not reduce the work of building homes or sourcing
food to biological survival or the satisfaction of individual achievement;
it is the convivial entanglements of social reproduction that enable the
work of living to get done. As Fourier would have it, the social me-
chanism that organises bees, beavers and other animals o ﬀers a plea-
surable model for shaping human social arrangements and a ﬀective
entanglements of work.
This notion of ‘industrial attraction ’also re-imagines processes of
domestication from a relation of domination and mastery to one ofmutualism and sociality, diagnosing the social incompetence of
Civilisation in interacting with other creatures:
our stables and our social customs are governed by a brusquenessand disharmony which stand in the way of the procedures necessary
for the domestication of these animals …[A]ny number of other
animals …will become friendly with man when they ﬁnd him en-
ticing enough to remain near him, which will never happen in the
civilised order ( Fourier, 2008 , 46).
Fourier's
understanding of domestication is akin to Porcher who
describes it as an engagement with animals ‘with whom we can live and
work and who want to live and work with us ’(2017, 107). Here do-
mestication and interspecies conviviality are bound up together and cutboth ways through a process of mutual recognition. In Fourier's ac-
count, animals do not occupy the realm of the “wild”only to be do-
mesticated by human mastery. Rather, animals reach out for humancompany when they recognise that humans have escaped the barbarous
conditions of Civilisation. Finding humans ‘enticing ’enough for co-
existence also suggests, in the context of Harmony, the willingness ofanimals to recognise humans' suitability as working collaborators. It is
through the lens of Fourier's convivial imaginary that my empirical
research develops its approach for making sense of the more-than-
human pleasures of agriculture. The case study that follows provides an
account of Brian learning to become a free-range chicken producer and
the centrality of the labour of claws and paws ( Haraway, 2008) to the
convivial pleasures of farming.3. The social pleasures of farming
3.1. Entrepreneurial experimentation
Brian became a farmer late in life. His family owned a large cattle
farm in New South Wales, where he experimented in his early twenties
with growing soybeans and raising cattle in what he describes as a
‘classic industrialised system’ . At the age of 45, after many years
working in Melbourne, he and his wife Nancy bought a 50-acre prop-erty (where Nancy continues her city work remotely). Brian's decision
to take up farming was not rushed, taking several years to build the
relationships with both humans and animals on which his enterprise
now depends. Though his farm has cows and cattle, today the com-
mercial aspect of his business is dedicated to, and enabled by, chickens.
As a former management consultant, Brian speaks the language of
entrepreneurialism ﬂuently. While the work of the entrepreneur is often
reductively perceived as ‘individualizing and normalizing forces of
control and e ﬃciency-seeking management ’(Hjorth, 2005 , 390),
proﬁtability for Brian is a ‘third tier motivator ’, allowing him to ful ﬁl
his primary and secondary goals of enjoying his working life and caring
for animals well. The lens of economic rationalism is insu ﬃcient for
making sense of the entrepreneurial space between ‘acceptable a ﬀective
practices and acceptable economic practices ’which many small-scale
livestock producers negotiate on a daily basis ( Finan, 2011, 94). Animal
husbandry, as Porcher notes, is often a vocation: ‘a shared life with
animals ’because ‘we want to live with them ’(2017, 104); earning a
livelihood is what enables the co-existence. Brian's return to farming
later in life encapsulates this vocational attraction to animal carework: ‘
…the notional romance and emotional pull-back to grow things and to
have animals …That
pull has been strong throughout my life.’ This
‘industrial attraction ’, which he acknowledges as somewhat idealised, is
caring for nonhumans, tending to their needs and ﬁnding solutions for
what is not working so that animals and the farm more broadly might
ﬂourish as a community. Part of the pleasure of caring for others —of
work more broadly —is being recognised, in this case by his animals, for
a job done well. Caring for cows and sheep proved relatively straight-
forward; chickens, as discussed later, provided a greater and un-
expected challenge.
3.2. Reconnecting with cattle and sheep
Brian's ﬁrst step was to ‘re-engage with cattle ’for which he felt a
strong a ﬃnity after his years on the family farm. He began taking in
unwanted cows from a neighbouring dairying property, which lacked
commercial value, either because they were insu ﬃciently productive or
failed to conform to milking machinery designed for a ‘standard ’cow
body. This a ﬀorded him the pleasure of interacting with cows again
while ensuring that their lives were not ‘wasted ’. Welcoming unwanted
and economically unproductive animals expanded the social collective
of the farm, with sheep added later to keep the grass down and feed the
family.
Brian's care for cows and sheep began with creating refuge from the
extremes of winter and summer. Planting rows of oaks, wattles and tree
lucerne produced an agrobiome of shelter and nourishment. Trees made
the lives of the cows more comfortable, establishing multiple scales of
care in which diverse species create the conditions for others to live and
ﬂourish with greater ease:
We put these trees [behind the house] for our own protection ….
We'd always see the cows tucked up in that corner where that littleshed is to stay out of the wind …Given a choice, they will always
seek protection and shelter. For me, any sustainable animal systemhas to have good protection but, not only that, shelter provides a
great carbon sink. The trees provide shade for the earth so that it
doesn't get baked in the summer and so it retains moisture and
therefore provides greater feed. That enables the soil, when youK. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
122
combine the leaf litter and the fallout of the litter from the trees ….
it provides a covering. It provides fungi sources of food for sus-
taining organisms to live within the soil.
The ‘multispecies world ’of soil constitutes a critical component
within the ‘politics of care ’by which farmers might ‘maintain, repair
and foster ’the subterranean communities that sustain livestock and
support humans in producing food ( Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015 , 703).
The metabolic appetites of photosynthesis and decomposition enable a‘convivial assemblage ’of trees, fungi and microbes by which the needs
of many are attended to ( O'Brien, 2013 ). By caring for the ancient and
now much-degraded soils of the Australian landscape, this shelterbelt
cum foodweb connects Brian to a broader project of responding to the
uncertainties of climate change.
5Layers of species enablement— soil
organisms, cows, sheep, trees —strengthen Brian's attraction to the land
and its myriad inhabitants, engaging him more deeply in the lives of
known and unknown others.
3.3. Canine collaborators
The pleasures of agricultural labour are not Brian's alone. Henry, the
keen border collie with whom he works and lives, has his own invest-
ment in farm life. Brian is more experienced working with cattle but
knows less than Henry about working with sheep. Reciprocity rather
than domination guides their working life: ‘I had to learn to butt out
and just let him get on with the job. He can do the job better than I canif I don't over-control him.’ A productive working relationship is not
only a matter of training and commanding Henry but Brian himselflearning from and being guided by Henry. This serves as a reminder,
Porcher notes, that living and working with animals ‘transforms us;
animals educate us and give us skills that we ourselves are lacking ’
(2017, 101). Henry is a young dog and still learning, sometimesspooking the cattle by running at them too directly. Brian decides when
it's safe to let him near the cows, a constraint not always appreciated by
Henry:
Herding is his favourite thing in the world. Sometimes when thecattle are in the yards, I don't want him in the yards because it's
dangerous …He just howls and howls. It's like he's crying; it's so
terrible. You can't console him; he loves that most of all of anythingin the world.
Henry's exuberance for herding is in his blood. Recalling Marx,
herding ‘gives play to his bodily and mental powers ’, a task that speaks
to his very DNA (1906, 127). But is ascribing joy to a border collie
herding animals simply indulging an anthropomorphic fantasy about
working dogs' enthusiasm for engaging in behaviour that serves the
economic interests of humans?
Border collies are renowned for their work ethic. An article in
Modern Farmer describes them as: ‘exceptionally obedient, grounded
and the most rational dogs on the planet …They would rather work
than breathe ’; this, suggests the author, obliges the humans of border
collies to ensure their hard-working nature is not exploited(Swearingen, 2014 ). Border collies —and all dogs with jobs —could, on
the one hand, be regarded as capitalist macrotechnologies, or ‘biolo-
gical artefacts shaped by humans to serve human ends ’(Russell, 2004,
1). On the other, these biotechnologies, engendered through inter-generational and interspecies entanglements have shaped what humans
themselves have become capable of achieving ( Pearson, 2013 ). Pro-
cesses of domestication have long been an animal– human collabora-
tion, in many ways ‘initiated as much by animals as it was by man [sic] ’
(Korthals, 2002 , 128; Clark, 2007 ). Over millennia, working dogs andhumans have gathered livestock together in workable ways, each en-gaging in diverse but also mutual interests ( Lorimer, 2006 ).
Henry's breed may serve the interests of capitalism, but his keenness
to herd could not be further from a capitalist agenda. As Henry expertly
navigates the bodies of sheep in the paddock, he ﬂexes his canine in-
tentionality, making decisions about what, when and how to act. Bordercollies
are known for being quick-thinking and keen observers of
human body language —‘rational ’even, as noted earlier. At the same
time, howling from inside the car —the inconsolability and heartbreak,
as Brian sees it, of not being able to do with his companion what heloves most in the world —is not rational. Henry is emotional. He was
born to herd —or rather, he shares an ancestral history with humans
whose livelihood also depended on herding animals. With this shared
history comes a deeply social desire to work closely with Brian and to
interact with other animals in particular ways. He protests against being
denied this simple pleasure.
Watching Henry in action does not reveal whether he works for the
exhilaration of the chase, the thrill of anticipating a sheep's next move
or, always alert to nuanced gestures of instruction, the pleasure of
working with his human companion. Humans certainly cannot claim to
see the world through a dog's eyes. Yet equally important is the re-
cognition that, within the shared space of the paddock, dog and farmer
are more than the sum of their parts. Marshalling sheep through pad-
docks together, they ‘forge connections and understandings across
species and cultural boundaries ’, cultivating a ‘somatic sensibility ’that
brings a playful and convivial dimension to the work of herding
(Greenhough and Roe, 2011, 62). Though Henry and Brian do not ex-
perience conviviality in the same way, each renders the other morecapable through their collaboration in the paddock ( Despret, 2008).
This intersubjective enablement brings its own pleasures to the task ofherding, co-producing an intricate choreography between dog and
farmer that mixes farming work with social pleasure.
3.4. Industrial chickens
Creating the conditions for chickens to live well on the farm was less
straightforward than for cows, sheep and dogs. Brian unwittingly and
somewhat naively entered into a far less convivial realm of breeding
technology and animal welfare science with his decision to raise meat
chickens. Standard broiler chickens in Australia are Ross and Cobb,
hybrid breeds developed speci ﬁcally for commodity meat production.
They rarely ﬁgure as living creatures in marketing discourse, except as
consumers of grain, optimised assemblages of poultry genetics and an
end-product for consumers. The Cobb is heralded as setting new in-
dustry standards for achieving the ‘highest eviscerated and breast meat
yield with the best live production e ﬃciency ’(Cobb-Vantress n.d .). Is-
sues of animal welfare and sustainability, ostensibly addressed through
genetic improvements in leg and cardiovascular strength, are rolled into
commitments to ‘a future that achieves economic growth ’(Cobb-Van-
tress n.d.). These corporate assurances elide how the bodies of in-dustrial chickens are subordinated to labouring for the mass production
of protein ( Boyd, 2001 ). Perhaps more than any other livestock animal,
the industrial chicken is both the manifestation and object of Fou-cauldian biopower, subject to disciplining biotechnological interven-
tions: ‘the optimisation of its capabilities, the extortion of its forces, the
parallel increase of its usefulness and docility, its integration into sys-tems of e ﬃcient and economic controls ’(Foucault, 1990 , 139).
In this brutal system for converting animal feed into protein through
the unacknowledged alimentary labour of chickens, the pleasures are
few. Large, noisy ventilation fans di ﬀuse
the stench of ammonia created
by the concentration of manure. Individual chickens are un-
diﬀerentiated and interchangeable. Without opportunities to scratch or
forage for food of di ﬀerent textures, shapes, ﬂavour or colour, eating is
bereft of interest. Living in enormous crowds, they are stripped of
meaningful social life. Studies have shown broilers bred for industrial
production exhibit poor social skills ( Grandin and Deesing, 2013).5As noted later, chickens also play an important role in soil care. As Hilimire's
(2012) study of small-scale poultry farmers demonstrates, soil fertility balanced
equally with pro ﬁtability as a reason for and bene ﬁt of engaging in pastured
poultry production.K. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
123
Denied the social hierarchies by which interactions are managed, they
resort to acts of violence against each other. Feather picking and even
cannibalism justify debeaking in the name of animal welfare, a practice
commonplace since the 1950s ( Lonsdale et al., 1957; Bock and Buller,
2013 ). For social animals, this constitutes a profound deprivation of
conviviality, one that entails ‘kill[ing] animals twice —taking their life
along with their living ’(Galusky, 2010 , 24).
Rearing industrial broiler chickens is unconvivial, even for humans.
Those who raise chickens do not own the birds and are contracted tomanage the facilities in which they are raised with limited agency in
how they do their work. Poultry sheds themselves often generate con-
ﬂicts between chicken farmers and neighbouring residents. ‘Unsightly,
smelly and polluting ’(O'Connor, 2005 ), they are more likely to gen-
erate con ﬂict, sickness and su ﬀering than the conditions for con-
viviality. This is not to suggest that individual workers within industriallivestock production do not care for animals; much research demon-
strates they often do ( Porcher, 2017 ;Buller and Roe, 2018). None-
theless more convivial forms of care that build trust and a ﬀection are
often ‘defeated ’, suggests Porcher (2014) , by a lack of autonomy and
ﬂexibility in shaping the conditions of production along with the tem-
poral and spatial rationality of e ﬃciency that determines animal-
human relations in industrial settings.
3.5. Failures in conviviality
This is precisely the industry Brian sought to avoid when he pur-
chased sixty Ross and Cobb birds at the start of 2013. With the best
intentions, he planned to care for them ‘as nature intended ’. Because
Gallus gallus , ancestor of the domesticated chicken, originated in the
jungles of southeast Asia, he hoped the expanding thicket of trees be-
hind his house would recall their ancestral roots and provide a com-fortable environment in which to live, eat and socialise. By day, the
chickens could access pasture for scratching around and foraging under
the tree canopy that o ﬀered protection from birds of prey. At night,
heated sheds protected them from foxes and the elements.
To Brian's dismay, the chickens proved lethargic and disinterested
in foraging. Within several weeks, two or three birds were dying eachday. A poultry veterinarian bluntly informed Brian that the chickens
must be fed medicated high-protein feed and the runts be ‘culled ’as
they were too weak to compete with larger birds. This was not howBrian expected to care for his chickens. As he learned from the vet,
Cobb and Ross chickens are designed to sit next to feeders, expending as
few calories as possible to obtain food. Their fast-growing bodies are
structurally ill-suited to foraging, and open paddocks stress the birds.
Their deaths were a refusal to accept the conditions for living o ﬀered to
them —their testimony that, despite Brian's attentive care, this was the
worst possible life for them. The unconvivial biotechnology of in-
dustrial broilers presented a challenge to Brian's aspirations to live well
with chickens. As it transpired, another breed —an alternative bio-
technology —was
 needed, one demanding a di ﬀerent modality of care.
In his search for an expert poultry breeder, he found Michael
Sommerlad.
3.6. Convivial biotechnologies
While industrial chickens are designed for feed-conversion e ﬃ-
ciency, the eponymous Sommerlad breed has been developed for an
outdoor free-range environment, comprising a mix of di ﬀerent heritage
birds selected for strong bone density, keenness to forage, robustnessagainst seasonal extremes and good growing capacity ( Sommerlad
Poultry n.d .). Despite the commercial interests at work in rearing
Sommerlads for meat, the breed demands a di ﬀerent way of living with
chickens, one that accounts for individual needs and inclinations. The
Sommerlad Poultry blog instructs farmers to feed according to the ‘free
choice feeding method ’, a dietary regime that o ﬀers the birds the ‘op-
portunity to select between a mixture of six grains’ (Sommerlad Poultry,2015 [emphasis mine]). Acknowledging that individual birds have
diﬀerent preferences, this feeding regime allows them to ‘take a posi-
tion in relation to what is o ﬀered’and exercise agency in their own
nutritional ﬂourishing ( Despret, 2008 , 125).
Starting with sixty Sommerlad chickens, Brian now works with
between 400 and 500 birds that sleep and shelter in mobile heated
coops, moved on a weekly basis. Four weeks after the coops are moved,
the pasture is covered in thick, glossy grass that helps to build soil
carbon and retain moisture in the soil. Integrating soil care and chicken
care sit at the heart of Brian's farming philosophy. He also aims to make
sure that the chickens have, as he puts it, ‘fun and interesting lives ’.
Spending much of their day outdoors, two Maremma sheepdogs guardthe chickens from predators. The birds' daily routine involves skirting
along the forest fringe, meandering into the open paddock to catch
insects and sit in the sunshine, then darting back under the tree's ca-
nopy. The unhurried task of feeding birds allows him to observe social
dynamics and individual personalities as well as identify and respond to
sickness. He describes falling into a reverie as he observes young chicks
leaving their heated shelter: ‘You watch them take their ﬁrst steps out
into the big wide world …Iﬁnd myself wasting time watching the
animals. I quite like that …They'll also follow you around the garden …
You can often pick them up and hold them. I love watching them. ’
The willingness of the birds to be held is experienced by Brian as a
kind of gift, a moment of convivial exchange that deepens his attach-ment and intensi ﬁes his desire to give them a good life: ‘It's a really
contented …not a cluck exactly …but you'll hear the noise. You know
that
they're happy; they're content and enjoying what they're doing, so
that's quite rewarding to get that feedback from them. ’These ‘oﬀerings
of subjectivity ’are how animals testify to their experience: to protest
and resist or receive assistance and a ﬀection ( Despret, 2008, 134). For
Porcher's, response-able animal carework operates as a gift relation:
‘animals give a lot; they give their presence, their trust, and their af-
fection ’just as Bruce o ﬀers aﬀection and respect in his attempts to give
the chickens a good life (2017, 14). In contrast to industrial productionwhich conceptually and materially refuses chicken pleasure, the culti-
vation of an a ﬀective attachment to the chickens extends to them the
status, as Plumwood suggests, of ‘fully intentional others whose striv-
ings, interactions and di ﬀerences in life strategy are intricate, amazing
and mysterious ’(Plumwood, 2003a , 135). In this convivial scene be-
tween chicken and farmer, the birds are acknowledged as subjects in
their own right with their own intentionality, personalities and social
worlds in which Brian takes a deep interest. At the same time, he ac-
tively searches for signs that his work is legitimated by his chickens.
These are not only obvious indicators of vigour and good health but also
signals that suggest they are enjoying the diverse tasks, foods and social
relations comprising their daily rituals.
Practices of self-care set the rhythm for the chickens ’day. A col-
lective ritual begins with languid stretches in the sun, followed by a
dust bath and mid-afternoon nap:
They'll put one leg back, and you think, ‘oh my God, something is
wrong ’, and they just stretch. Then they'll stretch the other leg out
…. Then they'll dust bathe. A big bunch of them will get together,
and they'll shake up the dust. Then they'll sleep …heads fallen
forward on their beak.
These convivial moments demonstrate how chickens care for each
other: ‘they'll group up with their friends, and they'll lie in a little pod of
six or ten or 20, and they'll have a little snooze together, and someone isalways watching out for threats. ’These mutualist practices of social
care constitute more than instinctual reactions against possible threats.The chickens choose to watch over or dust-bath and nap with some and
not others. Brian's role within these scene is to enable the conditions in
which chickens are, as Buller puts it, ‘“empowered to care ”in matters
like their own uses of space and choice of food ’as well as the company
they keep ( Buller, 2012, 66). Brian acknowledges the chickens' work of
guarding ‘friends ’that enables the convivial practice of collectiveK. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
124
napping. Such labour easily goes unrecognised for, as Despret notes, it
is only through ‘recalcitrance that cooperation becomes perceptible ’
(2016 , 181).
The social relations of chickens are not inherently convivial, nor
even benign. Stronger chickens often harass or even kill those wea-kened by illness or injury. This necessitated Brian's construction of
‘chicken hospitals ’, small huts where ill birds can be easily monitored
but also protected from others. In recognising the care work thatchickens refuse to do, Brian learned that the conditions for conviviality
went beyond o ﬀering chickens the scope to ﬁnd their own means of
caring for each other. It also meant acknowledging the limits of con-viviality in chickenly social relations. In this case, caring for sick and
injured chickens is work best left to humans. I return to these limits of
conviviality in the penultimate section of this paper.
4. Strategic anthropomorphism as multispecies courtesy
As noted earlier, humans cannot assume to know the psychic in-
teriorities of other animals. Plumwood warns that making claims about
animals' social and emotional worlds and their pleasures risks taking
the human as a ‘basic model ’of lived experience, e ﬀacing species dif-
ference by ‘inscribing that agency with the cast of the conscious human
mind ’(2003a, 127 & 136). While this cautionary approach is sagacious,
to deny that animals might like to eat, play, relax, socialise and, indeed,care for one another is limiting if new ways of living with others are to
emerge in practice. Animal geographers Philo and Wilbert advocate for
a cautious anthropomorphism that treats ‘some non-humans in some
situations as if they could perceive, feel, emote, make decisions and
perhaps even “reason” something like a human’ (2000, 19). This more
generous and convivial stance does not presume pleasure is the unique
endowment of humans nor that human pleasure is the benchmark
against which all other pleasures are measured. Instead it assumes that
animals are capable of experiencing far more than humans can
know —that the limitation is our own inability or unwillingness to un-
derstand nonhuman pleasure rather than in animals' capacity to ex-perience it. The epistemological limitation of human animals to un-
derstand other animals highlights the need for greater interspecies
civility. Such courtesy includes extending to animals ‘the decencies of
life, space and place that we (humans) would expect and want forourselves and others, in a manner that maybe does stem from a certain
anthropomorphism (re ﬂecting the possibility that in certain respects
animals are notso diﬀerent from humans) ’(Philo and Wilbert, 2000,
24).
Jonathan Balcombe argues that the paucity of scholarly attention on
a‘pleasurable animal kingdom ’reﬂects hypocritical assumptions about
the nature of human and animal experience; despite the bene ﬁto f
language, he notes, ‘the physical privacy of individual experience is as
unbridgeable
between two humans as it is between a human and a non-
human animal ’(2009, 209). His work in hedonic ethology o ﬀers in-
sights into how scienti ﬁc approaches to animal behaviour frequently
subject pleasurable activities —for example, gustatory pursuits, play
and social a ﬀection —to the utilitarian explanatory horizon of evolu-
tionary biology. This instrumentalisation of pleasure privileges the
evolutionary advantages for species survival over the immediacy of
pleasurable lived experience. Balcombe argues this is akin to reducing
the culinary practice of seasoning food to a purely adaptive behaviour
that serves an antimicrobial function in the gut. Seasoning food might
proﬀer some evolutionary advantage, but this inadequately accounts
for why humans might eat basil with tomatoes or ﬁnish a salad or curry
with a splash of ﬁsh sauce. The animal kingdom likewise comes with its
own social and sensual pleasures that exceed species survival, some
easily recognisable and others impossible for humans to know or un-
derstand.
Mellor and Beausoleil's work on animal welfare assessment goes
some way in redressing the limitations of animal welfare science by
incorporating the aforementioned a ﬀects of pleasure and other physicaland emotional comforts in their model of animal welfare ( Mellor and
Beausoleil, 2015 , 243). As such, their work potentially o ﬀers a con-
ceptual framework for acknowledging the relevance of conviviality asan assessment metric in conventional animal welfare science. However
the rhythms and tempos of work needed to not only assess but also
materially support convivial relations within larger animal populations
raise questions about scale. The kind of animal ‘feedback ’described
earlier necessitates a care-full attentiveness to animal socialities that isrendered di ﬃcult in industrial livestock production.
Despite growing consumer interest in animal welfare, tech-
noscienti ﬁc approaches for minimising su ﬀering may not go far enough
in extending the courtesy of convivial pleasure to animals. As Smithargues, they insu ﬃciently challenge ‘a cultural logic that de ﬁnes [ani-
mals] as “dumb, ”as lacking the ability to express themselves, or indeed
lacking any self to express ’(2002, 49), thereby perpetuating the abuse
in production and slaughter even where legislative frameworks exist toprotect animals. Activist and president of United Poultry Concerns
Karen Davis notes that the poultry industry represents chickens as
‘mentally vacuous, eviscerated organisms ’that are naturally aggressive
towards one another ( Davis, 2012 , 18). Her experience running a
chicken sanctuary suggests quite the opposite. Like Brian, she observes
that chickens possess sophisticated social lives, complex modes of
communication, strong bonds with conspeci ﬁcs and other species, and
the capacity for ‘enjoying their lives and pursuing their own interests ’
such that ‘when
chickens are happy, their sense of well-being resonates
unmistakably ’(2012, 30). It is perhaps this that Brian senses when he
receives ‘feedback ’from his birds. Or, as Despret puts it, he experiences
the‘judgement that is brought to bear on the work [of humans] by the
animals themselves’ ; this mutual judgement and recognition provides
the‘vector of pleasure ’by which humans learn to be a ﬀected by the
animals with whom they live and work (2016, 183). As Brian's ex-
perience suggests, practices of care in which the needs of others must be
attended to are central to convivial, ‘sustainable and ﬂourishing rela-
tions, not merely survivalist or instrumental ones ’described in animal
welfare science ( Puig de la Bellacasa, 2012 , 198). Convivial care on
farms is an ongoing mode of attentiveness rather than a set of ﬁxed
principles, the ‘persistent tinkering in a world full of complex am-
bivalence and shifting tensions ’(Mol et al., 2010, 14).
The Sommerlad chicken is no more ‘natural ’than the industrial
Cobb and Ross chickens. The di ﬀerence is in the nature of care they
engender. While the latter is designed for discipline, optimisation andcontrol, the former demands modalities of care that multiply and am-
plify a ﬀective intersubjective relations on the farm. The biotechnolo-
gical natureculture of the Sommerlad necessitates greater ‘response-
ability ’in order to ﬂourish, more co-constitutive entanglements that
encourage those that work and live with Sommerlads to devise newways of listening and responding to chickenly propositions and making
space for their interests and pleasures. For Haraway, response-ability
takes the form of a multispecies politics of care in which good manners
are critical in responding to the tensions of co-existence. Just as po-
liteness shapes social interactions of the convivial table —that is, in
what manner resources are shared and diverse perspectives exchangedand accommodated —it is‘the little things that makes lives ’within the
politics of co-existence ( Haraway, 2008 , 93). The complex totality of
these a ﬀective experiences, both positive and negative, produces en-
counters of enchantment that imbue Brian's work with meaningfulnessand hope, engendering a sense that ‘here is something worth continuing ’
(Herman, 2015 , 109 [original emphasis]).
5. The limits of conviviality
Despite such possibilities for hope, an analytic emphasis on con-
viviality and care risks producing ‘comfy
and cosy ’stories that reinforce
‘encompassing normativities, both the “bads”and—especially —the
“goods ”’(Abrahamsson and Bertoni, 2014 , 141). Such moral dualisms
risk imagining a world in which eating is unsullied by messy materialK. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
125
entanglements, much as Thomas More's Utopians had slaves to do the
dirty work of slaughter and butchery.6The intractable problem and
complex intimacies of eating others well necessitate that we do notbecome lost in utopian imaginaries. This brings us to the limits of
conviviality and, indeed, of utopian thinking more broadly. In the
section that follows, I explore two limitations to the utopian ideal of
multispecies conviviality on farms. The ﬁrst relates to the cost of con-
viviality, while the second concerns two contradictory positions held intension: living well, on the one hand, and killing, on the other.
5.1. The cost of convivial relations
In the late nineteenth century Melbourne, Australia's most populous
city, was home to more poultry than humans ( Gaynor, 2010 ). Aus-
tralian urbanites were intimately entangled over generations with
chickens, sharing not only their domestic spaces but also their food; for
chickens often ate scraps from the human table. ‘Chooks ’—the aﬀec-
tionate colloquialism by which they were and still are known —pro-
vided eggs and meat as well as manure for backyard gardening and
often income from selling eggs. Through practices of cooking, caring for
animals and gardening, chickens and humans were messmates at the
table, each enabling the other to eat in their metabolic exchange of food
scraps and manure.
However, two signi ﬁcant developments changed Australians' re-
lationship to chickens after World War Two. Municipal regulations
were introduced in the late 1950s, severely restricting commercial
backyard production. At the time, small urban and peri-urban produ-
cers dominated the chicken meat industry, comprised predominantly of
spent laying hens; that changed dramatically in 1959 when the ﬁrst
commercial meat breed was released, leading to a ﬁve-fold increase in
production over the 1960s, fuelled in part by the opening of Kentucky
Fried Chicken in 1968 ( Dixon, 2002 ). Since the late 1960s, the nation's
appetite for chicken has grown exponentially, even if beef and lambmaintained their primacy for some time as the cheapest and most
popular meats for home cooking and chicken remained a special oc-
casion meal well into the 1970s.
In 1966, just over 13 million chickens were slaughtered nationally;
by 2016, this ﬁgure climbed to 646.5 million ( Australian Bureau of
Statistics, 2017 ). This extraordinary 50-fold increase in 50 years is the
diﬀerence between each Australian eating just over one chicken per
year compared to consuming an entire chicken every two weeks. Far
from being a special occasion food, it is today by far the cheapest and
most consumed meat in the country, fetching only $4/kilogram for a
whole raw chicken. This low price has been arti ﬁcially maintained by
an ongoing price war between Australia's two major supermarkets thatclaim to be ‘working closely with our suppliers to invest in value for our
customers and lower the cost of living for Australian families ’(Chung,
2018 ).
The extraordinary cheapness of chicken is not a matter of value for
money; it points to the material ways by which certain lives are made to
matter, or not; as Patel and Moore put it, cheapness is ‘a strategy, a
practice, a violence that mobilizes all kinds of work —human and an-
imal, botanical and geological —with as little compensation as possible ’
(23, 2017 ).‘Working closely ’with suppliers to reduce the price of
chicken means forcing e ﬃciencies in an intensive system described
earlier in which one would imagine little additional value could beextracted
from the labour or bodies of birds or of those who work
within broiler sheds. Ironically this price war has run alongside in-creasing public discourse and consumer concern about animal welfare.
The poultry industry (particularly the egg lobby) and major retailers
have been at pains to shape their own voluntary standards for free-
range production, many of which bear only a distant semblance to whatconsumers might reasonably imagine a free-range system to be ( Carey
et al., 2017 ). Where 'free-range' is concerned, confusion and increas-
ingly skepticism reign.
In this broader industry context, Brian's chickens (and the handful of
other Sommerlad producers around the country) are Australia's mostexpensive birds. Organic and non-medicated feed, longer lives and
space for ‘interesting lives ’do not come cheap. Averaging between
three to four kilograms and priced around $20/kilogram, a single birdcan cost upwards of $60— in the exclusive reach of top chefs, boutique
butchers and privileged consumers. While a competent home cook canproduce several meals with a single bird, this is nonetheless a high price
for multispecies conviviality. Herein lies one of the fundamental ten-
sions of food utopias in practice. A production system that recognises
the agency and subjectivity of chickens —one that goes beyond cheap-
ness—makes one kind of world possible while revealing the im-
possibility of another. While strategic anthropomorphism might enable
imagining more utopian ways for chickens, working dogs, cows, sheeps
and humans to live together, it is impossible for 646.5 million chickens
to live and, importantly, die well in industrial conditions. Multispecies
conviviality is incompatible with a national appetite for chicken at its
current proportions. The modalities of care demanded by the
Sommerlad render chicken a special occasion meal once again, which is
precisely what Brian would prefer (even if Fourier might not). But who
gets a choice in the system of production from which they eat? If we
care about the equity of such arrangements for humans, then it de-
mands a broader political project committed to ‘equality and re-
imagined relations for humans in the web of life ’(Patel and Moore,
2017 , 34). This remains a seemingly intractable challenge of doing food
diﬀerently: how to resist the logic of cheapness that brutalises animal
life in agriculture without ignoring, or worse exacerbating, inequities
between humans.
5.2. Staying with the trouble of conviviality
Just as chickens do not extend conviviality to the sick and injured of
their kind, likewise Brian has his own limits. On his farm, convivial
intimacies of a ﬀection and care sit uncomfortably alongside the reality
of slaughter. It is precisely the act of killing that shifts the multispeciesrelations of conviviality from the arena of agriculture to the realm of
gastronomy. Brian is unequivocal about the deliciousness of his birds,
as are the chefs he supplies: ‘our chefs are saying to us, “this is the best
chicken I've ever used ”because it's old. It's got ﬂavour. The texture is
diﬀerent. The skin is di ﬀerent. The bones are di ﬀerent. The colour is
diﬀerent. ’By“old”, Brian means his birds are slaughtered at 16 weeks
rather the ﬁve to eight weeks for chickens sold at $4/kilogram. A life
lived di ﬀerently— and longer —produces
 a diﬀerent gastronomic out-
come, albeit one that sits squarely in the interests of humans. Buller
reads this gastronomic di ﬀerence as a function of ‘vital co-authorship ’
between human and animal that emerges from the animals' own en-gagement with ‘wider ecological assemblies ’on the farm (2012, 63 –64).
Like the social pleasures of conviviality on farms, gastronomic ‘good-
ness’is co-produced through the agency of how animals eat, move
around and express themselves socially. Critically though, even the“happiest ”of animals do not o ﬀer themselves up for consumption.
Brian is emotionally challenged by the slaughter of chickens in
whose lives he has taken such deep interest. For reassurance that they
are slaughtered humanely, he confronts his discomfort by sometimes
attending the abattoir to observe his chickens being ‘processed ’,a n
industry euphemism for killing. Despite these reassurances, slaugh-tering practices are materially structured by capitalist processes of ef-ﬁciency with limited scope to account for the subjectivity of the mil-
lions of birds which pass through the abattoir's doors. Its systems ofeﬃcient operation are ultimately designed to silence ‘the disquieting
cacophony ’which mark an animal's transformation from sentient being
to meal on a plate ( Smith, 2002 , 56). Animal welfare issues within the
industry are con ﬁrmed in a recent report regarding a Melbourne
6In many ways, industrial abattoirs —where the work of killing is out of sight
and out of mind —fulﬁl this role today.K. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
126
abattoir (not Brian's) in which spent laying hens were ﬁlmed by animal
activists being boiled alive in a scalding bath ( McGrath, 2017 ). The
dearth of options to operate outside of this system further forecloses
opportunities for farmers to better account for animal subjectivity be-
hind the doors of the abattoir.
The visceral confrontation of watching his chickens die has moti-
vated Brian to seek out alternatives, with the aim to de-industrialise the
killing process to whatever extent he can. This is not to deny the vio-
lence of the slaughter but to seek out a relational ethic of killing guided
by care rather than e ﬃciency. Working to establish a multispecies
abattoir co-operative shared with other like-minded farmers in the re-gion, he seeks greater agency over what happens behind closed doors.
Brian's aspirations are to bring the slaughter more directly into a con-
tact zone of co-presence where he and other farmers can bear witness to
death rather than eschew its realities. I see these e ﬀorts as a means of
‘staying with the trouble ’,a sHaraway (2010) suggests, in ways that
‘account for coexisting in a world we must consume to survive ’and in
which killing well —or at least better —is more explicitly attended to
alongside living with and eating others ( Mikulak, 2009, 78).
5.3. The possibilities of radical anthropomorphism
Remembering that humans are also food —or, in other words, ‘ev-
eryone is on the menu ’(Haraway 2008 , 287) —opens up for con-
sideration how an even more radical approach to the strategic an-
thropomorphism discussed earlier might be ethically productive. For
example, how might we humans prefer to be killed if we were on themenu for others? In what way might we want to live our lives in the
meantime? In considering these questions, we slip rapidly from utopian
possibilities to dystopic nightmares, for to imagine the human body as
food crosses ontological boundaries in ways that even the most strident
posthumanists may struggle to digest. Indeed, it is the stu ﬀof horror,
and yet hugely compelling as evidenced by the recent revival of thezombie genre. In the transformation from ‘master to meal ’, the hubris of
humanity's position at the top of the food chain is revealed and mon-strously undone ( Tenga and Zimmerman, 2013 , 80).
Temple Grandin's book (with Catherine Johnson), Animals in
Translation: Using the Mysteries of Autism to Decode Animal Behavior
(2009) ,oﬀers a far more palatable and less dystopic version of radical
anthropomorphism. Using her experience of autism to imagine what acow experiences as it moves through a slaughterhouse, the book has
contributed to the redesign of industrial slaughterhouses in order to
more humanely accommodate the sensory experiences of animals. Her
claim that ‘stress is horrible for pro ﬁts’(21) suggests, however, that a
spatial redesign of slaughterhouses does not go far enough in re-ima-gining the gap between the conviviality of the farm and that of the
table. It fails to counter the temporalities of industrial killing which
take life according to the same logic of speed and e ﬃciency that rears
pigs or chickens without regard for their pleasurable social worlds. It isthis logic that Brian seeks to challenge by bring the same intersubjective
ethic of care to his birds' deaths as he does their lives.
Plumwood's (2008) reﬂections
on humanity's own ‘foodiness ’, based
on her experience of ﬁnding herself locked within the jaws of a cro-
codile, o ﬀer perhaps more meaningful propositions for thinking about
the possibilities of radical anthropomorphism. Western culture su ﬀers,
she argues, from ‘lifeless ’mortuary practices that seek to materially and
ontologically separate not only humanity from nature —but also life
from death —by denying the return of our bodies to the earth as nour-
ishment for others. At funerals, we tell ourselves the cycle of life ends
with ashes and dust. Only the ghoulish would point out, as Plumwoodmight if she were alive today, that the worms crawl in and the worms
crawl out. Our last act in death is to give forth life.
Humans are also food in life, as much as in death. Eating may be
agricultural as Wendell Berry (1990) suggests, but it is also sympoietic:
the coming together of two agents each acting on and constituting theother in ways that are unpredictable, risky and mutuallytransformative. Even if humans sometimes eat alone at the table, di-gestion itself is always commensal. Gut bacteria help to digest our food
while parasites simultaneously eat of us. Taking seriously the ‘with-y ’
ontology of conviviality means acknowledging, as Lisa Heldke evoca-tively puts it, that ‘all life on this planet, including humans life, is
threaded through with relationships in which one creature sinks its“teeth ”into another and hangs on for dear life ’(Heldke, 2018 , 249).
With the vulnerability that such intimate proximity presents comes anopportunity to better understand how the self is constituted through
messy encounters with nonhuman others. Humans are always co-pro-
duced by those we eat, those that help us eat others and, just as im-
portantly, those that eat us. In understanding our own edibility, it be-
comes clearer how food itself is not, by necessity, a ‘disrespectful
category ’; instead, Plumwood proposes that the good life involves
eating in ways that ‘acknowledge our kinship with those whom we
make our food, which does not forget the more than food that every oneof us is, and which position us reciprocally as food for others ’
(Plumwood, 2003b , 11).
6. Conclusion
Through an exploration of the multispecies socialities of Brian's
farm, I have argued that the good life is one that is co-produced and
judged by animals themselves, shifting us perhaps ever so slightly to-
wards Fourier's utopian imaginary in which more convivial agriculture
is, in part, contingent on humans and animals being on better working
terms. Or, bv Porcher's more contemporary account, a utopia for livingwith animals would entail shared pleasures negotiated more collec-
tively, necessitating humans to invent new ways of taking seriously the
‘genuinely sensuous ’nature of living and working with animals (2016,
103). Farmers themselves are critical in such inventions because, asanthropologist Tim Ingold suggests, ‘those who are “with” animals in
their day-to-day lives [ …] can o ﬀer us some of the best possible in-
dications of how we might proceed ’(Ingold,
2002, 19), not only in
living and livelihood but also in killing and eating others better. Thispaper also proposed that strategic anthropomorphism might cultivate
more courteous attentiveness to the convivial pleasures of animal
worlds and more care-full listening to how animals respond to the
practices of care o ﬀered to them. Central to such a politics of multi-
species conviviality are certain ‘intellectual, emotional, and critical
capacities ’complicated by a requisite acknowledgement of how other
species —and, in this case, also breeds —‘respond in their own particular
ways to given worlds’ , each bringing their ‘own life histories, personal
developmental dynamics, and the diverse forms of knowledge and truththat they have inherited and been disciplined into ’(Van Dooren and
Rose, 2016, 90).
While there are certainly better or worse ways to live and work with
animals, eating remains a matter of living and dying, as I learned fromlife's voracious appetites during my time on the farm. Haraway pro-
poses a cultivation of ‘shared su ﬀering ’, a labour of care in living,
thinking and learning with animals ( Haraway, 2008 , 83). I have added
to this the need to acknowledge shared pleasures. However, if it is ul-
timately the slaughter that transforms the animal from a lively social
being to a delicious meal on a plate, gastronomy as a cultural discourse
and practice for eating and living well must give more explicit con-
sideration to ‘who lives well and who dies well under current ar-
rangements, and how they might be better arranged ’(Ginn et al., 2014,
115). This is where Fourier's convivial imaginary leaves us little to think
with. Radical anthropomorphism provokes methodological questions
about new approaches to make better sense of these arrangements butalso potentially more generative forms of storytelling that engage more
meaningfully ‘with the multitudes of others in their noisy, ﬂeshy living
and dying ’(Van Dooren and Rose, 2016, 91). It may not resolve the
question of how to kill well, but it may go some way ﬁnding new ways
of honouring life in the spaces of slaughter and provoking alternativegastronomic ontologies of conviviality and, indeed, edibility. Just asK. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
127
postdualist scholars have drawn attention to our more-than-human
natures, we also need gastronomic stories about the ways in which
animals are, like humans, always more-than-food. Finding new ap-
proaches to eating, living and killing well —that is, a multispecies gas-
tronomy —remains a di ﬃcult but urgent ethical task, one for the sci-
ences, social sciences and humanities alike as well as for those, like
Brian, who work and share their lives with animals.
Declaration of interest
None.
Funding sources
This research did not receive any speci ﬁc grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-pro ﬁt sectors.
Acknowledgements
I sincerely thank the three anonymous reviewers for their generous
engagement with this paper and my doctoral supervisor Rachel Hughes
for her valuable insights. I am also indebted to Nick Rose and Lilly
Cleary for their convivial support and for reading early drafts of this
paper and, of course, to my participants who share with me their ex-
periences and stories.
References
Abrahamsson, S., Bertoni, F., 2014. Compost politics: experimenting with togetherness in
vermicomposting. Environ. Humanit. 4, 125 –148.
Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2017. Livestock products, Australia. Jun 2017 (cat. no.
7215.0). Retrieved from. www.abs.gov.au .
Balcombe, J., 2009. Animal pleasure and its moral signi ﬁcance. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci.
118, 208 –216.
Beecher, J., Bienvenu, R., Trans (Eds.), 1971. The Utopian Vision of Charles Fourier:
Selected Texts on Work, Love and Passionate Attraction. Jonathan Cape Ltd,
London, UK .
Bennett, J., 2010. Vibrant Matter: a Political Ecology of Things. Duke University Press,
Durham, NC .
Berry, W., 1990. What Are People for?: Essays. Counterpoint Press, New York, NY .
Best, S., 2009. The rise of critical animal studies: putting theory into action and animal
liberation into higher education. J. Crit. Anim. Stud. 7 (1), 9 –52.
Bock, B., Buller, H., 2013. Healthy, happy and humane: evidence in farm animal welfare
policy. Sociol. Rural. 53 (3), 390 –411.
Boyd, W., 2001. Making meat: science, technology, and American poultry production.
Technol. Cult. 42 (4), 631 –664.
Buller, H., 2012. Nourishing communities: animal vitalities and food quality. In: Birke, L.,
Hockenhull, J. (Eds.), Crossing Boundaries: Investigating Human-animalRelationships. Brill, Boston, MA, pp. 51 –72.
Buller, H., Roe, E., 2018. Food and Animal Welfare. Bloomsbury, London .
Braun, B., 2008. Environmental issues: inventive life. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 32, 667 –679.
Brillat-Savarin, J.-A., 1994. The Physiology of Taste. (A. Drayton, Trans.). Penguin Books,
London UK (Original work published 1825).
Campbell, H., 2015. Spurlock's vomit and visible food utopias. In: Stock, P.V., Carolan,
M., Rosin, C. (Eds.), Food Utopias: Reimagining Citizenship, Ethics and Community.Routledge, New York, NY, pp. 195 –217.
Carey, R., Parker, C., Scrinis, G., 2017. Capturing the meaning of “free range ”: the contest
between producers, supermarkets and consumers for the higher welfare egg label in
Australia. J. Rural Stud. 54, 266 –275.
Carolan, M., 2016. Adventurous food futures: knowing about alternatives is not enough,
we need to feel them. Agric. Hum. Val. 33 (1), 141 –152.
Castree, N., 2012. Making Sense of Nature. Taylor & Francis, London, UK .
Charles, N., 2014. ‘Animals just love you as you are ’: experiencing kinship across the
species barrier. Sociology 48 (4), 715 –730.
Chung, F., 2018. Coles kicks o ﬀfresh chicken price war. News.com.au Retrieved from.
https://www.news.com.au/ ﬁnance/business/retail/coles-kicks-o ﬀ-fresh-chicken-
price-war/news-story/028a0ab151afe39c3a40e6ac70d7dcf9 .
Clark, N., 2007. Animal interface: the generosity of domestication. In: Cassidy, R., Mullin,
M. (Eds.), Where the Wild Things Are Now: Domestication Reconsidered. Berg,
Oxford, UK, pp. 49 –70.
Cobb-Vantress. (n.d.). Products: Cobb 700. Retrieved from http://www.cobb-vantress.
com/products/cobb-700 .
Cole,
M., 2011. From ‘animal machines ’to‘happy meat’ ? Foucault's ideas of disciplinary
and pastoral power applied to ‘animal-centred ’welfare discourse. Animals 1, 83 –101.
Commonwealth of Australia, 2015. Our North, Our Future: White Paper on Developing
Northern Australia. ACT, Canberra Retrieved from. http://industry.gov.au/ONA/
WhitePaper/Documents/northern_australia_white_paper.pdf .Connolly, W.E., 2013. The ‘new materialism ’and the fragility of things. Millenn. J. Int.
Stud. 41 (3), 399 –412.
Davis, K., 2012. The mental life of chickens as observed through social relationships. In:
Smith, J.A., Mitchell, R.W. (Eds.), Experiencing Animal Minds. Columbia UniversityPress, New York, NY, pp. 14 –30.
Despret, V., 2008. The becomings of subjectivity in animal worlds. Subj. Int. J. Critical
Psychol. 23, 123 –139.
Despret, V., 2016. What Would Animals Say if We Asked the Right Questions? University
of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis B. Buchanan, Trans .
Dixon, J., 2002. The Changing Chicken: Chooks, Cooks and Culinary Culture. UNSW
Press, Sydney .
Finan, A., 2011. For the love of goats: the advantages of alterity. Agric. Hum. Val. 28,
81–96.
Foucault, M., 1990. The History of Sexuality, Volume 1: an Introduction. Pantheon Books,
New York, NY (original work published in English 1978).
Fourier, C., 2008. In: Jones, G.S., Patterson, I. (Eds.), The Theory of the Four Movements.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (Original work published in 1808) .
Galusky, W., 2010. Playing chicken: technologies of domestication, food, and self. Sci.
Cult. 19 (1), 15 –35.
Gaynor, A., 2010. Fowls and the contested productive spaces of Australian suburbia,
1890 –1990. In: Atkins, P. (Ed.), Animal Cities: Beastly Urban Histories. Taylor &
Francis, Farnham, UK, pp. 205 –219.
Gerristen, R., 2010. Evidence for indigenous Australian agriculture. Australas. Sci. 31 (6),
35–37.
Ginn, F., Beisel, U., Barua, M., 2014. Flourishing with awkward creatures: togetherness,
vulnerability, killing. Environ. Humanit. 4, 113 –123.
Grandin, T., Deesing, M.J., 2013. Genetics and animal welfare. In: Grandin, T., Deesing,
M.J. (Eds.), Genetics and the Behavior of Domestic Animals. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp.435–472.
Grandin, T., Johnson, C., 2009. Animals in Translation: Using the Mysteries of Autism to
Decode Animal Behavior. SUNY Press, New York .
Greenhough, B., Roe, E., 2011. Ethics, space, and somatic sensibilities: comparing re-
lationships between scientiﬁ c researchers and their human and animal experimental
subjects. Environ. Plann. Soc. Space 29 (1), 47 –66.
Haden,
R., 2011. Lionizing taste: toward an ecology of contemporary connoisseurship. In:
Strong, J. (Ed.), Educated Tastes: Food, Drink, and Connoisseur Culture. University ofNebraska Press, Lincoln, NB, pp. 237 –290.
Haraway, D., 2008. When Species Meet. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN .
Haraway, D., 2010. When Species Meet: staying with the trouble. Environ. Plann. Soc.
Space 28, 53 –55.
Hartigan, J., 2016. Species. The Multispecies Salon. Retrieved from. http://www.
multispecies-salon.org/species/ .
Heldke, L., 2018. It's chomping all the way down: toward an ontology of the human
individual. Monist 101, 247 –260.
Herman, A., 2015. Enchanting resilience: relations of care and people –place connections
in agriculture. J. Rural Stud. 42, 102 –111.
Higgin, M., Evans, A., Miele, M., 2011. A good kill: socio-technical organizations of farm
animal slaughter. In: Humans and Other Animals: Critical Perspectives. PalgraveMcMillan, London, pp. 173 –185.
Hilimire, K., 2012. The grass is greener: farmers' experiences with pastured poultry.
Renew. Agric. Food Syst. 27 (3), 173 –179.
Hinchli ﬀe, S., Whatmore, S., 2006. Living cities: towards a politics of conviviality. Sci.
Cult. 15 (2), 123 –138.
Hjorth, D., 2005. Organizational entrepreneurship with de Certeau on creating hetero-
topias (or spaces for play). J. Manag. Inq. 14 (4), 386 –398.
Ingold, T., 2002. From trust to domination: an alternative history of human-animal re-
lations. In: Manning, A., Serpell, J. (Eds.), Animals and Human Society: ChangingPerspectives. Routledge, London, UK, pp. 1 –22.
Kirksey, E., Helmreich, S., 2010. The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cult.
Anthropol. 25 (4), 545 –576.
Kirksey, E., Schuetze, C., Helmreich, S., 2014. The tactics of multispecies ethnography. In:
Kirksey, E. (Ed.), The Multispecies Salon. Duke University Press, Durham, NJ, pp.1–24.
Korthals, M., 2002. A multi-practice ethics of domesticated and ‘wild’animals. In:
Keulartz, J., Korthals, M., Schermer, M., Swierstra, T. (Eds.), Pragmatist Ethics for aTechnological Culture. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, NL, pp. 127 –141.
Latour, B., 2004. Politics of Nature. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA .
Law, J., 2004. After Method: Mess in Social Science Research. Routledge, London, UK .
Levi, J., 2015. Charles Fourier versus the gastronomes. Utop. Stud. 26 (1), 41 –57.
Lonsdale, M.B., Vondell, R.M., Ringrose, R.C., 1957. Debeaking at one day of age and the
feeding of pellets to broiler chickens. Poultry Sci. 36 (3), 565 –571.
Lorimer, H., 2005. Cultural geography: the busyness of being ‘more-than-representa-
tional ’. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 29 (1), 83 –94.
Lorimer, H., 2006. Herding memories of humans and animals. Environ. Plann. Soc. Space
24 (4), 497 –518.
Lorimer,
J., 2013. More-than-human visual analysis: witnessing and evoking a ﬀect in
human-nonhuman interactions. In: Coleman, R., Ringrose, J. (Eds.), Deleuze andResearch Methodologies. Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh, pp. 59 –78.
Marx, K., 1906. In: Moore, S., Aveling, E., Trans, Engels, F. (Eds.), Capital: a Critique of
Political Economy. Volume I: The Process of Capitalist Production. Charles H. Kerr &
Co, Chicago, IL (original work published 1867). Retrieved from. https://www.
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Capital-Volume-I.pdf .
McGrath, P., 2017. Chickens Boiled Alive at Star Poultry Supply Abattoir in Melbourne,
Secret Footage Reveals. November 16. ABC News Retrieved from. http://www.abc.
net.au/news/2017-11-16/chickens-boiled-alive-inside-melbourne-abattoir/9157186 .
Mellor, D.J., Beausoleil, N.J., 2015. Extending the ‘Five Domains ’model for animalK. Donati
Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
128
welfare assessment to incorporate positive welfare states. Anim. Welf. 24, 241 –253.
Miele, M., 2011. The taste of happiness: free-range chicken. Environ. Plann. 43 (9),
2076 –2090 .
Mikulak, M., 2009. The silence that can speak: nature, ethics and interspecies cosmo-
politics. Environ. Philos. 6 (2), 73 –92.
Mol, A., Moser, I., Pols, J., 2010. Care: putting theory into practice. In: Mol, A., Moser, I.,
Pols, J. (Eds.), Care in Practice: Tinkering in Clinics, Homes and Farms. Transaction
Publishers, New Brunswick, US, pp. 7 –25.
Montanari, M., 2012. Let the Meatballs Rest and Other Stories about Food and Culture.
Columbia University Press, New York, NY .
O'Brien, A.T., 2013. Supporting soil fungi to rebuild soils in agriculture. PAN Philos. Act.
Nat. 10, 24 –35.
O'Connor, A., 2005. Farmers' feathers ru ﬄed by poultry farm plan. The Age Retrieved
from. http://www.theage.com.au/news/national/farmers-feathers-ru ﬄed-by-
poultry-farm-plan/2005/08/22/1124562804953.html .
Ogden, L.A., Hall, B., Tanita, K., 2013. Animals, plants, people, and things: a review of
multispecies ethnography. Environ. Soc. Adv. Res. 4, 5 –24.
Pachirat, T., 2011. Every Twelve Seconds: Industrialized Slaughter and the Politics of
Sight. Yale University Press, New Haven .
Pascoe, B., 2014. Dark Emu: Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident? Magabala Books,
Broome, WA .
Patel, R., Moore, J.W., 2017. A History of the World in Seven Cheap Things: A Guide to
Capitalism, Nature, and the Future of the Planet. University of California Press,Oakland, CA .
Pearson, C., 2013. Dogs, history, and agency. Hist. Theor. 52 (4), 128 –145.
Philo, C., Wilbert, C., 2000. Animal spaces, beastly places: an introduction. In: Philo, C.,
Wilbert, C. (Eds.), Animal Spaces, Beastly Places. Routledge, London, UK, pp. 1 –34.
Pilgrim, K., 2013. ‘Happy cows, ’‘happy beef ’: a critique of the rationales for ethical meat.
Environ. Humanit. 3, 111 –127.
Plumwood, V., 2003a. Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. Routledge, New York, NY .
Plumwood, V., 2003b. Animals and ecology: towards a better integration. Retrieved
from. https://openresearch-repository.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/41767/3/
Vegpap6.pdf .
Plumwood, V., 2008. Tasteless: towards a food-based approach to death. Environ. Val. 17,
323–330.
Porcher, J., 2014. The work of animals: a challenge for social sciences. Humanimalia: A
Journal of Human-Animal Interface Studies 6 (1), 1 –9.
Porcher, J., 2017. The Ethics of Animal Labor: a Collaborative Utopia. Palgrave
Macmillan, Cham, Switzerland .
Porcher, J., Schmitt, T., 2012. Dairy cows: workers in the shadows? Soc. Anim. 20 (1),
39–60.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M., 2012. ‘Nothing comes without its world ’: thinking with care.Socio. Rev. 60 (2), 197 –216.
Puig
de la Bellacasa, M., 2015. Making time for soil: technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace
of care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 45 (5), 691 –716.
Rose, D.B., 2005. An indigenous philosophical ecology: situating the human. Aust. J.
Anthropol. 16 (3), 294 –305.
Rose, D.B., 2015. Dialogue. In: Gibson, K., Fincher, R., D, B. (Eds.), A Manifesto for Living
in the Anthropocene. Punctum Books, Brooklyn, NY, pp. 127 –131.
Russell, E., 2004. The garden in the machine: toward an evolutionary history of tech-
nology. In: Schrepfer, S., Scranton, P. (Eds.), Industrializing Organisms: IntroducingEvolutionary History. Routledge, New York, NY, pp. 1 –18.
Salvadori, M. (Ed.), 1968. Modern Socialism. Palgrave MacMillan, London .
Smith, M., 2002. The ‘ethical ’space of the abattoir: on the (in)human(e) slaughter of
other animals. Hum. Ecol. Rev. 9 (2), 49 –58.
Sipe, D., 2009. Social gastronomy: Fourier and Brillat-Savarin. Fr. Cult. Stud. 20 (3),
219–236.
Sommerlad Poultry (n.d.). Slower Growing Heritage-Style Meat Chickens Developed for
Optimal Animal Welfare and Food Quality. Retrieved from http://www.
sommerladspoultry.com.au/welfare.html .
Sommerlad Poultry, 2015. Hot Weather Poultry Management [blog post]. Retrieved.
https://sommerladspoultry.wordpress.com/2015/11/20/hot-weather-poultry-
management/ .
Stock, P., Carolan, M., Rosin, C., 2015. Food utopias: hoping for the future of agriculture.
In: Stock, P., Carolan, M., Rosin, C. (Eds.), Food Utopias: Reimagining Citizenship,
Ethics and Community. Routledge, New York, NY, pp. 3 –13.
Swearingen, J., 2014. Ru ﬀchoice: which farm dog is right for you? Modern Farmer.
Retrieved from. http://modernfarmer.com/2014/06/ ﬁnd-right-farm-dog/ .
Tenga, A., Zimmerman, E., 2013. Vampire gentlemen and zombie beasts: a rendering of
true monstrosity. Gothic Stud. 15 (1), 76 –87.
Van Dooren, T., Kirksey, E., Münster, U., 2016. Multispecies studies: cultivating arts of
attentiveness. Environ. Humanit. 8 (1), 1 –23.
Van Dooren, T., Rose, D.B., 2012. Storied-places in a multispecies city. Humanimalia: A
Journal of Human/Animal Interface Studies 3 (2), 1 –27.
Van Dooren, T., Rose, D.B., 2016. Lively ethography: storying animist worlds. Environ.
Humanit. 8 (1), 77 –94.
Wacquant, L., 2011. Habitus as topic and tool: re ﬂections on becoming a prize ﬁghter.
Qual. Res. Psychol. 8 (1), 81 –92.
Watts, M., 2004. Enclosure: a modern spatiality of nature. In: Cloke, P., Crang, P.,
Goodwin, M. (Eds.), Envisioning Human Geographies. Arnold, London, UK, pp.48–64.
Yin, R.K., 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, fourth ed. SAGE Publications,
Los
Angeles, CA .K. Donati Journal of Rural Studies 66 (2019) 119–129
129
