Abstract
Hope for a better future has become a survival strategy within contemporary 
Western societies that are drifting through polycrises. The concept of hope 
evokes future orientedness, suggests positive emotions and creates spaces for 
dreaming. But what if, instead of hope, it is hopelessness that moves people 
to strive for living a better life and leads to, in the words of Macy and John-
stone, the great turning? In this article, I draw on my ethnographic fieldwork 
to bring forth journeys of regeneratively oriented farmers who (have started 
to) build a radically different life by pursuing livelihoods through diversified 
small-scale farming. By analysing how hope is manifested in the work and 
everyday lives of the farmers, I introduce an understanding of hope as action  
and show how hope in the context of the studied farming practices materi-
alized through cultivating the lands, inspiring others , and reciprocating the hope 
of other species. I argue that conceptualizing hope as action suggests a differ -
ent kind of temporality, one that is (literally) grounded in intergenerational 
farming landscapes: hope as action brings into play both the hope(s) and the 
hopelessness(es) of the past that impacts the actions of the present and of the 
future that orients the actions of today. As farmers and (their) soils are being 
rapidly mobilized into vessels of hope for their potential to sequester atmos -
pheric carbon, understanding the kind of action hope materializes into (or 
doesn’t) is important to better understand whose  hopes are being mobilized 
through regenerative agriculture and how  and why  these hopes are mobilized.
Keywords: hope as action, diversified farming, regenerative orientation, re-
generative agriculture, intergenerational landscapes, false hope, ethnographyGalina Kallio
© Galina Kallio 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8499-9541 
ETHNOLOGIA FENNICA Vol. 50 (2023, issue 2), 5–29. https://doi.org/10.23991/ef.v50i2.125134 
This work is licensed under Creative Commons CC-BY-NC 4.0 International License.Hope beyond Hope
Farming One’s Way into a Better Today
6
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayMatters of hope
 
”Because losing hope might not be the end, but the beginning.” 
(Lehtinen 2019, translated by the author)
  
In a world of limited Earth resources, hope has been made a limitless resource. 
Despite the growing evidence of elevated burnouts and climate anxiety (Macy 
and Johnstone 2012; Sangervo, Jylhä, and Pihkala 2022; Työterveyslaitos 
2022), maintaining optimism regarding a better future — that science and 
technology, regulation, or activism will resolve ongoing crises, that sanctions 
will end wars, that economic growth can be decoupled from environmental 
destruction — appears to ground societal discourse. But what would happen if 
one stopped speaking with the language of hope? What if hanging on to hope 
for a better future is a mirage that prevents people from starting to build and 
live a radically new life in the present?
In his essay ”In Defence of Hopelessness ”, Ilja Lehtinen (2019) argues for 
the right to give up hope and learn to live in a world of recurrent crises. In-
stead of chasing salvation-to-come Lehtinen (ibid.) calls for valuing earthly 
experiences, for living here and now, without a continuous belief in the end 
of histories and times, suffering and death. But (how) can the present be de-
tached from the future? Drawing on the work of practice theoretician Theo-
dor Schatzki, Bryant and Knight (2019) postulate that living in the present is 
”always and inevitably shaped by the ends for which we strive” (p. 20). Hope 
then, the authors suggest, is one kind of an orientation towards the future 
(ibid.). It is a particular state that enables people to believe in a better future, 
be that future a future without suffering (Lehtinen 2019), a future of prog-
ress (Kingsnorth 2023), or a future of yet unrealized, enticing potential (Bry -
ant and Knight 2019). 
But that feeling which keeps haunting me, which — in a place were two 
ghosts,1 one from the ruins of the future and the other from the destruction 
of the past, meet — makes me ask: what happens when the present is shaped 
with the loss of hope for a better future?  
1 I use the metaphor of ghosts introduced in the book Arts of living on a damaged planet: 
Ghosts and monsters of the Anthropocene (Tsing et al. 2017) to refer to tangible traces 
in landscapes that are visible to those who know where to look and how to interpret 
them, to those who, in the words of Christina Grasseni (2004), have learned to view 
skilfully.
7
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayFor the past four years, I have been working at diversified small-scale farms,2 
market and forest gardens, and other types of farmdens3 and have encoun-
tered different stories through which people have journeyed into regenera-
tive farming and ended up living off and with the land. These were stories of 
escaping meaninglessness and searching for a meaning, of seeking to work 
for the benefit of nature and of refusing to be part of destroying it, of taking 
responsibility and of giving (it) up.  
 
These were stories of change and continuity, of empowerment and burnouts. 
 
Stories of liberty and sacrifice…   
 
…of hopelessness and hope. 
 
The more I dove into the lives of people engaged in small-scale diversified 
farming, which I have elsewhere identified as regenerative agriculture4 (Kallio 
2022; Kallio and LaFleur 2023), and the further I followed the developments 
in the field of regenerative agriculture, the more discomfited I became. While 
regenerative agriculture has rapidly become a powerful political discourse, a 
major domain of research and a growing field of development, it is primarily 
being addressed as a pathway for transitioning so-called conventional agricul-
ture to carbon farming (IPES-Food 2022). This reduction not only disregards 
other, much broader meanings in farming (Silvasti 2002; Vlasov 2020, see 
also Kallio 2022; Kallio & LaFleur 2023), but also fails to acknowledge how 
and why new farmer generations set out to work with and regenerate the land. 
More crucially, however, I noticed that this reduction is founded on the 
production of hope that relies on farmers to contribute to taking care of the 
2 By diversified small-scale farms I refer to the kinds of farms that focus on diversified 
organic production (though not always certified), as in contrast to (techno-industrial 
or organic) monocrop farming and often integrate animals while also engaging in crop 
and vegetable production. I acknowledge that ‘small-scale’ is relative and might be 
an ambiguous way to categorize farms. In the Finnish context, a medium-sized farm 
is 50ha   and a small-scale farm in this context would be a farm cultivating anything 
from 1ha—40ha and having animals from a few up to 30.
3 Farmden is a term coined by a regenerative farmer Lee Reich, who defines it as more 
than a garden and less than a farm. (https://leereich.com)
4 There is no uniform definition of regenerative agriculture. Most commonly the concept 
is used in reference to principles and methods of improving soil health and other eco-
logical capacities of agricultural lands. I have argued elsewhere (Kallio 2022; Kallio 
and LaFleur 2023) that this focus neglects other, equally important dimensions of 
regeneration, such as community empowerment, resilience and self-determination, 
and questions of livelihoods. For definitions of regenerative agriculture, see e.g. (Giller 
et al. 2021; Rhodes 2017; Schreefel et al. 2020).
8
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Today‘carbon problem’ — a hope that has made policy makers and scientists alike 
captivated by the potential of carbon farming (Heinonsalo 2020; IPES-Food 
2022). But while regenerative farmers and (their) soils are being rapidly mobi-
lized into vessels of hope, it is paradoxically often the lack of hope concerning 
strongly sustainable5 societal transformations as well as the anxiety aroused 
by the great unravelling (Macy & Johnstone 2012, see also Jensen 2006) that 
are moving people (back) to the land to practise regenerative farming  — a 
movement that also my findings support. It is from this kind of ambiguity 
that this article emerges. 
My aim is to explore hope through an ethnographic account by which I wish 
to make visible the stories and lived experiences of regeneratively oriented 
small-scale farmers and bring forth an understanding of hope as action . Draw -
ing on the work of Macy & Johnstone (2012) and a relational practice-based 
research approach (Ingold 2000; Räsänen and Trux 2012), I ask: how is hope 
manifested in the work of diversified small-scale farmers? Based on a senso-
ry, emplaced and narrative analysis (Pink 2015; Riessman 1993), I show that 
hope as action, in the context of the studied small-scale diversified farmers, 
is manifested through cultivating the lands, inspiring others , and reciprocating 
the hope of other species. I argue that conceptualizing hope as action suggests 
an essentially different temporal orientation than that of future-orientedness 
(Bryant & Knight 2019), one that is (literally) grounded in intergenerational 
farming landscapes (Ingold 1993). Hope as action mobilizes both the past and 
the future and intertwines them into the present by opening up a pathway 
to noticing the traces (Tsing 2012) into which hope(s) and hopelessness(es) 
materialize through the work and dwelling of farmers, who together with oth-
er beings shape, sustain, and steward intergenerational farming landscapes. 
I suggest that reflecting on both the differences in meanings and in beliefs 
(Abend 2008) related to the concept of hope, and ultimately, understanding 
the kind of action it materializes into (or doesn’t) is important for a better 
understanding of whose  hopes are being mobilized through regenerative agri-
culture and how and why these hopes are mobilized. It may well turn out that 
giving up false hope towards the future of progress (Kingsnorth 2021; 2023; 
Lehtinen 2019; Jensen 2006) might not only be necessary, but prove to be 
5 By ‘strong sustainability’ I refer to an understanding that natural capital is not sub-
stitutable by human-made capital (Gutés 1996), and hence, all practices are bound 
by acting in ways that sustain and regenerate, rather than degrade and degenerate, 
the living web of life for future generations (see also Houbeckers and Kallio 2022). 
The counterpart of strong sustainability, namely weak sustainability, then, refers to an 
understanding of sustainability based on the substitutability of natural capital (i.e., 
believing in the ability to replace ecological resources), hence allowing an endless 
extraction from the web of life. 
9
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todaythe only way to give birth to action that connects humans with the wider web 
of life and orients them towards regenerating it.
Hope as action 
While my aim is not to provide a theory of hope in the sense of any of the 
understandings of a theory as identified by Abend (2008), I do have a concep-
tual ambition, namely bringing forth an understanding of hope as action. In 
order to do this there is, however, a need to start from a completely different 
understanding of hope — like the one suggested by anthropologists Rebecca 
Bryant and Daniel Knight in their book The Anthropology of the Future — and 
start unpacking both the meaning(s) and belief(s) (Davidson 1984:142, cited 
in Abend 2008) underlying different conceptualizations of hope. 
Bryant and Knight (2019), building on an understanding of “temporali-
ty as inherently teleological” (ibid. 17), suggest that hope is one of seven ori-
entations towards the future. Based on two examples from political spheres 
where new chosen leaders arrive with powerful words that awaken people’s 
hope, the authors identify hope as “a swell of emotion, an affect of positivity, 
appearing to push the crowds toward a better future. This is not the future of 
dream, but rather the future of blocked or unrealized potential” (ibid., 134). 
Hope, in this sense, is depicted as a shared positive emotion — that is not  a 
dream — that orients people towards  the future. In characterizing hope in this 
way, the authors further argue that:
hope emerges in the gap between the potential and the actual, between matter and 
its not-yet form. Hope is about something that doesn’t presently exist but potentially 
could; hope is based on more than a possibility and less than a probability. In that 
sense, hope is a way of virtually pushing potentiality into actuality. (ibid., 134) 
It is this abstract, future-oriented understanding of hope — an image of 
hope as floating-in-the-air — that leaves me puzzled. How  does hope, as some-
thing caught between the present and the future, relate to action, as some-
thing happening here and now? 
Looking into the historical trajectories of the production of hope, the play -
wright and free thinker Ilja Lehtinen (2019) not only departs from the positive 
connotations of hope but appears critical towards the whole concept. “Speaking  
in the language of hope” (emphasis original, np.), asserts Lehtinen, happens in 
the name of false promise of progress and does not appear reasonable in an 
era where ecological crises and collapse of current civilizations meet. In fact, 
it is both optimism and future orientedness that Lehtinen criticizes. 
10
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayIn his assessment, the production of hopefulness towards the future is not 
so much characterized through the linearity of time but rather by “explicitness, 
controllability and surveyability” of it (ibid., emphasis original, np.). In contrast, 
Lehtinen suggests, approaching time as “inevitable, destined, and unknown” 
would make hanging on to immaterial promises of continuing business-as-usu-
al, and promises of salvation through technological solutions, meaningless. 
Giving up hope for a better future, the future of progress would enable one 
to ground one’s experiences in the present, and teach one to live in the midst 
of unfolding crises, suggests Lehtinen.    
Similarly to Lehtinen, Mariame Kaba, a grassroots organizer and educator, 
refuses to connect hope to optimism or the future (Scahill 2021; Sonenstein 
and Wilson 2020), but unlike Lehtinen continues to believe in  the possibili-
ty of having hope. As a person actively working in and for Black communities 
to dismantle what she calls the Prison Industrial Complex, Kaba contests the 
idea of hope being an emotion  and advocates for an understanding of hope as a 
discipline. This understanding came to her from an encounter with a nun and is 
deeply rooted in religious practice. Thus, for Kaba, hope is produced in action 
and requires disciplined work: “It is work to be hopeful,” she states (Scahill 
2021, np.). In this sense, instead of giving up the concept of hope, like Lehti-
nen suggests, Kaba seems to redefine its meaning. For her, hope does not as -
sume optimism and future orientedness, but rather, as a discipline it “always 
[carries] a potential for transformation and for change. And that is in any di-
rection, good or bad” (Sonenstein & Wilson 2020, np.).  
While for Kaba, (repetitive) action (re)produces hope, for Macy and John-
stone (2012) it seems to be the other way around. In their book Active Hope, 
ecophilosopher Joanna Macy and resilience specialist Chris Johnstone bring 
forth an understanding of hope as becoming active through enabling and 
prompting action. For Macy and Johnstone the word ‘hope’ has two differ -
ent meanings: 
The first involves hopefulness, where our preferred outcome seems reasonably likely 
to happen. […] The second meaning is about desire. It is what we do with [this] hope 
that really makes the difference. Passive hope is about waiting for external agencies 
to bring about what we desire. Active Hope is about becoming active participants in 
bringing about what we hope for. (Macy & Johnstone 2012: 3.)
In other words, Macy and Johnstone suggest that the future that is hoped 
for  — that is desired — is brought about through actions in the present. It 
is, then, about activating  hope through the empowerment of people to work 
towards what they desire, a phenomenon the authors call the Great Turning. 
11
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayThe great turning is a part of a larger story in which, as the authors state, “we 
live in extraordinary times, and [we] can be caught between contrasting ver -
sions of reality” (2012, 64). The reality that Macy and Johnstone describe is 
one in which an increasing number of people and other living beings suffer 
— a reality acknowledged by some people — but which the mainstream cul-
ture views as “depressing news, gloomy thoughts, and feelings of distress as 
‘negative experiences’ from which we need to protect ourselves” (68). What is 
interesting in their analysis is that, similarly to what Lehtinen suggests, sub-
jecting oneself to gloomy images of reality, the authors suggest, can actually 
mobilize rather than paralyze the desired action. 
As it turns out, the conceptualizations of hope by Bryant and Knight, Leht -
inen, Kaba, and Macy and Johnstone not only differ in terms of the meanings 
and beliefs attached to (the concept of) hope, but also in terms of temporal-
ity; namely, in how the authors define the relationship between hope, action 
(as something happening in the present), and the future (as something yet 
to come). In connecting action to hope or hope to action I will next move to 
presenting my fieldwork and methods of studying and analysing hope in the 
context of diversified small-scale farming.        
Soil under the fingernails, or: fieldwork and methods
I started my fieldwork in Finland at the beginning of 2019. At that time the 
term regenerative agriculture was barely known to people outside the ‘pioneer -
ing’, or ‘alternative’ farming communities that I studied. Among these people, 
it was a concept used to refer to farming in a holistic and an organic manner 
with conscious reflection on the sustainability and ethics of the practices ap-
plied to produce food. Quite soon, I came to observe, the concept of regenerative 
agriculture became co-opted by food industry actors and started to be used in 
the context of conventional agriculture and in reference to ‘regenerative prac -
tices’ such as sowing cover crops to keep soils green as long as possible, using 
low-or-no-till methods, or reducing (but not necessarily giving up) the use of 
pesticides. Moreover, regenerative agriculture came to be rapidly reduced to 
what has now become known as carbon farming. Therefore, it has become dif -
ficult, if not impossible, to use this concept to refer to farming practices arising 
from a completely different paradigm than that of conventional farming in a 
transition that is deeply connected to the techno-industrial agrifood complex. 
Hence, I speak of a regenerative orientation  and diversified small-scale farming. 
The farms that I worked on included farms practising organic farming, 
biodynamic farming, market gardening and forest gardening. Some followed 
permaculture and agroecological principles, others referred more explicitly to 
regenerative farming methods (and a few more explicitly to carbon farming) 
12
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todaythat they were learning from practitioner books, peer-to-peer networks, You-
Tube videos and by following ongoing scientific research. Altogether, I visit -
ed 16 farms and worked at 10 farms for varying periods of time throughout 
different seasons. 
My tasks included almost everything except driving tractors and helping 
with the birth of animals. I sowed seeds and prepared beds, I did weeding and 
transplanting, I harvested and prepared vegetables for sales or for food bags to 
be delivered to CSA6 members, I fed animals and cleaned their barns, I cleaned 
farm spaces and prepared lunches, and I did many other things that came up 
as part of the farmers’ everyday lives whenever I was present. 
In addition to recording many of the spontaneous conversations happen-
ing alongside work and other activities at the farms, taking photos and writ -
ing notes in my field diary, I conducted ten semi-structured interviews that 
I co-designed together with the farmers. These were video recorded and pub-
lished in NÄKYMÄ7. While hope was not a concept I explicitly inquired into, 
or a topic that was often addressed during the fieldwork, I started to sense  the 
presence of something resembling hope the more time I spent on the farms. 
I used my sensory experiences to try, as Pink (2015, 54) describes, “to access 
areas of embodied, emplaced knowing and [to] use these as a basis from which 
to understand human environments, activities, perception, experience, ac -
tion and meaning”. To my surprise, this method allowed me to notice how, in 
many of our conversations at the farms, we kept returning to staying with the 
trouble(s)8 rather than spending our time envisioning a more hopeful future.   
Drawing on a relational approach (Ingold 2000) and the framework of prac -
tical activity (FPA) (Räsänen and Trux 2012), as well as on an understanding 
that practices are always more-than-human9 and unfold through the tempo-
ralities of the landscapes (Ingold 1993), my analysis of hope proceeded in two 
stages. In the first part of the analysis, I focused on the stories  of how people 
went into farming, analysing how  and why  people ended up practising diver -
sified regenerative farming. The stories that I compiled from my fieldnotes, 
6 CSA is an acronym for Community Supported Agriculture. For more information about 
CSA’s in Finland, see e.g. (Kallio 2018; Ruralia 2023)
7 NÄKYMÄ is a website that presents research results on the project Invisible work in 
regenerative agriculture funded by the Kone Foundation. Link to the site: www.naky-
matontyo.fi 
8 I use this expression from Donna Haraway’s book Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin 
in the Chthulucene, to refer to a collective reflection of troubling times and efforts to 
think-with multispecies communities (Haraway 2016).
9 I position my work within relational-material practice ontoepistemology, which situates 
humans as part of the biosphere and acknowledges that human interaction is always 
intimately entwined with the dwelling and activities of species and more-than-human 
materiality (see e.g. Ingold 2000, Kimmerer 2003).  
13
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todayinterview transcripts and transcripts of everyday conversations during the 
fieldwork revealed how the coexistence of hope and hopelessness encom-
passed  both the past and the future of the farmers’ journeys. I describe these 
findings in the next section titled ‘Thus called the land’. 
The second part of the analysis included two phases. First, in inquiring 
more deeply into the actual practices of regeneration, I specifically focused on 
what regeneration meant at each farm, and (hence) what were the things farm-
ers and land stewards were working towards, analysing both the how and the 
why. Second, I made a word search for hope in all the written and transcribed 
research material. This search brought me hits from six different farms out of 
16. When going through the parts where hope was explicitly mentioned I re-
alized that most of the excerpts were extremely mundane, in parts even dull, 
mentioning hope as part of and connecting it to concrete action. Analysing ex -
cerpts with mentions of hope together with accounts of the hows and whys of 
regenerative farming resulted in identifying hope as action characterized as 
cultivating the lands, inspiring others and reciprocating the hopes of other beings. 
I describe these findings in the section titled ‘Be  the change’.  
Thus called the land
In bare feet and hands covered in soil she meets me with a warm hug. We have never 
met before and yet it feels like we’ve known each other for a long time. As we walk 
through a wooden arch- shaped entrance into a path surrounded by plants of dif -
ferent shapes, colours and heights, most of which I do not recognize, Ulrika10 tells 
me how she ended up living on this piece of land far from where she grew up. Nei-
ther of her parents have a farming background, but Ulrika declares that she can’t 
imagine doing anything else than, as she puts it, serving this land. “My story prob-
ably begins from college. I didn’t have much direction at that time, but I knew that 
my hands belong to [be in] the earth, and that was the direction towards which I 
started to journey,” she reminisces. (Field diary11, 2020)
This was one of the many stories that I encountered in my fieldwork. I 
found two kinds of storylines: the stories of those people who did not grow 
up on a farm and did not have a farming background through family —whom 
some scholars refer to as back-to-the landers (Halfacree 2007; Vlasov 2020; 
Wilbur 2013) — and the stories of those who did. What these storylines had 
in common was that in both cases people journeyed towards  something they 
considered meaningful and away from  action that appeared to be contributing 
10 All the names of the farmers have been anonymized and pseudonyms are used instead.
11 The field notes have primarily been written in Finnish, and have been translated into 
English by the author.
14
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todayto the ongoing ecological crises. In the words of Macy and Johnstone (2012), 
it was the great transformation that I was witnessing. 
Some of the people whom I encountered were career changers who had 
never farmed before, but were drawn to the work as small-scale farmers. Ahti 
was one of these people. He did not wish to enter the academic world, as it 
did not seem to him to have a purpose, but neither did his chosen profession 
as a technician that he worked at for ten years feel meaningful on a deeper 
level. Consequently, he ended up quitting his job and moved into farming.  
Anthony, on the other hand, received an academic education and began 
working as a key account manager at a large tech company. However, like Ahti, 
Anthony felt that the work that he did at that time was not meaningful, but 
rather the contrary; his work contributed to the climate change that he was 
becoming increasingly aware of and anxious about:
 
Absolutely not [no background in farming]. I grew up in cities all over the world. […] 
At some point, I realized that I wanted to create a world in which I was able to live in 
accordance with my ethics [...] the real crisis of our time was global warming. And I 
sort of became more and more aware of that […] I’m just not going to… I don’t want 
to be a part of that karma or that cycle of destruction […] and so I started moving 
more towards working with ecosystems. (Transcripts, 2019)
 
Indeed, many urbanites who were drawn to small-scale and sustenance 
farming were well aware of global warming and felt the need to do something 
about it, something concrete, as Joonas did:
 
I was studying [at university] and I learned about climate change and a number of 
other issues facing people everywhere and tried to figure out something concrete that 
I could do beyond typical activism. […] I wanted to eat better food and so I became 
interested in gardening. So, gardening became an interest in what is organic farming? 
Is there anything better than organic farming, what can we do? And so I just found 
that path to be extremely gratifying, working outside with plants and nature and 
compost… (Interview 7)
 
Other people also drifted into farming through becoming interested in the 
origins of food. Also, communal living in the countryside was an attraction to 
some, like Iris, her partner, and their friends:
 
I don’t have an agricultural background at all. I have grown up in a suburban area 
in a town. […] Many [of us participating in a food collective] had a dream of living 
[more sustainably] in the countryside and we were interested in the origins of our 
food. (Transcripts, 2019)
 
15
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayPeople without a farming background moving from urban to rural areas 
needed to acquire a piece of land and often started building gardens from 
scratch — on “waste lands”, “deserted fields”, or “plots occupied by trees” — 
with the hope of being able to regenerate these landscapes. 
I observed similar aspirations among people who grew up on a farm and 
wanted to continue farming on the lands that had been cultivated by their 
families for decades, if not for centuries. This younger generation of farmers 
seemed to have in common an impulse to take care of the landscape and im-
prove the overall condition of the soils and the surrounding ecosystems. One 
farm was run by siblings who continued in the footsteps of their grandfather: 
 
The girls’ father started to reflect on the condition of the fields here at our family farm, 
and he has a connection to biodynamic farming through his background and so he 
somehow wanted, felt the need for us, to start taking care of the land… (Transcripts, 
2021)
 
Environmentally conscious farming also guided Jyrki, who continued his 
old family farm, and converted it into an organic farm that nowadays oper -
ates as a community supported agricultural cooperative:
 
I was born and grew up here at this farm and have been participating in the work as 
much as I could since I was little. […] And then also environmental issues have gained 
prominence and were already important when I was little. So, going organic was quite 
self-evident for me. […] And now we also have this farmer cooperative and CSA here. 
(Interview 8 & transcripts, 2019) 
 
Many of the stories that I heard made visible future-oriented aspirations 
to move towards  what people found desirable, namely working on and with 
the lands and producing food in a regenerative manner. At the same time, re-
flecting on the past was intrinsic to regeneratively oriented farming, which 
provided a path for moving away from the trajectories of degeneration that 
people were witnessing. 
In the many different places where I worked, I encountered a similar view -
point: that the actions of the past generations had had a severe negative im-
pact on farming lands and on the living environment more broadly. Things 
were heading in the wrong direction and that not enough was being done to 
reverse the ongoing environmental destruction. I recall one conversation with 
Jyrki about what would “locally adapted ecological farming“, as he called it, 
be like. He said in passing: “I don’t believe that any significant changes will 
happen in the society by that time [when the next generation takes over this 
farm].” This notion encapsulated many conversations to come. 
16
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodaySome farmers felt that not only were things bad but that they were getting 
much worse, and through regenerative farming they were preparing for what 
Bendell (2018) identifies as a societal collapse. In one conversation with An-
thony, we were discussing the power of corporations to control seed supply. 
And while he was saving seeds as an intrinsic part of farming, and participat -
ing in various seed-saving communities, he was not optimistic about the fu-
ture of indigenous, non-patented seeds: 
We don’t know what follows. […] It’s a code that’s evolved, and there’s all these checks 
and balances that have been built into the [seed] structure, for literally billions of 
years, and now, suddenly, one species and only a very small percentage of that one 
species has a shitload of power and money, and technology, they’re gonna go in and 
they’re gonna decide how that code is gonna evolve. […] So, if these people have the 
means of reproduction, they can out-compete anyone else in reproduction, because 
they can firstly manipulate, then they also patent it. […] They have a huge advantage. 
Huge advantage. And they will probably use it to fuck everything up. We have no idea 
what kind of crazy shit we’re gonna get out of that.  (Transcript 2019)
Some even expressed the idea that regeneratively oriented diversified farm-
ing and engaging in self-reliant food economies12 was a potential threat to es -
tablished institutions, and hence this way of farming had been made very dif -
ficult. By listening to these concerns, I realized that for these farmers, when 
judging the actions of the past and the present, there was simply not enough 
evidence for any kinds of strongly sustainable improvements — neither in the 
political nor in the market spheres — to take place in the near future.   
The stories of how and why people were called to work on the lands revealed 
the entangled temporalities of the landscapes (Ingold 1993) that farming ac -
tivities evoked. Loss of faith in the current system, or the story of the Great 
Unravelling as Macy and Johnstone (2012) put it, was as deeply attached to 
the past and present traces in the landscapes as it was connected to creating 
new traces  through farming. As hopelessness unravelled in the lives of the 
farmers, space for another kind of trajectory, one that was deeply connected 
to today’s actions, began to unfold. 
12 By ‘self-reliant food economies’ I refer to practices of food provisioning that are 
organized independently at grassroots level, and which are not subordinated to the 
rules and regulations of the conventional market-based economies and food (safety) 
regulations (see Houtbeckers and Kallio 2019; Kallio and Houtbeckers 2022 for the 
conceptualization and use of the concept of self-reliant food economies).
17
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayBe the change 
At the end of a long day, I sit in the car and drive home with my notebook, camera 
and a bag of food that has been given to me. During the day I’ve fed the cows by car -
rying them hay bales, I’ve carried vegetable bags of 20kg into the cellar and out of 
it, I’ve washed, weighed and packed hundreds of kilos of root vegetables to be deliv -
ered to customers, I’ve filled the shelves of the farm store, helped to make lunch and 
set and cleaned the table for a crew of nearly ten people. When I leave, I know that 
the farmer continues the day by delivering the vegetables we’ve prepared for sales, 
by orienting for and scheduling the next day’s to-do list, by participating in taking 
care of the family needs, by feeding the cows twice more that evening, and by doing 
some accounting before eventually falling dead tired into bed. (Fieldnotes 2022)
This farm was not the only farm with days requiring more hours than there 
are in a day. As the main growing season only lasted for some three months, 
particularly on those farms that primarily focused on seasonal annual vege-
tables, the work during this time was very intensive. Nearly all farmers, gar -
deners and servants of the land appeared on the verge of burnout, and there 
was always much more that could have been done but couldn’t be. It was ex -
actly this kind of everyday, recurrent physical labour that embodied hope for 
building a better future on the one hand and complete loss of faith for any 
true change to happen in the society at large on the other. But this ambiguity, 
the mutual constitution of these two incommensurable dimensions of hope, 
turned dirt into soil, grass deserts into pollinators’ paradises, hundreds of 
hectares of solitude into community-supported agriculture.    
Taking action into one’s own hands and practising diversified agriculture, 
market and forest gardening in a self-determined manner provided the farm-
ers a counter force to the lack of hope that they were experiencing regarding 
a larger societal change. In the landscapes that I visited, I found, as Macy & 
Johnstone (2012) put it, that hope was active . In the following I describe how 
hope was manifested through i) cultivating the lands, ii) inspiring others, and 
iii) reciprocating the hope of other species.
 
Cultivating the lands 
Soil and the condition in which it was inherited played an important role in 
the work of the farmers. What united all farmers, gardeners and servants of 
the lands was stewardship, as they were all working to improve the health of 
the soil and the surrounding landscapes in order to bring them more to life.  
Some soil was approached with ploughs, other soil with bare hands. Some 
farms were turned into perennial forest gardens, some into animal pastures 
and traditional biotopes, some were converted into oases of diversified annual 
18
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todayvegetable gardens, and some became experimental sites for carbon farming. All 
these different landscapes unfolded through active shaping of different species, 
including humans, that inhabited, worked at, or passed through the landscapes. 
As part of applying different regenerative practices, the farmers actively moni-
tored their landscapes and many reported that they could sense the vitality of 
soils and observe improved plant growth and the appearance of diverse insects, 
birds and animals. Marika described their observations as follows: 
 
We have this experience [here] and a sensation about how our ways of farming and 
[increasing] biodiversity has changed the soil, the land, into a totally different form, 
and how being in the fields feels [now] completely different from when we started. 
(Transcripts 2021)
 
Harri also observed the concrete results of his farming efforts as he worked 
in synchronicity with nature’s rhythms: “When I work together with nature 
and in this amazingly diverse and tangible farm organism, I see very concrete-
ly every day how nature’s metamorphosis works, and I can join it, because I’m 
in the same location.”  (Interview 5). 
Some farmers told stories about other people who had been applying re-
generative agricultural practices consciously for decades, or even just for a few 
years, and who were ”turning things around”. Being able to learn from oth-
ers that it was possible to transform a piece of land to have “the best soil in 
the county”, even where chemicals had previously been used, even where the 
soils had been “poisoned” and converted to “dirt”, and wastelands, gave a lot 
of hope to continue one’s own regenerative work.
Being able to take care of the lands and produce ‘good food’ (Kallio 2020) 
in an autonomous manner and in accordance with one’s beliefs, and witness -
ing the concrete material results of one’s own work empowered the farmers 
and generated hope. Many considered that farming had a lot of potential to 
make an impact on other people and to make a change in the proximate en-
vironment, as Iris stated: “These kinds of farms impact hundreds of people.” 
(Fieldnotes 2020).   
The fruits of one’s labour came in many different forms, but what seemed 
to ground them was a very special temporal orientation, namely, intergener -
ationality:  
 
For me this [regenerative work] is very hopeful. I am extremely touched when I plant 
a tree, which is so intergenerational.  (Interview 2)
 
So that we can cultivate these lands for the next thousands of years we need to take 
care of them as well as we can. (Interview 6)  
 
19
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayThese hopes for intergenerational care and continuity were infused into 
concrete action, and most of all, hope was planted and replanted in the mun-
dane, everyday farming work, guided by pursuing self-reliant and autono-
mous ways of regeneration, where the means of (re)production stayed under 
the control of the farmers and (other) stewards of the lands. The ambiguity 
of hope was present in every seed sowed, plant planted, animal reproduced 
or killed, harvest sold or unsold, as Anthony states: 
 
And it’s not like I’m under any kind of illusion that this is going to save the world. It 
isn’t. But if everybody went in this direction or some kind of similar direction where 
they’re relating with biology, relating with ecosystem, then … (Interview 3)
 
Something very essential was captured in Anthony’s words. Hope was 
planted in and through concrete action, but there needed to be someone to 
acknowledge the impacts of that which was sowed and cultivated.  
 
Inspiring others
At the very core of the practices of regenerative farmers and stewards of the 
land was a desire to demonstrate that these kinds of ways of farming and (re)
producing food were viable. Similar to being inspired by other regenerative 
farmers, whose books some people had been reading or whom they were fol-
lowing on the social media, many wished to be able to inspire others — farmers 
of today and of tomorrow — through the work they were doing and through 
the landscapes they were (co)creating and shaping.  
The underlying hope of many farmers was to facilitate more regenerative 
farms in the future. They hoped that they could provide guidance and support 
the learning needed for this kind of development, despite the fact that some 
felt that regenerative agriculture was a threat to the broader market-based 
society, as noted by some farmers: “this [diversified small-scale regenerative 
farming] is not wanted in the bigger picture, that’s for sure. The global mon-
etary economy is driving in a completely opposite direction, the direction of 
control.” (Transcript 2021).
Many seemed to want to validate diversified small-scale farming, as Joonas 
put it: “what I’m trying to do is just have a small-scale business that’s profit -
able enough that it’s going to hopefully inspire more, especially young people, 
to see that farming in Finland is a viable option” (Interview 7). For many, the 
concrete farming work was in itself inspirational and empowering. Many de-
scribed how it gave them strength and a sense of autonomy, provided meaning 
and continuous inspiration. People working on farms and at homestead gar -
dens generally saw that regenerative farming had a lot of potential for bring-
20
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todaying about change, and even for providing a totally different paradigm of live-
lihoods compared to what the dominant consumption-driven society offered. 
For many farmers, doing things together and enabling communities to 
form around and support small-scale farming was at the core of the required 
paradigm shift. Indeed, on some farms I observed a continuous flow of peo-
ple who came to work, help or visit. These were friends and acquaintances, 
trainees and volunteers, school groups and political delegations, other farmers 
and researchers like myself. These were the people who had the potential to be 
inspired. Particular farms were known for their successful regenerative work 
and admiring appraisals of them circulated by word of mouth. Some farmers, 
however, were rather humble, underestimating the impact they might have 
as a source of inspiration. Ahti was one of them.   
After working periodically at Ahti’s farm for one year we sat down to record 
a video interview. Our conversations during our workdays had always flowed 
very well, but then, in front of the camera, it proved to be difficult for Ahti to 
articulate his achievements. When I asked why he finds regenerative farming 
important there was a long silence after the familiar answer he gave — name-
ly, that it is important to take care of the soil, the animals and the local eco-
systems.  Then in a lowered and soft voice, he said: “That we can work together 
[here] and produce great results…maybe that gives people some hope. For me, an 
essential part of being regenerative is that people have a place in it.” (Interview 
6, author’s emphasis, based on a contextual understanding of the conversation)
Again, there was something very concrete and material in the hope of be-
ing able to inspire. Making a more liveable planet was not about talking and 
hoping that these beliefs would somehow magically materialize, but it was 
about walking the talk, about doing, observing and witnessing the impact of 
taking concrete action into one’s own hands in the immediate environments. 
Hoping to be or to become an inspiration was also a hope to make other peo-
ple experience the beauty and virtue of regenerative work. Juha described 
this as follows: 
 
But this planet is actually rather fragile and we need to do everything we can and 
then to find out that you can actually produce lots of food this way, you can clean the 
water, you can bring back biodiversity, you can bring back excitement, you can have 
healthy communities, people [would] want to become farmers again, they want to own 
land, they want to live out in the countryside where they can, when they’re actually 
told they can interact with this miraculous thing… (Transcripts 2020)
 
Interacting with the miraculous thing called the Earth gave hope, but for 
some, at some point in their journey, it appeared to relocate hope and shift 
people’s perspectives of whose  hopes farming work was serving. 
 
21
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayReciprocating the hopes of other living beings 
Hope did not merely exist for and because of humans, it also came in a form 
that departed from an understanding of hope as a characteristic of human be-
haviour alone. Working in multispecies environments, continually pursuing 
knowledge about how other species contributed to making and shaping land-
scapes enabled farmers to better  understand — and be interested in learning 
more about — the needs and aspirations of other species. This made some 
people reflect on the hopes of living beings beyond humans, whom Barron 
and Hess (2020) call the “earth-others”.    
At a biodynamic farm, Iris was taking a group of students for a walk in 
some surrounding pastures where traditional biotopes had been revived and 
sustained. She explained how “plants and nature, actually, somehow await 
and hope for us to see them. Interaction is as much a gift for them as it is for 
us.” (Transcripts 2020).
Acknowledging the needs and hopes of other living beings was embedded 
in farming, albeit in various ways. Despite the fact that the farmers worked 
within multiple ways of knowing the(ir) landscapes, they all seemed to share 
an understanding that they were not merely working for themselves, but for 
the land that had been degenerated and for the generations to come. Being 
able to work in intimate connection with the more-than-human world and 
towards acknowledging its silenced hopes helped some farmers to cope de-
spite the hard work:  
 
What helps me manage and is significant on the personal level is my relationship 
with nature and particularly with animals, this continuous co-living and sensing in 
my proximate environment. I get [back] at least what I hope to be able to give, and 
these ties that we make are very strong. (Interview 2)
 
Then with plants, I experience that it has a meaning that we do this work with our 
[bare] hands and with [conscious] presence. It is like the Earth wants to be touched…
That’s why I want to place my bare skin to her skin. (Fieldnotes 2021) 
 
Indeed, in the midst of planting seedlings in muddy fields, “cleaning” veg-
etable beds of weeds, or shovelling manure in the cowhouses, many described 
how the concrete feeling of sticking one’s hands into soil, meeting a wild ani-
mal in the garden at dawn, or tending the plants brought an ‘authentic’ feeling 
of being a human being out of them. But forming intimate relations with the 
soil, plants and animals and attending to the diverse rhythms of (re)produc -
tion (Kallio and LaFleur 2023) not only enabled the farmers to recognize the 
hopes of other-than-humans, but also made them recognize and appreciate 
the reciprocity of more-than-human relations. 
22
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayReciprocal relations manifest themselves in many ways, but at the core 
was the ability of the farmers to acknowledge the hopes of other living be-
ings. The hope of plants, animals, birds, fungi and sometimes even the hope 
of water — as Ulrika mentioned, “the water wants to flow freely, and not be 
captured in a static deposit” (Fieldnotes 2021) — would enter into the sphere 
of reciprocal relations.  
Creating reciprocal relations with plants, animals and other living beings 
in the landscapes meant giving something back to them, not merely taking 
from them. Reciprocity was manifested, for instance, in the practice of com-
posting. Making compost was an engagement which required a lot of work and 
time that could have been avoided by purchasing fertilizers or by outsourcing 
the making of compost. However, using one’s own compost was an expres -
sion of caring for the soil (Puig De La Bellacasa 2015) and was considered an 
act of giving back the nutrients that were taken from the soil by the harvest.
These kinds of practices that emerged from the need to reciprocate brought 
the farmers and other carers of the land to reflect upon the connections be-
tween the wellbeing of people and of the land: “It’s about human flourishing 
[…] what keeps our society going is the way we manage land, and you can see 
the soil health reflected in the health of the people, and [at the moment] peo-
ple aren’t happy.” (Interview 6).
At the end of the day, recognizing the hopes of other living beings inhab-
iting and shaping the farming landscapes amounted to a recognition of one’s 
own sources of illness and wellbeing, sorrow and happiness.
Hope and unfolding temporalities of intergenerational farming 
landscapes 
In its present form, a tree embodies the entire history of its development from the 
moment it first took root. And that history consists in the unfolding of its relations with 
the manifold components of its environment, including the people who have nurtured 
it, tilled the soil around it, pruned its branches, picked its fruit, and - as at present - 
use it as something to lean against. The people, in other words, are as much bound up 
in the life of a tree as is the tree in the lives of the people. (Ingold 1993, 197-198)
As a tree grows from a temporally unfolding landscape, the seed of this tree 
has been sown and the tree nurtured through hope. Motivated by developing 
an understanding of hope as something that people do  (Macy and Johnstone 
2012, see also Graeber 2001) rather than something that people have  (Bryant 
& Knight 2019, Lehtinen 2019), my aim has been to make visible how hope is 
materialized in actions like those Ingold (ibid.) describes in the quote above 
23
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todaywhen analysing Bruegel’s The Harvesters . Acts such as sowing seeds, nurturing 
plants and trees, caring for more-than-human communities, and harvesting 
I identified as cultivating the lands. Observing the growth, regeneration and 
the temporal unfolding of the landscapes and sharing this knowledge with 
others, is identified as inspiring others. Finally, leaning on a tree, looking at it, 
smelling its flowers and eating its fruits, and attending to the hopes of mul-
tiple other living beings who wish to be nurtured, is reciprocating the hopes of 
other living beings. All these activities emerge from hope.  
In what follows, I discuss how hope as action, in the context of regener -
atively oriented small-scale farming work, leaves tangible traces in farming 
landscapes that are always and inherently intergenerational and temporally 
unfolding. I argue that conceptualizing hope as action, or as Active Hope as 
Macy and Johnstone (2012) propose, suggests a different kind of temporali-
ty. This hope  is (literally) grounded in the  past , which impacts the actions of 
the present, and the  future, which orients the actions of today. Furthermore, 
as active hope acknowledges the coexistence of hope and hopelessness, it also 
reveals that they are derived from totally different sources. 
As I learned at the diversified small-scale farms where I worked, hope 
manifested through concrete everyday work and recurrent action. Farmers 
sow seeds in the hope that they germinate; they tend plants in the hope that 
there would be a good harvest; they care for soil in the hope that it becomes 
animate (Puig de La Bellacasa 2019). They observe, experiment and learn to 
farm better in the hope that others too became inspired and succeed. They 
learn to notice  (Grasseni 2004; Tsing 2012: 17-26) the needs of plants, ani-
mals and (other) fellow workers in the hope that such generosity will be re-
ciprocated (Kimmerer 2013). 
It is here where acknowledging the larger view of time (Macy & Johnstone 
2012) comes to play a significant role in abandoning the understanding of 
hope as merely a future-oriented emotion  as proposed by Bryant & Knight 
(2019). Conceptualizing hope as action, I suggest, moves beyond the linear 
perception of time — beyond gazing forward into the future and seeking to 
catch the ever-escaping promise of unrealized potential (Byrant & Knight 
2019) — but instead appears to be more truthful to the temporality of the 
landscape (Ingold 1993). 
This kind of temporality discloses hopeful and hopeless traces of intergen-
erational pasts, presents and futures, and acknowledges the paces of soil (Puid 
de la Bellacasa 2015), plants (Kimmerer 2013) and animals. Indeed, working 
so closely with the manifold living beings that inhabited and shaped farming 
landscapes put a very particular kind of intergenerational temporality into 
play: farmers became cognizant of the different lifespans of diverse organ-
24
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todayisms and materialities. For instance, by making compost they participated in 
different rhythmic cycles of animal reproduction and became subjected to the 
timely and time-consuming processes of decomposition emerging from the 
entwined rhythms of microbes, mycelia, plants, animals and humans (Kallio 
and LaFleur 2023). Ultimately, it was about recognizing the temporalities of 
enlivening or degrading soil, of nurturing or cutting down trees, and of help-
ing plants, animals, birds and pollinators to adapt or become extinct in the 
changing conditions of their habitats. 
Aiming to regenerate the landscapes of the present through diversified 
farming the farmers continued to shape landscape relations inherited from 
past generations and thereby ended up reconfiguring the trajectories of fu-
ture generations. Through active hope (Macy & Johnston 2012), the farmers 
were making the future here and now rather than trying to control it (Lehtin-
en 2019) — by acting  upon that what they desired and hoped for.  
But while an understanding of hope as action — as residing in the repro-
duction of everyday farming life — is very close to an understanding of hope 
as a disciplined work (Scahill 2021; Sonenstein and Wilson 2020), contrary to 
what Kaba suggests, the kind of hope that I observed at the farms was activated 
not on account of its antithesis, hopelessness, but despite it. In other words, 
while some journeys had started from places of hopelessness, the farmers 
and other carers of agricultural lands were not pursuing livelihoods through 
regeneratively oriented small-scale farming because they were hopeless, but 
because they refused to contribute to ecological degeneration. 
Instead, hope was transformed into action in the process of pursuing a 
completely different desired reality, one that acknowledged the possibilities 
of more-than-human livelihoods (Houbeckers and Kallio 2022) and one in 
which utopias were collectively put to work (Alhojärvi 2021). In this sense, 
conceptualizing hope as action requires re-examining the relationship between 
hope  and  action . Further, it calls for relinquishing an understanding of hope 
as something that is abstract, and instead warrants recognizing its materiali-
ty. Hence, speaking of the unfolding of hope through intergenerational farm-
ing landscapes is not possible without recognizing how  hope(s) and hopeless -
ness(es) of past generations materialize in the conditions of the agricultural 
lands, lands that have been inherited by the new farmer generations. Equal-
ly, recognizing the materiality of hope is to recognize the ways in which ag-
ricultural lands are farmed from the position of acting upon the anticipated 
hope(s) and hopelessness(es) of future generations.  
This brings me to the last point that I wish to discuss, namely false hope. 
While arguing that both hope and hopelessness of past, present and future gen-
erations leaves traces in farming landscapes and mobilizes action, it is crucial 
25
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better Todayto point out that farmers’ hope(s) and hopelessness(es) not only arose from 
different sources but that the hope(s) of farmers were also based on totally 
different beliefs and understandings of the desired future than those offered 
by politicians and market actors. 
As other thinkers have pointed out more generally (Jensen 2006; Lehtinen 
2019; Macy and Johnstone 2012) farmers’ hopelessness also derived from the 
experience of not having any real agency to guide societal transformation in a 
desired, strongly sustainable direction. Engaging in farming enabled self-de-
termination and thereby gave the farmers agency to act upon, and an ability 
to move towards, what they desired. However, what diversified small-scale 
farmers desired differed greatly from the dominant regenerative agricultural 
field. While the hope of politicians, financiers and industry actors has increas -
ingly been characterized by the desire to reduce and balance carbon emissions 
through carbon markets (IPES-Food 2022), selling one’s labour input and of -
fering one’s lands to serve carbon offsetting pursuits was not the hope of the 
farmers whose journeys I followed. 
I would like to end this hope-full journey with the thoughts of Tim In-
gold, who, in the preface to the 2021 reissue, discusses the collection of es -
says published in The Perception of the Environment. Ingold describes how “in 
the course of writing these essays I began to find renewed hope in a way of 
thinking that would see our relations with others nestled within the wider 
field of relations with the very earth on which we dwell, and all that lives and 
grows from it.” (Ingold 2000: xiv). He then goes on to reflect on the critique 
he received for depicting the beauty of this world rather than its dissonance. 
To the critique, Ingold replies:
 
My response was to say that you cannot tear apart what has not first been woven to-
gether; that coherence is a necessary condition for rupture. And it was the nature of 
this coherence that I wanted to understand. But as the skies darken overhead, I am 
no longer so sure. […] I know I am not alone in intuiting this contradiction, as it is 
patently on show in all the debates, anthropological and otherwise, that are struggling 
with the question of how to live, in a way that would offer hope to future generations. 
We will have our work cut out, in coming years, to resolve it. (2021, xv) 
 
Indeed, we are living in turbulent times. It remains to be seen what kinds 
of hopes and states of hopelessness the future generations will carry on and 
how they will end up resolving living off and with the lands that they inher -
it. Ultimately, the answer to the question of how to live in a way that would 
offer hope to future generations might well be giving in to hopelessness, con-
templating the Great Unravelling, and giving up false hope (Jensen 2006; Le-
htinen 2019; Macy and Johnstone 2012).
26
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayThen, what remains, is hope as action : acting here and now from within a 
“larger view of time” (Macy & Johnstone 2012) and situating oneself within 
shared stories of our times and unfolding temporalities of intergeneration-
al landscapes. Then, maybe, hope as action can guide us through the world 
of loss, ruins and extinction (Tsing et al. 2017; Van Dooren 2014) and mark 
paths towards a world of beauty, miracles and awe.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I wish to thank all the farmers who have allowed me to work alongside them, 
learn new skills, and enter spaces of sharing and intimacy. Their openness and 
generosity have filled me with gratitude and showed me the incredible com-
plexity of the web of life that sustains us. I also wish to express my gratitude 
to Marja-Liisa Trux for inspiring and thought-provoking feedback on an ear -
lier version of the manuscript as well as Will LaFleur and Eeva Houtbeckers 
for encouraging comments. 
FUNDERS
This article has been written as part of the project titled More-than-human 
economies in the era of ecological crises — tracing human-soil relations, reciproc -
ity and livelihoods in practices of regenerative food (re)production funded by the 
Research Council of Finland (former Academy of Finland). The ethnograph-
ic fieldwork undertaken for this article has been initiated as part of projects 
funded by the Maj and Tor Nessling Foundation, the Kone Foundation, and 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry of Finland. 
AUTHOR
Galina Kallio is an environmental social scientist with a background in criti-
cal organization studies . She is currently working at the University of Helsin-
ki, Ruralia Institute. Her research focuses on farming livelihoods, diversified 
small-scale agriculture, self-reliant food economies, and more-than-human 
landscape relations. As a scholar deeply immersed in ethnographic practice, 
she is also interested in multi-sensory research methods, multispecies pro-
cesses of knowledge production, and alternative ways of representing science.
27
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodaySOURCES
Fieldwork material
Interview material published on [webpage]: 
–Interview 1. October, 2021, Southern Finland. Females, 30-50 years. Interviewer Galina 
Kallio
–Interview 2. October, 2020, Southern Finland. Female, 40 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
–Interview 3. June, 2019, Norway. Male, 40-50 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
–Interview 4. November, 2019, Central Finland. Female & Male, 50 years. Interviewer 
Galina Kallio
–Interview 5. December, 2019, Central Finland. Male, 40 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
–Interview 6. October, 2019, Southern Finland. Male, 40 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
–Interview 7. November, 2019, Southern Finland. Male, 40 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
–Interview 8. November, 2019, Southern Finland. Male, 40 years. Interviewer Galina Kallio
Interview material, in the possession of the author, stored at the University of Helsinki
project group folder: 
–Transcripts. Recorded conversations during the fieldwork, 2019. Interviewers Galina 
Kallio & Risto Musta. 
–Transcripts. Recorded conversations during the fieldwork, 2020—2022. Interviewer 
Galina Kallio.
–Field diaries, 2019–2022.
Bibliography
Abend, Gabriel. 2008. “The Meaning of ‘Theory.’” Sociological Theory 26 (2): 173–99.
Bendell, Jem. 2018. Deep Adaptation: A Map for Navigating Climate Tragedy. Institute 
for Leadership and Sustainability (IFLAS) Occasional Papers Volume 2. University of 
Cumbria, Ambleside, UK.
Bryant, Rebecca, and Knight, Daniel M. 2019. The Anthropology of the Future. Cambridge 
University Press.
Davidson, Donald. 1984. Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Giller, Ken E, Hijbeek, Renske, Andersson, Jens A., and Sumberg, James. 2021. “Regen-
erative Agriculture: An Agronomic Perspective.” Outlook on Agriculture  50 (1): 13–25.
Grasseni, Cristina. 2004. “Skilled Vision. An Apprenticeship in Breeding Aesthetics.” 
Social Anthropology 12 (1): 41–55.
Halfacree, Keith. 2007. “Back-to-the-land in the Twenty-first Century–Making Connec-
tions with Rurality.” Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Sociale Geografie 98 (1): 3–8.
Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Duke 
University Press.
Heikkurinen, Pasi, and Ruuska, Toni. 2021. Kestävän Elämän Manifesti. Elonkehä-kirjat. 
Vihreä elämänsuojelun liitto ry.
Heinonsalo, Jussi. 2020. Hiiliopas. Katsaus Maaperän Hiileen Ja Hiiliviljelyn Perusteisiin.  
1. Painos. Kaarina: Paino-Kaarina.
Houbeckers, Eeva, and Kallio, Galina. 2022. “Kohti Vahvaa Kestävyyttä Ja Heikkoa Tie-
tämistä: Monilajista Toimeen Tulemista Pohjolassa.” Elonkehä, no. 3/22.
Houtbeckers, Eeva, and Kallio, Galina. 2019. “Talous Käytäntöteoreettisesti: Kotitalo-
uksien Omaehtoinen Ruuanhankinta Taloutta Koskevan Tiedon Lähteenä.” Tiede & 
Edistys, no. 2: 150–69.
28
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodayIngold, Tim. 2000. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling 
and Skill. Psychology Press.
IPES-Food. 2022. Smoke and Mirrors: Examining Competing Framings of Food System 
Sustainability: Agroecology, Regenerative Agriculture, and Nature- Based Solutions. 
International panel of experts on sustainable food systems. Accessed December 10, 
2023. https://ipes-food.org/_img/upload/files/SmokeAndMirrors.pdf
Jensen, Derrick. 2006. “Beyond Hope.” Orion Magazine 2.
Kallio, Galina. 2018. The Visible Hands: An Ethnographic Inquiry into the Emergence of 
Food Collectives as a Social Practice for Exchange. Aalto University.
Kallio, Galina. 2020. “A Carrot Isn’ta Carrot Isn’ta Carrot: Tracing Value in Alternative 
Practices of Food Exchange.” Agriculture and Human Values 37: 1095–1109. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10460-020-10113-w.
Kallio, Galina. 2022. “Viljelyn Estetiikka Uudistavan Maa/Talouden Maisemissa.” In 
Ympäristömuutos Ja Estetiikka, 92–133. Suomen Estetiikan seura.
Kallio, Galina, and Houtbeckers, Eeva. 2022. “Kuluttaja-Kansalaisen Kritiikki Ja Uuden-
laiset Talousmallit: Uusintava Ja Moninainen Toimijuus Ruokataloudessa.” Planeetan 
Kokoinen Arki, 215–30.
Kallio, Galina, and LaFleur, Will. 2023. “Ways of (Un) Knowing Landscapes: Tracing 
More-than-Human Relations in Regenerative Agriculture.” Journal of Rural Studies 
101: 103059.
Kingsnorth, Paul. 2021. “Blanched Sun, Blinded Man Divining the Machine, Part One.” 
The Abbey of Misrule (blog). May 26, 2021.  https://paulkingsnorth.substack.com/p/
blanched-sun-blinded-man.
Kingsnorth, Paul. 2023. “Watch the Great Fall.” The Abbey of Misrule (blog). March 2, 
2023. https://paulkingsnorth.substack.com/p/watch-the-great-fall.
Lehtinen, Ilja. 2019. “Toivottomuuden Puolesta.” Medium (blog). July 15, 2019. https://
iljalehtinen.medium.com/toivottomuuden-puolesta-5a86266eae4d.
LUKE. 2022. Maatalous- Ja Puutarhayritysten Rakenne 2022 (Ennakko). Luonnonvara-
keskus. www.luke.fi/fi/tilastot.
Macy, Joanna, and Johnstone, Chris. 2012. Active Hope: How to Face the Mess We’re in 
without Going Crazy. New World Library.
Pihkala, Panu. 2023. “Suruteorioiden Soveltamista Ympäristösuruun.” Elonkejä, no. 
1/2023: 50–57.
Pink, Sarah. 2015. Doing Sensory Ethnography. SAGE Publications Ltd.
Puig De La Bellacasa, María. 2015. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and 
the Pace of Care.” Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691–716.
Räsänen, Keijo, and Trux, Marja-Liisa. 2012. Työkirja: Ammattilaisen Paluu. Kansanva-
listusseura.
Raworth, Kate. 2017. Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think like a 21st-Century 
Economist. Chelsea Green Publishing.
Rhodes, Christopher J. 2017. “The Imperative for Regenerative Agriculture.” Science 
Progress 100 (1): 80–129.
Riessman, CK. 1993. “Doing Narrative Analysis.” Narrative Analysis. London: Sage 
Publications.
Ruralia. 2023. “Kumppanuusmaatalous. Ruokaa Yhdessä Ja Kestävästi.” Blogs Helsinki 
(blog). 2023. https://blogs.helsinki.fi/kumppanuusmaatalous/.
Sangervo, Julia, Jylhä, Kirsti M., and Pihkala, Panu. 2022. “Climate Anxiety: Conceptual 
Considerations, and Connections with Climate Hope and Action.” Global Environmental 
Change 76: 102569.
Scahill, Jeremy. 2021. “Hope Is a Discipline: Mariame Kaba on Dismantling the Carceral 
State.” The Intercepted (blog). March 17, 2021.
29
Galina Kallio: Hope beyond Hope: Farming One’s Way into a Better TodaySchreefel, Loekie, Schulte, Rogier, De Boer, I.J.M., Pas Schrijver, Annemiek, and van 
Zanten, H.H.E. 2020. “Regenerative Agriculture–the Soil Is the Base.” Global Food 
Security 26: 100404.
Silvasti, Tiina. 2002. “Hyvän Viljelijyyden Kulttuurinen Malli Ja Ympäristökysymys.” 
Teoksessa: Torsti Hyyryläinen & Hannu Katajamäki. Muutoksen Maaseutu. Helsingin 
Yliopisto, Maaseudun Tutkimus-Ja Koulutuskeskus. Mikkeli, 42–54.
Sonenstein, Brian, and Wilson, Kim. 2020. “Hope Is a Discipline.” Toward Freedom. Global 
Reports. Grassroots Perspectives. (blog). September 17, 2020. https://towardfreedom.
org/story/archives/activism/hope-is-a-discipline/.
Tsing, Anna. 2012. “Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species: For Donna Har -
away.” Environmental Humanities 1 (1): 141–54.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt, Bubandt, Nils, Gan, Elaine, and Swanson, Heather Anne. 2017. 
Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet: Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. U of 
Minnesota Press.
Työterveyslaitos. 2022. Työuupumus on Kasvanut - Työhyvinvointi Kaipaa Tukea Juuri Nyt. 
Mediatiedote. Työterveyslaitos. Accessed December 10, 2023. https://www.sttinfo.fi/
tiedote/tyouupumus-on-kasvanut---tyohyvinvointi-kaipaa-tukea-juuri-nyt-?publisher -
Id=69819005&releaseId=69934521.
Vlasov, Maxim. 2020. Ecological Embedding: New Farmers and the Everyday Politics of 
Making a Living on the Land. Dissertation, Umeå: Umeå University.
Wilbur, Andrew. 2013. “Growing a Radical Ruralism: Back-to-the-land as Practice and 
Ideal.” Geography Compass 7 (2): 149–60.
   
