RESEARCH ARTICLE
Humans in/of/are nature: Re-embedding reality
in sustainability sciences
Caitlin B. Morgan1,2,*, Kristian Brevik3, Lindsay Barbieri2, and Joe Ament4
Behind the facades of humanity ’s technological advances and urban lifestyles, there is in fact no real wall that
separates us from the web of life. Biology, physics, Western social theory, and Indigenous scholarship all tell usthat we are embedded in the natural world; to operate otherwise is a dangerous misconception and leads to
the human-centered ecological crises we currently face. And yet many scientific communities, including those
concerned with the environment and sustainability, continue to incorporate human-first, human-separatemental models into their disciplines. In this article, we use the method of Bohmian dialogue to explore the“imagined wall” of false separation and how it manifests in 4 distinct fields: entomology, soil science, foodsystems, and monetary policy. We ask: How would deconstructing the imagined wall function as the basis forinterdisciplinary sustainability research? We lay out where the wall can appear, its consequences, academicand practical resistances, and how each field might move toward truer sustainability without this mentalmodel. We offer suggestions for this process of unlearning and relearning, particularly to those scientists
who may have begun to question human supremacy in ontology and epistemology but who have not actively
applied such critical social theory to their own work.
Keywords: Embeddedness ,Soil science ,Entomology ,Food systems ,Ecological economics
Introduction
For all their attention to sustainability, environmental
research fields—including ag ricultural science and eco-
nomics—do not share a meaningful definition of the con-cept, especially regarding who and what is being sustained(White, 2013). While classic definitions of sustainability
focus on the ability of human development to continue
without harming the environment or future generations(Brundtland, 1990), some scholars take exception to the
implicit and explicit dominance of humans in such con-
ceptions (Brown, 2004; Bergmann, 2019). At the basis ofthis conceptual schism is the Western scientific mentalmodel that erroneously sets humans apart from other
forms of life, as if we were somehow outside or above
nature rather than part of it (Haraway, 1988).
Human separation from nature appears to manifest
throughout modern life. Most humans no longer grow
their own food. The labor involved in keeping us alive,including the sourcing of all the materials of daily life, islargely invisible in the modern economy (Plumwood,
2003). The effects of how we use energy, water, and chemi-
cals are often experienced in locations far from that use(Worthy, 2013). Privileged people who are alive today in
higher income places and countries are given precedence
over not only people from poorer neighborhoods andpoorer countries—not only over all other forms of lifeimpacted by warming climate, acidified oceans, polluted
and depleted groundwater, and deforestation—but also over
future humans, through the process of economic discount-ing that means current human needs are seen as morevaluable than future ones (Brown, 1992). Sustainability is
that much harder to achieve when unsustainability is often
so obscured from the modern societies perpetrating it.
This obliviousness does not change reality, however.
Regardless of our recognition, we are deeply connected,
dependent upon, and impactful on the world within whichwe find ourselves. The packaged nature of our modern lives
does not disembed our culture; it only creates an illusion of
separation (Mitchell, 2018), a wall that we imagine to bethere but is not (Plumwood, 2003). Humans are inextricablylinked with all other living things and the ecological and
geologic systems upon which we all depend. The “imagined
wall” of separation and hierarchy inherently facilitates theexploitation of other forms of life and of other humans(Merchant, 1989; Mellor, 1997a; Plumwood, 2003).
This wall also pervades the methods and frameworks of
much environmental research, thereby limiting its poten-
tial capacity to generate new ideas and findings that can
1USDA ARS Food Systems Research Unit, Burlington, VT, USA
2Gund Institute for Environment, University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT, USA
3Rubenstein School of Natural Resources, University ofVermont, Burlington, VT, USA
4Department of Community Development and AppliedEconomics, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA
* Corresponding author:
Email: caitlin.morgan@usda.govMorgan, CB, et al. 2023. Humans in/of/are nature: Re-embedding
reality in sustainability sciences. Elem Sci Anth ,1 1 :1 .
DOI: https:/ /doi.org/10.1525/elementa.2021.00083
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

contribute to deep, lasting, and effective sustainability. Envi-
ronmental researchers can help perpetuate the wall throughhow they think about and study the subject matter of theirfields, without recognizing or acknowledging that there areother much more enmeshed approaches. They can overlookdiverse, already existing forms of resistance to the wall,
whether through how soils, animals, plants, or subaltern
humans behave, or through the work of fellow researcherswho are questioning the wall.
The work of re-embedding reality in sustainability
sciences, then, is to dismantle the imagined wall that istaken for granted in effectively every field of sustainabilitystudy within Western institutions. We believe the disre-gard of interconnectedness prevents true sustainability,
“the possibility that human and other life will flourish
on the planet forever” (Ehrenfeld and Hoffman, 2020, p.7). Critical social theory from many fields tackles this cog-nitive disconnect, but the insights have not permeated thepractice of sustainability sciences, and attempts to trans-late these insights into how scientists do their work arefew and far between. As scientists who engage with theseideas, we will show how we have developed our under-
standings and consequently changed how we see our
work, with the goal that it may facilitate this process forother sustainability scientists.
To illustrate possible transitions in scientific thought
toward a more integrated approach to sustainability, wewill demonstrate how tearing down the imagined wallsthat separate human beings from the constituents of liv-ing and nonliving systems can fuel environmental
research across 4 areas of inquiry. This includes soil sci-
ence, entomology and “pest” management, agricultureand food systems, and monetary policy.
Background: Theories of connection
Our framing of the imagined wall draws on a largely West-
ern scientific understanding of “human” and “nature,”
a stream of thought formalized in ancient Greece, includ-ing by Plato, through subsequent Christian writings, andfortified by Descartes (Hall, 2011). The imagined wall isa foundational premise of colonial and capitalist society(Plumwood, 1993). The notion of separation helps to jus-tify the exploitation of others and exists in a feedback loopof theory and action: Justifying (certain) human suprem-
acy likely emerged in order to disregard respectful and
reciprocal kinship relationships with other species andeach other. Exploitation and domination allow for wide-scale destruction, including converting ecosystems intoagriculture, clearing land to build houses, damming riversto make electricity, burning fossil fuels to move around,and depleting freshwater resources (see e.g., Rockstro ¨me t
al., 2009). If sustainability can be seen as the long-term
flourishing across different domains of life, the imagined
wall makes it nearly impossible as it renders ecologicalharm as necessary or even inevitable.
Three core aspects of human existence, illustrated by
scientific findings, contradict the notion of a wall betweenhumans and the rest of nature (Brevik and Barbieri, 2019).The first aspect is evolution, which through a tangled andmessy evolutionary tree connects all life to all beings, livingand nonliving (Quammen, 2019). The second is human
existence as a mosaic, each of us made up of billions of
other beings and only partially individuated. For instance,human digestive tracts are replete with microbes who trans-
form the food we eat into the matter of our being (Morton,
2010; Ursell et al., 2012). The third is those characteristicsthat humans often use to position ourselves as unique or
superior to other life forms, such as culture, language,
social organization, tool use, morality, and self-awareness.These characteristics are neither universal nor exclusively
human, however (Hunt, 1996; Fox et al., 2017). For exam-
ple, not all humans are able to use tools or language, yetmany crows can use tools to obtain food.
Taken together, the fundamental error of the
“imagined wall” is to assume that humans are unique intheir subjective experience in an otherwise objective
world (Haraway, 1988) and are therefore entitled to use
other species and ecosystems, regardless of outcome. And,
while the wall is pervasive in Western-inspired thinking,
a separation between humans and the rest of nature is notjustified by science itself.
In this article, the term “imagined wall” serves as a syn-
thetic term for the rich diversity of social theory dedicatedto the reality of human embeddedness in the natural
world and to the mental constructs that either obfuscate
or integrate our awareness of it.
1As a group of environ-
mental researchers, we authors have been variously influ-
enced by such ideas as hyper-separation (Plumwood,
2003), alienation (Marx, 2007) , domination (Merchant,
1989; Warren, 1990), and linked forms of oppression
(Gaard and Gruen, 1993), in which Western mental models
of hierarchy create the rationale for exploiting naturalsystems as well as other humans.
To unlearn these models, our work has incorporated com-
plementary theories of embeddedness (Polanyi, 2001),
immanence (Mellor, 1997a), nested systems (Meadows,
2008), transcorporeality (Alaimo, 2017), situatedness (Har-away, 1988), noticing (Tsing, 2015), kinship (Haraway, 1988;
Kimmerer, 2013; Todd, 2017), right relationship (Brown and
Garver, 2009; McGregor, 2009), hyperobjects (Morton, 2013),and Place-Thought (Watts, 2013). These are a few of many
efforts to de-theorize human separation, focused on the con-
nections between parts from the individual level up to thebiosphere (cf. Worthy, 2013). They position humans as within
social and natural systems, in which we participate and upon
which we entirely depend. The work is a resistance to deeplyrooted concepts of Cartesian reductionism and of the
“rational actor” in a human economy: Fallacies of individual-
ism that permeate much of Western thinking and allowhumans to position themselves as outside, above, and
1. “Imagined wall” also nods to the iteration of our group
thinking on this subject. One author, JA, wrote a paper onduality narratives in Western culture and economy, which LB
read and passed on to KB. With JA, CBM, and LB, KB then
attended a conference on ecological economics, which sparkedthe idea for an essay titled “There is No Magic Wall,” co-
authored with LB (Brevik and Barbieri, 2019), which then
inspired this project. We have adjusted the terminology from“magic” to “imagined” for greater specificity regarding thehuman cognitive aspects.Art. 11(1) page 2 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

entitled to the rest of life (Mellor, 1997a). Western science,
especially ecology and systems-based fields, has made greatstrides toward a more relational understanding of the world,originally stemming from the works of Muir (1911), Leopold
(1949), and Carson (1962) and continuing into the present.
Yet this ongoing theoretical work—and the ongoing planetaryecological disaster—is evidence that there is much to be donebefore Western human thought and its attendant actions are
fully reintegrated with natural cycles and connections.
Not all knowledge traditions prioritize humans in such
ways that require an undoing. The work of Indigenous
scholars, especially Todd (2016), TallBear (2014), Watts(2013), and Kimmerer (2013), has influenced our concep-
tions here. We are inspired by them while keeping in
mind guidance from Liboiron (2021) and Simpson(2017) to avoid appropriating Indigenous ways of relatingin order to improve Western ways of relating or overlyrelying on Indigenous knowledge systems as resources.
As scientists, we recognize the need to bound our
inquiries and erect conceptual walls to concentrate our
research. What is important is to remember that suchwalls are not real; they are conceptual tools. They are notinherent, natural, nor im permeable, and they do not
supersede physical laws in our material worlds. Accord-
ingly, they must be explicitly recognized as such, so theiruseful intellectual separations do not inform our embod-ied relationships. Boundaries allow us to focus; walls allowus to objectify and exploit.
Approach
While we see increasing discussion of the embeddedness
of humans in nature from emerging interdisciplinary col-
laborations, there are often not complementary discus-s i o n so fh o wt oi m p l e m e n ts u c ha nu n d e r s t a n d i n gi nresearch. In our experience as interdisciplinary environ-
mental scholars, the idea of human separability from
nature is often implicit, even within fields expressly con-cerned with protecting nonhuman forms of life. Thisinspires the research question: How would deconstructingthe imagined wall as the basis for interdisciplinary sustain-
ability research operate in different disciplines?
What follows are explorations of deconstructing the
imagined wall within 4 fields of sustainability sciences
as examples of the work that can be done. The Methodssection documents how our team began to analyze the
imagined wall concept in our respective fields. The Case
Studies section provides specific cases of how the imag-ined wall influences our respective fields and how decon-structing it would influence our approach tosustainability. We begin by exploring the microbial world
within soil, how labeling beings as “pests” erases our com-
munality, and how farming systems are places of bothseparation and mutuality before exploring how ourapproach to money embodies a human/other distinction.
2The Discussion investigates how this approach has helped
us develop a richer appreciation of the importance ofcritically examining the imagined wall and how otherscholars could apply and build upon these efforts.
Methods
Theoretical standpoint, identities, and intentions
Interdisciplinary environmental scholars are strongly posi-tioned to see the shortcomings of the imagined wallpremise, as our work often draws upon complexity theory,
ecology, political ecology, and other schools that explore
the interconnectedness of life and challenge atomisticnotions of existence.
We, the authors, came to this project from different
disciplines and methodological training, but with similardistress over the rapidly declining health of our world.Most of us have a background in ecological economics,a field that recognizes that human economies are embed-ded in social and natural systems and are subject to those
realities; and in ecofeminism and related fields, which are
concerned with right relationship, in both human andmore-than-human relationships. Our project—and its nov-elty to our team—is admittedly conditioned by both ourinherited and consciously acquired perspectives and iden-tities. We are uniformly of White colonist ancestry, trainedat an academic institution in the rural northeasternUnited States, and both beneficiaries and products of elite
educations steeped in traditions of positivism, neoliberal
capitalism, and an atomizing and dominionistic culturalnarrative about how human people relate to nature. Inother words, we come from communities and philosoph-ical worldviews in which there is a strong imagined wall.
However, we have also sought out and been exposed to
ontological and epistemological orientations that chal-lenge these culturally dominant conditioners. This articlerepresents an unlearning and subsequent relearning pro-
cess stemming from our own personal and professional
commitments to confront the foundational issues of theAnthropocene. The article’s primary use may be to scho-lars from similar educational ontologies and/or culturalidentities, especially those interested in holistic sustain-ability who have not been trained in social theory. There ismuch unlearning to do in these circles.
From intradisciplinary reflection
to interdisciplinary dialogue
This project emerged from conversations surrounding Bre-
vik and Barbieri (2019) essay “There is No Magic Wall” in
our team’s interdisciplinary professional circles. Its argu-
ment is the one we lay out and apply here: That despitehuman actions, perceptions, and rhetoric, there is no hardboundary between us and the rest of nature. First, weindependently mapped cracks in the imagined wall acrossthe diverse empirical and theoretical literatures withwhich we work. Concurrently, conversations around theimagined wall and our respective concept-mapping effortsemerged among members of our team. Recognizing that
we were spontaneously engaging in separate conversa-
tions with the potential to be collectively enriching,
2. Although this group has an emphasis on agricultural
research, such a focus is not required for this inquiry; our othercollaborators include scholars of wildlife management andmusical theory.Morgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 3 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

a former collaborator initiated a formal working group
(see Acknowledgments).
Our team’s transition from independent concept-
mapping to an interdisciplinary joint venture occurredorganically and manifested elements of the intentionaldialogue process described by physicist and philosopher
David Bohm. Bohmian dialogue was first put forth as
a strategy for uncovering the domain assumptions thatlimit human thought, and for exploring the possibilitiesthat lie beyond the boundaries of those assumptions(Bohm et al., 1991). The approach has been used toencourage interdisciplinary (McCallin, 2004) and transdis-ciplinary (Francovich, 2015) thinking in contexts rangingfrom health care to education. It is especially pertinenthere, offering an alternative to the atomism and dualism
(Hobson, 1999) that underlie the imagined wall.
Using Bohmian dialogue to guide our interdisciplinary
conversation around the imagined wall concept, our teaminitiated an iterative series of meetings structured aroundkey elements of the Bohmian approach, as outlined inDialogue: A Proposal (Bohm et al., 1991). Prioritizing
Bohm’s emphasis on avoiding superficial consensus, wegathered to discuss the potential alignments and diver-gences in our thinking around the wall in our own fields,
with attention to: (a) suspending our individual goals and
judgments; (b) ensuring the potential for sustained con-versation that allowed evolution of thought; (c) minimiz-ing the influence of preexisting social hierarchies in ourgroup (e.g., seniority at our shared institution); and (d)maintaining the topical flexibility to follow unplannedavenues of discussion. Owing to our team’s small size, tofollow the final element of Bohmian dialogue commonly
set forth—participation of a group ranging from 20 to 40
individuals—we presented a draft of this article in a key-note panel at a conference in mid-2021, which influencedthe positionality reflections herein.
Over the course of iterative meetings, we discussed our
respective understandings of the imagined wall as a theo-retical lens, its consequence for our specific disciplines,and the interdisciplinary significance of dismantling it atthe disciplinary level. In our first 2 meetings, we closely
conformed to the unstructured essence of Bohmian dia-
logue. These sessions were dedicated to probing the over-laps and divergences of the imagined wall concept in eachof our fields, and brainstorming alternatives for commu-nicating the substance of our conversations with a wideraudience. Our dialogues eventually centered around onequestion: What would it mean to apply the idea of nowall
between humans and nature to actual scientific inquiry?After initial discussions and individual reflective writing,
we discussed each other’s ideas for our respective fields,
redrafted, and provided iterative responses and feedback.Each round of dialogue helped push each of our ideasforward and challenged the ideas that we had come toindividually. We have now been engaged in discourse, for-mally and informally, for 5 years.
One area we found difficult for attaining consensus
(the goal of Bohmian dialogue) was whether humans truly
are unique in Earth’s ecosystems. As noted above, any
supposedly distinguishing lines are blurred or erasedunder close scrutiny; we have almost no unique claims
to individuation or even ability. There was a sense in thegroup that the hubris of uniqueness is part of the basis forexploitation and destruction. And yet, humans have cre-ated global ecosystem change, beyond any other species’reach. The entire premise of this exercise was to address
those problems, that is, the “roots of crisis” for which
human values are responsible (Bohm et al., 1991). Weeventually agreed to a framing of humans as uniquelysituated but not inherently more worthy.
Another area of uneasiness was in our position as
White scientists seeking to learn from a diversity of theor-ists, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous. Debates areongoing as to whether Western scholars should, or can,
incorporate Indigenous worldviews and science into colo-
nialist academic lineages. Some people think such knowl-edge systems are incommensurable and argue againstappropriation; others contend that Indigenous scholarshipdeserves wider recognition for its critical insights. We havetried to strike a balance on both these questions, reflectedin a “both–and” nuance throughout this article, while notreinforcing walls between complementary ideas.
To that end, while we have all engaged in theory and
academic debate on the question of human embeddedness,our dialogues also uncovered the extent to which our inter-est and perceptions were deeply personal as well as profes-sional. For some of us, this work is a way to demonstratewith theory and external evidence what we believe andhave lived ourselves. We have variously encountered theoneness of life through art, fishing and hunting, physical
activity, spiritual practice, and listening deeply (literally and
figuratively) to our research subjects, human and nonhu-man. Such reflections came up often as evidence or illus-tration of what we tried to communicate conceptually. Inour efforts to dismantle conceptual walls and our respectfor multiple ways of knowing, we wish to affirm theseexperiences as legitimate motivations for scholarly work.
Case studies
The following accounts reflect our current thinking on theimagined wall in our fields, as influenced by the Bohmiandialogue. Each subsection features one author addressingthe following topics in their area of specialization: (1) howthe wall manifests, (2) its scientific and practical conse-
quences, (3) alternatives and resistances to imagined wall
thinking, (4) how we might build upon such alternativesfor more holistic and accurate sustainability research, and(5) insights that arose from the Bohmian method. TheDiscussion extends these findings broadly to sustainabilitystudies.
Soil science -Lindsay Barbieri
Soils are fertile grounds for creating, propagating, andthus examining the imagined wall. Humans manipulatesoils, and the flows of nutrients therein, to cultivate plantand animal beings for food, fiber, medicine, fuel, culture,aesthetics, and enjoyment. While humans are not oneundifferentiated group and are also not unique amongliving beings in entering into these relations with soil,globally, humans have particularly large impacts on theArt. 11(1) page 4 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

land. The sheer extent and weight of human alteration is
immense, with humans manipulating soils on nearly 3quarters of the Earth’s ice-free surfaces (Ellis and Raman-kutty, 2008) and with humans and their livestock far-outmassing all other mammals (Bar-On et al., 2018). Theintensity and magnitude of the effects of human alter-ation on soils are also substantial, with large perturbations
of global nutrient cycles (Ayres et al., 1994) and rapid
displacements and extinctions of nonhuman life (Pimmet al., 1995). Indeed, recent endeavors to quantify howmuch human–soil relationships are responsible for thedisturbance of planetary processes have shown that
human–soil interactions are critical contributors to
anthropogenic planetary degradation (Kopittke et al.,2021). Whether intended or unintended, human–soil rela-
tionships have helped produce substantial imbalances of
both nutrients and power (Shiva, 2015). This has contrib-uted to many entwined problems from eutrophication toclimate change to displacements and extinctions.
For me, the imagined wall looms most at 2 points:First, the imagined wall is embedded in human con-
ceptions of the soil itself. Soils are vast, biodiverse worlds,with extensive tangles of complex relations. Yet, throughthe lens of soil science as a scientific discipline, the dom-
inant envisioning of soil (from predominantly Western,
White, male perspectives) h as historically been one of
resource—a matrix which humans can add things into(e.g., fertilizer, seeds, labor, scientific probes, and instru-ments) and take things from (nourishment, preciousmetals, building materials, scientific insights, and culturalidentity). “What soil is thought to be affects the ways inwhich we care for it, and vice versa” (Puig de la Bellacasa,
2015, p. 692), and if one sees soil as simply a balance
sheet of inputs and outputs (Soil Science Division Staff,2017), it becomes easy to justify the manipulation andextraction in service to humans.
Second, the imagined wall is embedded in the logics
that shape human–soil relationships. While reciprocityand care are foundational in some human–soil practices,these relationships are also enmeshed within dominantsocial and economic systems. These growth-focused sys-
tems encourage human manipulation of soils to feed and
serve humans in productivist-dominated, extractive waysthat contribute to the disruptions and destruction ofnutrients and life. Agricultural production alone (humansmanipulating soils to feed humans) contributes substan-tially to the disruption and degradation of ecosystems(Foley et al., 2005; Campbell et al., 2017) and the destruc-tion of soil itself (Bouma and McBratney, 2013). While soilsprovide nearly all of the calories that current humans
consume, the imagined wall logic of “humans need to
expand/intensify engagements with soil in order to growmore food because there are hungry people” allows pow-erful humans to obfuscate the questions of which humansare benefiting and who in the web of life is being harmed?
Originating from beliefs about the primacy of humans
over the rest of nature, the imagined wall justifies theseparation of humans from soils and the life therein and
thus reinforces and allows for continued human domina-
tion and extraction while obscuring damages. Confrontingthe imagined wall both allows me to engage with a plurality
of ideas from across disciplines, knowledges, and entities,and enables me to more critically consider these 2 points(conception and logic) from within the discipline of soilscience—all while opening pathways to counter dominantand damaging human-centric conceptions and logics.
In dealing with the conceptualization of soils, much
work is being done. Soil scientists are increasingly recog-nizing soils as endangered worlds where many differentrelationships flourish (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015), withcalls for “more responsible ways of thinking about andcaring for the myriad conglomerates of living, decaying,and dead matter that basically make up the stuff of soil”(Granjou and Salazar, 2019). And certainly, countercur-rents exist. This is reflected in increasing attention to soil
health, the continued capacity of soil to function as a vital
living ecosystem as a way to more holistically assess soils(Lehmann et al., 2020). This is also reflected in agroecolo-gical conceptions and practices, and even in the develop-ment of a combined “anthropology of microbes” at theintersection of anthropology and microbial ecology (Bene-zra et al., 2012). However, as a scientific discipline, soilscience remains one of the least diverse scientific fields.Historically marginalized communities are often the people
most affected by the negative impacts of human–soil rela-
tions (e.g., climate change, land degradation). These are alsooften the people that have more varied conceptions of whatsoil is and how human–soil relations can exist—and yetthey are underrepresented in soil science, so their voicesand perspectives do not shape the discourse of the disci-pline (Berhe and Ghezzehei, 2021). Further, as soils playa pivotal role in many entangled transdisciplinary ecosys-
tem challenges, work conducted around soils may not
always be carried out by those that would identify them-selves as soil scientists (Weil, 2016). Expanding on the diver-sification of people and voices within soil science while alsobroadening and deepening the avenues for co-creation ofsoil knowledge while remaining epistemically humble areboth critical pathways to allow for more holistic and vibrantconceptions of soil. Shifting and expanding conceptions ofsoil while simultaneously qu estioning/dismantling the
imagined wall will allow space for more diverse, entangled
human–soil relationships to exist and flourish.
In unraveling these damaging logics, 2 examples fol-
low. First, the continued expansion and intensification ofagriculture has not provided food security and nutritionfor all humans (Krishna Bahadur et al., 2018). While agri-cultural assemblages—including soils and their biotic andabiotic communities—produce enough food for allhumans, people and institutions make inequitable deci-
sions about what food is grown and how it is distributed
(Berners-Lee et al., 2018; Barbieri et al., 2019). Confrontingthe imagined wall makes me question actions “for thegood of humans,” and then allows me to focus on morenuanced questions of justice. If “for feeding humans” isnot a justification for expanding or intensifying human-centric soil relationships, what does that mean for how wegrow and distribute food and who is making those deci-
sions and at what scale? Second, humans are increasingly
recognizing soils for their ability to sequester carbon and
Morgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 5 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

reduce greenhouse gas emissions (Smith et al., 2014; Min-
asny et al., 2017). Predominant policy directions exemplifydiffering views on how humans can best support climate
change mitigation in soils, from technological solutions
(e.g., introducing biological nitrogen inhibitors) to conser-vation agricultural practices (e.g., reducing tillage). Thesesolutions tend to fall along the line of humans. Predom-
inant policy directions exemplify differing views on how
humans can best support climate change mitigation insoils, from technological solutions (e.g., introducing bio-logical nitrogen inhibitors) to conservation agricultural
practices (e.g., reducing tillage). These solutions tend to
fall along the line of humans either taking active actionsin mitigation, often piecemeal and with technological
help (Crist and Kopnina, 2014) or cordoning off human
access to allow other soil re lationships to reestablish.
However, regardless of where solutions fall along thisspectrum, they are all human-derived and almost always
center human needs (as defined by humans) above all else.
While it may not change human–soil interactions
(humans may still make human-centric decisions), recog-
nizing the imagined wall enables a deeper questioning ofthe underlying and pervasive human-centric visions,
even—and particularly—wit hin ostensibly eco-centric
goals. Whether for growing food or sculpting land, inter-actions with soil are common practices for many humans.As everyday practices, these interactions can shape how
we see the world and enact materiality (Papadopoulos,
2011). For this reason, it is critical to carefully considersoil relationships as spaces to imagine and enact sustain-able and just world views (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015;
Roux-Rosier et al., 2018).
Entomology and "pest" management -Kristian
Brevik
As within any ecosystem, the relationships between spe-
cies in agroecosystems shape the lives of those species.These relationships both create the participants and are
created by them through a dynamic and complex inter-
weaving of ecological relations (such as who
3eats whom,
provides environment for whom, and pollinates whom)and evolutionary change (such as changes in genes and
gene frequency, epigenetics, and phenotype). Agroecosys-
tems are a web of reciprocal exchange. Walls are imaginedin agricultural ecosystems between those beings whomhumans want to be present (crops, domestic animals, soil,
and farmers), and those who humans don’t want to be
present (plant-eating insects, called “pests,” and plantswho grow without human intention, called “weeds,”
rocks, etc.).
While agroecosystems displace or replace existing eco-
systems, they also provide abundant food resources for
some plant-eating arthropods. This is especially true inmany current agroecosystems, where a single species ofplant is densely cultivated over a wide area. Humans who
grow food in this way grow abundance in the form ofplant life (such as potatoes, corn, and vegetables) forthemselves and others. Insect species who can take advan-tage of this abundance are able to increase their popula-tions and expand their geographic ranges. These insects
often come into conflict with humans over food resources.
In these conflicts, humans have developed ways of think-ing about insects, including classifying them as “pests”—a term which serves to justify actions taken to dominateand destroy those whose lives are “in our way.” Whena being is designated as a pest, they are made killable ,i n
that their deaths do not call on us to respond—that is, theydo not call on our responsibilities (Haraway, 2013, p. 80).
This wall between “pests” and other species truncates the
development of more considered relationships.
One simple way to begin breaking down walls between
species is to acknowledge the significance of the words weuse and emphasize that many of our relationships withother species are constructed and are thus changeable.Using “pest” in quotations is one way of intentionallycalling out the imagined wall in entomology and insect
management research. Moving beyond use of this term
will help the field of entomology in 2 ways—one scientificand the other philosophical.
The scientific rationale for not using the word “pest” is
that it hard-codes subjective preferences as something inher-
ent to another living being, introducing unexamined biasinto research. To say “pest” is to say something like, “theyinterfere with our activity, and we do not like them.” But
a “pest” in one context can be prized in another context, as
we see with many agricultural plants. For example, manyhumans try to remove dandelions from lawns, where wecall them “weeds,” while others encourage their growth,both for human use (tea, greens, and fried flowers) and forthe services they provide to many insect species, includingbees. Using a word like “pest” normalizes control and dom-ination of other species and avoids a more thoughtful and
coherent assessment of our relations with other beings. It is
also a potent shorthand which short-circuits attempts toarticulate our knowledge—to say what we actually mean.As Beth Savage writes about the term “invasive,”
When we designate a species as invasive, we
essentially set in motion a script ...We assign
certain qualities to these species (aggression,
danger, and malevolence), we read into their success
as a negative for the native wildlife and so the
behaviours they enact through their very being alive,
cement their invader status. (Savage, 2020, p. 195)
A similar script accompanies the designation of a spe-
cies as “pest,” where we construct their identity through
their very being alive and successful in the ecosystemshumans have played a large role in creating. This designa-tion attempts to exempt people from our responsibility inputting these dynamics in motion. The behaviors thesespecies perform as “pests” are facilitated by humans—whoelse planted millions of acres with nothing growing butpotatoes, which benefit potato beetles the same way they
3. Language is powerful, and this human author chooses to
use pronouns for other beings which emphasis their animacyand personhood—thus, “who,” rather than “that,” and singular“they” rather than “it.”Art. 11(1) page 6 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

do humans? Before we can improve our relationships with
the other beings within agroecosystems, we first need toacknowledge responsibility for our current ways of relat-ing, while remaining reflective as these relationshipsdevelop. Instead of saying “this species is a pest,” we caninstead say, “in this town in Vermont, this species of insectrelies on potatoes for food, and so has an antagonisticrelationship with local farmers, who rely on exchangingpotatoes at a local market for U.S. dollars in order topurchase food and health insurance.”
Philosophically, it is imperative for those in the biolog-
ical or natural sciences to critically assess the usage and
normalization of certain terms, especially when theirusage flows into discourse outside of academic journalsand conferences. When terms are elevated and grantedlegitimacy within scientific discourse, they perpetuate thelegitimacy of the ontological framework that allows forcertain beings or individuals to truly be “invasive” or
“pests” or “weeds,” and justify beliefs and ways of beingin relation with others, inside and outside the discipline.This is to ignore the ontological assumptions whichundergird the usage of such terms.
To use a previous example, the use of the term
“invasive” is predicated on a utopic Western conception
of “nature” existing in a pure state without humans or
human impacts and is used to justify vast numbers ofviolent acts against animals and plants—alongside humanresidents—in the name of conservation (Wallach et al.,2020), continuing a mode of engagement based onhuman domination or management. Classifications ofbeings as “pests” on the far side of the imagined wall canhave violent political power, seen in Nazi Germany, duringthe Rwandan genocide, and in the United States duringWorld War II, when the Japanese Army was portrayed aslice and mosquitos, complete with language surroundinginfestation and extermination (Raffles, 2011). To deprivesuch language of power, it is not enough to simply contestthat certain humans do not belong in such a category withrats and beetles, we must deny that these categories are
objective ways of classifying any living beings. Ecologies
do not conform to conceptions of a hierarchy with
humans on top (and certain humans higher than others);
they show us that we live within an interconnected meshof relationships.
Within the fields of entomology and “pest” manage-
ment, there is rarely any resistance to the use of the word
“pest,” or much consideration paid to the death of insects,or any ethical responsibilities humans may have towardthese beings. My experience suggests that such consider-ation would be difficult at best, and that most researchersin the field or industrial farmers in their fields would ask,“What is the point of this? We still have to kill insects togrow food and make money.” Most modern humans findthemselves bound to extractive fossil-fuel-based agricul-ture to meet their nutritional and caloric needs, whichdoes not allow for much fle xibility when it comes to
exploring nuanced relationships with “pest” insects. So
how shall we move forward? Moving beyond wallsrequires acknowledging the difficult relationships we havebuilt with other species and the uncertainty of the harm
we cause them.
How might we begin moving beyond this illusion of
separation from insects, while also remaining aware of theways insects can cause harm to humans? I would like tooffer this practice, something we can do every day to
improve our relationships with insects. It’s called
“Meditation with Insects.” Whenever you encounter aninsect or other arthropod, pause and observe them. If theyare a spider in your house, try to imagine why they areenjoying being there (given that spiders likely lived in thatspot for many years before your house was built). If theyjust crawled up your leg, think about how they might beperceiving you. Are they drawn to your body heat? Your
smell? You just happen to be there? How are they experi-
encing you as you are experiencing them? While they arespending time with you, think about what your responsi-bilities are to this being as someone with a commonancestor. If you are feeling an urge to kill them or swatthem away, why? Can you remember who taught you torelate to insects that way? Even if this encounter results indeath for them, what are your ethical responsibilities to
them, a fellow being who is making an ecosystem with
you?
Agriculture and food systems -Caitlin B. Morgan
It is common in environmental circles to hear that theestablishment of agricultu re around 10,000 years ago
began shifting humans away from sustainable hunter-
gatherer organization and paved the way for all otherenvironmentally destructive human behaviors. It is easyto see how the creation of settled society, and the trans-formation of natural materials to support it, would allowcertain human cultures to imagine themselves as separatefrom and dominant over the rest of nature. And yet agri-culture is a contradictory case, where the imagined wall is
both obviously erected and demonstrably false. Through
farming, humans manipulate the life cycles of plants andother animals for our own ends of survival and pleasure.In some cases, the manipulation is an exploitation anddegradation. In other cases, it could be considered carework or stewardship, as humans breed and carefully raiseother animals and consider nutrients, soil-dwellers, andsurrounding biodiversity among their many responsibili-
ties. These are different discourses, one dominating, one
more reciprocal. As in the preceding sections, the imag-ined wall particularly appears where the plurality andlong-term health of these ecological relationships isignored or treated only as an economic instrument.
Food systems, a relatively new field of study, is itself
a resistance to thinking in terms of walls. It attempts tocapture the full swath of social and biophysical aspects of
food and considers the relationships between parts. As
a transdiscipline, it attempts to eliminate disciplinarywalls and merge different forms of knowledge (Wicksonet al., 2006). That said, scholars in the field often do notexplicitly position humans as fully embedded in the nat-ural world, beyond acknowledging that we are all in nat-ural systems: There is still a strong presence of human-firstmentalities and short-term economic concerns takingMorgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 7 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

precedence over long-term ecological ones, as it is in all
sectors of the human economy (Crist, 2018). For example,as corporate profits take precedence over maintaining top-soil (Marris, 2022); pollution is part and parcel of thepressured and ever-consolidating dairy sector (Grossman,2014); people sell and plant pesticide-coated seeds thatkill bees (Dengler, 2017); tillage has been historically
acceptable practice for managing “weeds” while damaging
soil nutrient content (Kornei, 2022); food comes wrappedin single-use plastic that ends up in the ocean, waterways,and human bodies (The Environmental Impact of FoodPackaging, 2020); and so on. The issues related to theseoutcomes are often framed in terms of their impacts onhuman communities, rather than on ecological communi-ties, too.
There are admittedly very different approaches to
studying food systems. Some are focused on social justicewithin human relations, some on mitigating climatechange impacts, and others on the re-regionalization offood to pursue environmental, economic, and social goals.Some are explicitly anti-capitalist (e.g., Holt-Gime ´nez,
2017), while others maintain the same economic develop-ment goals of previous global agricultural work, updatedwith an understanding that food touches other parts of
life besides the human economy (e.g., FAO et al., 2021).
The wall appears at different places, and with differentlevels of emphasis, for each. While there are increasingdiscussions of trying to balance ecological goals with eco-nomic or nutritional ones, the human-first mentalitymakes it difficult to truly consider the plurality of whatwe want to sustain. Profits? Some human lives? All humanlife? All forms of life? Without a wall, we could balance
conflicting goals more openly and effectively. With a wall,
soil is just dirt, insects are “pests,” and the immediateneeds of the economic system hold sway, even when dam-aging long-term human interests.
Alternatives and resistances to the imagined wall
appear throughout the wide food systems literature.Agroecology, for instance, strives for integrated agroeco-systems that foster diversity of life and support humanhealth, nutrition, and culture (Morgan and Trubek,
2020). Local agricultural movements, including literature
on phenomena such as “civic agriculture,” position food-related relationships in a more immediate geographicarea, where people can interact with the species that nour-ish them (DeLind, 2002; Delind, 2006). Human eatinghere becomes an issue of citizenship, potentially not onlyhuman communities but of all human life. Part of thisprocess is the iterative nature of standard-making. Forexample, organic agriculture originally emerged as a resis-
tance to degradation of soil and the social desacralization
of farming (Robbins, 2019) and later in the environmentalmovements of the 1960s and 1970s. It was eventuallyadopted, some would say co-opted, by industrial industry,which has sparked the creation of new certifications callsfor more strict standards (Held, 2021).
New, on-the-ground projects in this vein promote cul-
turally derived, landscape-specific food such as The Sioux
Chef’s (n.d.) work to make Indigenous gastronomy widely
accessible or Soul Fire Farm’s reclamation of Blackagricultural roots, resistance to racism, and cultivation of
community food sovereignty (Lennon et al., 2018). Theseare food decolonization efforts. The imagined wall isa colonial mentality of invasion, domination, and extrac-tion (Mellor, 1997b), made possible by the mental dis-tance of “othering.” Decolonizing food systems (LaDuke,
2018) means undoing those frameworks and rebuilding
the relationships literally from the ground up. Science cansupport them by providing new or reclaimed knowledgeand by investigating the effects of such projects on com-munities of life.
Undertaking the Bohmian process helped me clarify
the blurry line of wall/no wall thinking in food systemswork. The progression of scientific thought is never mono-
lithic, it is iterative, messy, and self-contradictory. I realized
that truly representing the reality of human embedded-ness requires constant vigi lance, lest the entrenched
assumptions creep back into our well-intentioned butimperfect additions to the canon. And yet even at ourmost aware, it is not always possible to apply such a fram-ing. Many scholars rely on funding from institutions thatare deeply committed to the imagined wall. Many, espe-
cially those whose fields do not engage with social theory,
are not able to publish alternative ideas in journalssteeped in imagined wall mentalities. There are structuresthat keep such destabilizing, if generative, questioning atbay.
I have also realized there are issues that need to be
theoretically addressed, both scientifically and perhapsculturally, before agriculture and food systems are fully
inclusive of all life. Specifically, the issue of agriculture
as “managed death”—that raising plants and animals isabout choosing the time and manner of their death forpractical ends—seems to be a wall in Western conceptions,but it is not an objective separation between us and otherspecies. Even as we raise species for our own ends, therecan also be deep connection to those beings. We carefullynurture baby plants. Even in more exploitive, industrial
systems, humans actively care for the animals who pro-
duce their food (Overstreet, 2018).
Death is thus a rich and complicated ground for under-
standing the nuances of the imagined wall in agriculture.It is not killing itself that erects the imagined wall: Allanimals rely on others’ lives to survive. The wall appears,instead, when we disregard the relationship of eater and
eaten. Some humans recognize this connection explicitly.
As the poet Gary Snyder puts it,
Innumerable little seeds are sacrifices to the food
chain. A parsnip in the ground is a marvel of living
chemistry, making sugars and flavors from earth, air,
and water. And if we do eat meat, it is the life, the
bounce, the swish, of a great alert being with keen
ears and lovely eyes, with foursquare feet and
a huge beating heart that we eat, let us not deceive
ourselves. (Snyder, 1990, p. 184)
I have begun to wonder if we can begin to understand
this kind of death as kinship, the comingling of ourselves
with other selves, as we eat others and feed others withinArt. 11(1) page 8 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

us. How differently might our food systems be arranged
with this relationality at the forefront of human minds?Farms, eaters, and eaten: We are all in physical discoursewith each other and the rest of nature. Such an under-standing could serve not only our symbolic connectionwith the world but also our material relations within it.
Monetary policy -Joe Ament
The imagined wall also shows up in the systems of moneythat actualize and formalize the relationships in agricul-t u r ea n dl a n du s ed e s c r i b e da b o v e .M o n e yi sa to n c ea mechanism for creating the imagined wall and an
embodiment of the imagined wall itself. Just as the man-
ner in which we use money, discussed below, places animagined wall between humans and the rest of nature,our use of money is also one of the critical tools formaintaining the imagined wall in the previous examples.This gives the imagined wall of the monetary system spe-cial significance in maintaining the imagined wall in therest of science. This hegemony gets in the way of deep
interrogation of the wall, something that came through in
the Bohmian process.
The history of money is complex and differs across
space and time. Yet money has always been, whether inthe form of commodities or systems of credit and debtrepresented by those commodities, a social claim on phys-ical resources (Brown and Garver, 2009). When exchanginga dollar bill for an apple, for example, we utilize a human
social convention to exchange natural goods between
individual humans. That exchange takes place wholly onone side of the imagined wall, the object of exchange (theapple) rendered inert and homogenized.
Money’s early history can be traced to payments made
for grievances committed against the social fabric such asmurder, theft, or adultery (The ´ret, 1999). Over thousands
of years these social debts codified into accounting ledgers
of owing and being owed (Henry, 2004; Graeber, 2014)
and evolved to take the form of coins, bills, and bankbalances we see today. Money’s history is thus a deeplysocial institution of relationships between and amongindividuals and society.
In the global transition to modern market economies,
money evolved from this social relation (Ingham, 1996)used for exchanging and accounting for commodities to
a commodity itself (Polanyi, 1971). This evolution was nec-
essary to allow for the commodification of land and laborthat capitalist economies require (Polanyi, 1971). This pro-cess alienated society from money’s deeply social founda-tions and worked to disembed social relations (Giddens,1991, p. 26) from the interconnected relations of the “restof nature.” The commodification of modern moneyyielded “distanciated transa ction[s]” (Giddens, 1991) in
which the money and the produce for which it is
exchanged transact across a vast social space where thesocial relation between users and recipients of money hasobjectified through money’s commodity form.
The greatest consequences of this commodified mod-
ern money exist in the machinations of monetary policy.As money became commodified, interest became the pricefor which it was exchanged. M onetary policy involvesmanipulating the rate at which central banks lend money
into the economy in order to stabilize investment,employment, and inflation ( Arestis and Sawyer, 2008).
These in turn directly influence the extraction of naturalresources for human consumption. When inflation is high,for example, consumption diminishes and extractionslows. The opposite is true when unemployment is low:
Consumption and extraction increase. Accordingly, while
all research in monetary and fiscal policy is ultimatelyabout physical goods, the disembedded and alienatednature of modern money means the goods themselves areobjectified as units in a stimulus bill, GDP calculation,employment report, or inflation measure. In short, inter-est rate considerations dominate the physical world inways that the imagined wall maintains and disguises from
our view.
As a macroeconomist, I have spent many years explor-
ing the modern monetary system and its relationship tothe natural world. I had always assumed that a moredetailed understanding of the current system wouldinform a transition toward a more sustainable one. WhatI learned through the Bohmian process, however, was howdisciplinary jargon could cordon off my field of researchfrom other scholars doing similar work in different fields
and potentially undermine collaboration or cause missed
opportunities. Speaking in plain language helped me seehow inflation is more than spending power, it is abouthow that spending power affects life beyond our wall.
Entering the process without goals was critical to my
development in the process. I admit that I began theBohmian method planning to educate my colleagues onhow the monetary system embodies an imagined wall,
and to learn how their respective fields embody walls. I did
not realize or expect the extent to which the wall in myfield of research enables the walls in all the other fields ofresearch, and vice versa. For example, the commodifica-tion of land and agriculture each work to embed the com-modification of money in a feedback loop that fails torecognize the inherent value of the land and food beingcommodified. For other practitioners, it would be usefulto recognize how the imagined wall in one’s own field
enables, and is enabled by, walls in other fields.
One interaction in the process particularly stands out.
While I was discussing where the wall exists in money, onecoauthor (KB) said, “whales don’t use money.” While itwas meant as an off-hand comment, it has stuck withme. No matter the rules and regulations surrounding
money or our use of fiscal policy for environmental spend-ing, our monetary system is employed only by humans,and is therefore itself a wall. Writing this, I grapple with
how a wall-less monetary system could exist when the rest
of life does not use money. This question has shaped myresearch and teaching. This conversation is purely a func-tion of the Bohmian process allowing conversation toevolve loosely and flexibly , and importantly, for my
coauthor to feel comfortable enough to make thestatement.
I have also begun to think more critically about current
approaches to reaching beyond the wall in monetary pol-
icy. Central banks around the world are beginning toMorgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 9 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

recognize the role of climate change and biodiversity loss
in monetary policy (Chenet et al., 2019). But only in thecontext of the risk of assets and how an unstable climateor loss of species may render securities insolvent. Somebanks are also considering climate risk in corporate debtpurchases (Campiglio, 2016). While these are promising
movements, they are still far from a wall-less monetary
system and much of the work in the field tends to focuson such action.
There are, however, prominent examples of scholars
who are pushing against traditional monetary thoughtto incorporate “the rest of nature” into humanity’s under-standing of money. Mellor (2015) has argued from anecofeminist political ecology perspective for money as
a sufficiency provisioning tool, I (Ament, 2020) have
a r g u e df o ram o n e yr o o t e di na no n t o l o g yo fs o c i o -ecological embeddedness, the think tank Positive Money(Barmes and Livingstone, 2021) has challenged centralbanks’ sustainability action, and the Capital Institute (Full-erton, 2011) has practiced regenerative banking. Each ofthese examples aims to minimize the distance (Giddens,1991) between and among individuals and the natural
resources for which money is used by decommodifying
and resocializing money’s nature.
Dismantling the imagined wall for monetary econom-
ics means engaging with the field’s own sacred cows withhumility and flexibility. This includes the field’s concep-tion of money and its use of monetary metrics. Conceivingof money as a social relation directly contrasts with main-stream economic theory in which money is simply a neu-
tral tool used for exchanging good (Schumpeter, 1954;
Mankiw, 2008). Needless to say, if conceiving of moneyas a social relation is foreign, dismantling an imaginarywall to conceive of money as a relationship with, not onlyhumans, but nature itself, is a challenge all-togetherunique. Similarly, while inflation and interest rates, forexample, are basic building blocks of macroeconomicanalysis, these metrics have different meanings and
impacts in other fields. Inflation is about stability, growth,
and credit generation in macroeconomics, but about pur-chasing power, inequality, and power in sociology (Ing-ham, 2004). Should a transdis ciplinary exploration
undermine the current contemporary approach to suchmetrics, so long as the quest to move beyond the imag-ined wall is furthered, it should be welcomed.
Perhaps most importantly, the field must engage hum-
bly about money with the nonacademic world, in a quasi-
Bohmian process. Avoiding jargon, listening to experi-ences, and entering into dialogues outside of the aca-demic world without goals or hubris will allow for theinclusion of diverse perspectives as the field continuesto engage with the imagined wall. Such engagement isrequired to embed humanity’s use of money with the“natural world” from which we are not separate.
Discussion
In this article, we have used the framing of imagined wall topush our ontological disposition past where our disciplinesnormally engage (see Table 1 ). This is just a beginning. Adeep unlearning, over time, will shape our scientific inqui-
ries in ways at which we have only been able to gesturehere. We encourage other researchers, especially those con-cerned with sustainability, to ask themselves the questionswe have considered above. Where in your field does theimagined wall show up? Where is it demonstrably arbitrary
or false? How would your work change if this concept dis-
appeared? Even if you are unable to fully dismantle theimagined wall in your work, noting where the wall doesexist should yield more inclusive research questions.
Additionally, it is important to note where the imag-
ined wall does not appear in your work. Where does your
field already reflect the interconnectedness of all life? Asscientists, we may move back and forth between separa-
tional and relational frameworks. Indeed, such fluidity is
necessary when generating knowledge about, for example,agroecosystems on the one hand and specific crops on theother. Identifying and building on our existing capacitiesfor relational thinking will help move us forward, perhapsmore quickly than just noting where we are entrenchedand deficient.
While examining our fields in the Bohmian process
resulted in different insights for each of us, some common
themes emerged between cases:
/C15To challenge the imagined wall is to deal with the
dichotomy of humans being just one species ofmany and yet also the species with greatest globalimpact. We must confront the responsibilities for ouractions without allowing our position of power toreinforce imagined wall hierarchies.
/C15The impacts of operating as if there were an imag-
ined wall are cocreated with other species and mat-ter. We interact with soils, “pests,” farmed plants andanimals, and all the domains of life over whichmoney exacts a claim. Many of these situations aredriven by humans, but they are not fully controlla-ble; acting on one part of the system without beingable to contain impacts on the whole system under-
lies the network of ecological damage we now see.
/C15Even in the most well-intentioned fields, where sus-
tainability is a key concern, it is easy and almostinevitable to import the atomistic and dominatingassumptions of the imagined wall into our work.Unrooting such assumptions will take a long andconcerted effort. Each of our fields, however, showsimperfect resistances: st epping stones along the
path.
/C15Who is doing the science matters. Some groups of
humans feel the impacts of the imagined walls muchmore keenly in their communities. Deconstructingwalls relies on all groups taking part in building ourshared knowledge.
/C15Language reflects and reinforces our conceptions.
Thinking of earth systems as “resources” is distancing
and obscuring; it allows domination and conceptu-
ally erases relationship. We need to transition tothinking about relations and responsibility to all life,rather than resources for short-term wants.Art. 11(1) page 10 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

To operationalize breaking down the imagined wall, it
is important to think about our respective scientific fields
in terms of what would be necessary to know or enact toachieve true sustainability. Would different assumptions
about the place of humans in nature lead to different
proposals for sustainable transitions and different out-comes of transition policies? We believe so. Some scholarshave already approached such questions by distinguishing
the legal rights of nature from true ecological justice (Gar-
ver, 2020).
Along those lines, we speculate that our own fields
could transform over time from “more inclusive” to poten-
tially “wall-less” ways of building knowledge. In soil sci-ence, the disappearance of the imagined wall could allow
us to account for equity between humans and the species
that live within the soil. In entomology, we could learnfrom, rather than antagonize, insects and transition awayfrom pesticides. Agriculture generally might be
approached as a long-term collaboration between humans
and the species that nourish us, and vice versa. And mon-etary policy might broaden economic stability to includeecosystem resilience and structural stability.
Examining where the imagined wall currently exists in
our own research allows us to specifically consider who
(both human and nonhuman) benefits and is harmed bya given decision. Such decentering of humans in sustain-
ability research opens up the possibility of justice for other
parts of nature (Mies and Shiva, 1993, p. 223) by unravel-
ling the entwined logics of domination that rely on alien-ation to exploit others (Plumwood, 1993, pp. 48–54).
It is important to understand how interdisciplinary sci-
ence itself benefits and suffers from imagined wall think-
ing. How does imagined wall thinking allow us to formconceptual mental models within disciplines that gener-
ate knowledge itself? When does imagined wall thinking
allow us to understand the workings of the ecosystem,without using that knowledge to justify domination? Per-haps methodological and epistemological walls are useful
in the scientific endeavor so long as ontological walls are
broken and traversed. It was beyond the scope of thisproject to consider how deconstructing the imagined wall
might influence research methodologies, but future work
should consider this question of extending ontologicalrevisions to the methodological.
There is, we believe, some solace in understanding the
role that the imagined wall plays in destructive human
activity. For if destruction begins in the mind, so mustpeacefulness. There is no universal law that claims
humans must dominate ecosystems for their gain at the
expense of living and nonliving beings. While perhapsTable 1. Summary of insights from each case
How the Wall Manifests in
This FieldConsequences for Dis-
cipline and PracticeResistances and
Alternatives Bohmian Insights
Soil science Division and supremacy of
(some) humans leading to
soil being conceived of as anextractable and exploitable
resourceDestruction of soil
Continued justification
of human primacyand domination
Damaging shifts in
nutrient cycles (e.g.,
climate change,eutrophication)Holistic conceptions
of soil, for
example, soilhealth
Systemic approaches,
for example,agroecology,microbial
anthropologyExpand soil conceptualization
and soil “work” including
more diverse perspectivesand voices
Unravel damaging logics
Entomology Distancing from other species
objectified and othered as
“pests”
Primacy of human food needs
over other speciesAttempted eradication
of “pests”
Use of widely harmful
chemicals in
agroecosystems
“Pest” as a classification
for any beingMeditations with
insectsNeed for acknowledgment of
the more difficult
relationships we have with
other species andaccounting for kinship
Food
systemsDivision of humans from
agroecosystems (cognitiveand spatial)
Objectification and
exploitation of “resources”Depletion, pollution,
and abuse
Difficulty in full
accounting of
impactsSystemic approaches,
for example,agroecology
Place-based cultural
food revivalsDeath as site of kinship
Variations in strength/
location of the wall in foodsystems science
Monetary
theorySeparation between subjects
and objects of exchange
Human-centered economic
policy
Objectification of exchange
processHyper-separation
Distanced transactionsOverextractionSocio-ecological
approaches to
money
Regenerative
monetary systemsand practicesIntegrated nature and positive
feedback loop between
money and other fields in
maintenance of wall
Leverage points for resistance
of wallMorgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 11 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

difficult to envision from our current vantage point of
domination, transitioning to a peaceful and equitable
existence with our Earth-kin is likely easier than the oppo-site, for it involves letting go rather than fighting.
As our world experiences accelerating climate change,
soil loss, ocean acidification, and biodiversity loss, we arerelearning how truly connected we are to the living and
nonliving beings of this planet. And in the context of this
change, the sciences are being forced to reckon with theirpositionality. Environmental scholars can no longer dis-cuss nature as if we are not in it, can no longer studynature as if we are not of it, and can no longer objectifynature as if we are not it. Sustainability science must movebeyond its best intentions to a place that challenges ourconceptual frameworks and mental models.
Conclusion
What became clear through this collaboration is the deepneed to grapple with what it means for humans to“manage” social and ecological systems. While imaginedwall thinking indeed has led to dramatic impacts upon the
earth’s systems, human impacts are not always a result of
wall thinking. Humans, as beings in, of, and part of nature,have always had (Abrams, 2020) and will always have animpact on the places they inhabit, just as nonhuman beingsdo. The question thus becomes how to reorient ourselvesconceptually within nature in order to make decisions from
a place of oneness. As Brown (2017) writes, “I often feelI am trapped inside someone else’s imagination, and I mustengage my own imagination in order to break free” (p. 18).The fate of our world relies on a collective breaking free, to
a shared imagination of true belonging.
Data accessibility statement
No data are available for this article.
Acknowledgments
This project would never have happened without JoshuaMorse, who originally convened this group, led the dialo-
gues for a year, and contributed hugely to the develop-ment of our Bohmian process and methodologicalgrounding. The authors wish to acknowledge the follow-ing people and organizations. Dr Cheryl Morse, for spark-ing JM and CBM’s curiosity about representations ofnonhuman personhood in Western science. Dan Cottle forhis early contributions to this dialogue. The Canadian Soci-
ety for Ecological Economics for hosting 2 conferences,
one that inspired the idea behind the “magic” wall andanother that brought our evolving thoughts back to thisintellectual community. The Gund Institute for Environ-ment, which has supported our collaborations in manyways. The anonymous human participants in CBM’s disser-tation research, who helped her think about slaughter asrelationship. And all the beings who are our teachers,
whether or not we consciously know.
Competing interests
There are no competing interests related to this work.Author contributions
Contributed to conception and design: CBM, KB, LB, JA.
Contributed to acquisition of data: CBM, KB, LB, JA.Contributed to analysis and interpretation of data:
CBM, JA, KB, LB.
Drafted and/or revised the article: CBM, JA, KB, LB.
References
Abrams, MD . 2020 Aug 5. Don’t downplay the role of
indigenous people in molding the ecological land-scape. Scientific American . Available at https://www.
scientificamerican.com/article/dont-downplay-the-
role-of-indigenous-peo ple-in-molding-the-
ecological-landscape/. Accessed September 3, 2021.
Alaimo, S . 2017. Trans-corporeal feminisms and the ethi-
cal space of nature. Revista Estudos Feministas 25(2):
909–934. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/1806-9584.2017v25n2p909.
Ament, J . 2020. An ecological monetary theory. Ecological
Economics 171: 106421. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecolecon.2019.106421.
Arestis, P ,Sawyer, M . 2008. A critical reconsideration of
the foundations of monetary policy in the new con-sensus macroeconomics framework. Cambridge
Journal of Economics 32(5): 761–779. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/cje/ben004.
Ayres, RU ,Schlesinger, WH ,Socolow, RH . 1994. Human
impacts on the carbon and nitrogen cycles in Soco-
low, R, Andrews, C, Berkhout, F, Thomas, V eds.,
Industrial ecology and global change. 1st ed . Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press: 121–156.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511564550.011.
Barbieri, L ,Ahamed, S ,Bliss, S . 2019. Farming within
limits. Interactions 26(5): 70. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1145/3348795.
Barmes, D ,Livingstone, Z . 2021. The green central bank-
ing scorecard . London, UK: Positive Money. Available
at https://positivemoney. org/publications/green-
central-banking-scorecard/. Accessed April 21, 2022.
Bar-On, YM ,Phillips, R ,Milo, R . 2018. The biomass dis-
tribution on Earth. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America115 (25): 6506–6511. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1711842115.
Benezra, A ,DeStefano, J ,Gordon, JI. 2012. Anthropol-
ogy of microbes. Proceedings of the National Acad-
emy of Sciences of the United States of America109 (17): 6378–6381. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.12005 15109.
Bergmann, IM . 2019. Interspecies sustainability to ensure
animal protection: Lessons from the thoroughbred
racing industry. Sustainability 11(19): 5539. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su11195539.
Berhe, AA ,Ghezzehei, TA. 2021. Race and racism in soil
science.
European Journal of Soil Science 72(3):
1292–1297. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejss.13078.
Berners-Lee, M ,Kennelly, C ,Watson, R ,Hewitt, CN .
2018. Current global food production is sufficientArt. 11(1) page 12 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

to meet human nutritional needs in 2050 provided
there is radical societal adaptation. Elementa: Science
of the Anthropocene 6: 52. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1525/elementa.310.
Bohm, D ,Factor, D ,Garrett, P .1 9 9 1 . Dialogue: A pro-
posal . Gloucester, UK: Hawthorne College. Available
at https://link-springer-com.ezproxy.uvm.edu/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1022989723259.pdf.
Bouma, J ,McBratney, A . 2013. Framing soils as an actor
when dealing with wicked environmental problems.Geoderma 200–201 : 130–139. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2013.02.011.
Brevik, K ,Barbieri, L . 2019. There is no magic wall.
Minding Nature 12. Available at https://www.
humansandnature.org/there-is-no-magic-wall.
Brown, AM .2 0 1 7 . Emergent strategy . Chico, CA: AK Press.
Brown, PG . 1992. Climate change and the planetary trust.
Energy Policy 20(3): 208–222. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/0301-4215(92)90079-H.
Brown, PG . 2004. Are there any natural resources? Politics
and the Life Sciences 23(1): 12–21.
Brown, PG ,Garver, G . 2009. Right relationship: Building
a whole earth economy .1st ed . San Francisco, CA:
Berrett-Koehler Publishers: Ingram Publisher Ser-vices [distributor]. (A BK Currents Book).
Brundtland, GH . 1990. Our common future . Melbourne,
Australia: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, B ,Beare, D ,Bennett, E ,Hall-Spencer, J ,
Ingram, J ,Jaramillo, F ,Ortiz, R ,Ramankutty, N ,
Sayer, J ,Shindell, D . 2017. Agriculture production
as a major driver of the Earth system exceedingplanetary boundaries. Ecology and Society 22(4):
11. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-09595-220408.
Campiglio, E . 2016. Beyond carbon pricing: The role of
banking and monetary policy in financing the tran-sition to a low-carbon economy. Ecological Econom-
ics121: 220–230. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.
ecolecon.2015.03.020.
Carson, R . 1962. Silent spring
.B o s t o n ,M A :H o u g h t o n
Mifflin Company.
Chenet, H ,Ryan-Collins, J ,van Lerven, F .2 0 1 9 . Climate-
related financial policy in a world of radical uncer-tainty: Towards a precautionary approach . London,
UK: UCL IIPP. Report No.: WP 2019-13.
Crist, E . 2018. Reimagining the human. Science
362 (6420): 1242–1244. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1126/science.aau6026.
Crist, E ,Kopnina, H. 2014. Unsettling anthropocentrism.
Dialectical Anthropology 38(4): 387–396. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10624-014-9362-1.
DeLind, LB . 2002. Place, work, and civic agriculture: Com-
mon fields for cultivation. Agriculture and Human
Values 19(3): 217–224. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1023/A:1019994728252.
Delind, LB . 2006. Of bodies, place, and culture: Re-
situating local food. Journal of Agricultural and Envi-
ronmental Ethics 19(2): 121–146. DOI: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1007/s10806-005-1803-z.Dengler, R . 2017 Jun 29. Neonicotinoid pesticides are
slowly killing bees. PBS NewsHour . Available at
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/science/
neonicotinoid-pesticides-slowly-killing-bees.
Accessed May 16, 2022.
Ehrenfeld, JR ,Hoffman AJ . 2020. Flourishing: A frank
conversation about sustainability .R e d w o o dC i t y ,
CA: Stanford University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9780804786676.
Ellis, EC ,Ramankutty, N . 2008. Putting people in the
map: Anthropogenic biomes of the world. Frontiers
in Ecology and the Environment 6(8): 439–447. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/070062.
FAO, UNDP, UNEP . 2021. A multi-billion-dollar opportu-
nity—Repurposing agricultural support to transform
food systems . Rome, Italy: FAO, UNDP, and UNEP.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4060/cb6562en.
Foley, JA ,DeFries, R ,Asner, GP ,Barford, C ,Bonan, G ,
Carpenter, SR ,Chapin, FS ,Coe, MT ,Daily, GC ,
Gibbs, HK ,Helkowski, JH ,Holloway, T ,
Howard,
EA,Kucharik, CJ ,Monfreda, C ,Patz, JA ,Prentice,
IC,Ramankutty, N ,Snyder, PK . 2005. Global con-
sequences of land use. Science 309 (5734): 570–574.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science. 1111 772.
Fox, KCR ,Muthukrishna, M ,Shultz, S . 2017. The social
and cultural roots of whale and dolphin brains.Nature Ecology Evolution 1(11): 1699–1705. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0336-y.
Francovich, C . 2015. Transdisciplinarity, autopoiesis, and
dialogye: An educational project. The International
Journal of Interdiscipli nary Educational Studies
10(2): 1–11.
Fullerton, J . 2011. The big choice. The Capital Institute’s
The Future of Finance Blog. Available at http://capitalinstitute.org/blog/big-choice-0/. Accessed
July 24, 2023.
Gaard, G ,Gruen, L . 1993. Ecofeminism: Toward global
justice and planetary health. Society and Nature
2(1): 1–35. Available at http://lgruen.faculty.
wesleyan.edu/files/2011/05/Gaard.pdf. Accessed
November 28, 2016.
Garver, G . 2020. Are rights of nature radical enough for
ecological law? in Anker, K, Burdon, PD, Garver, G,
Maloney, M, Sbert, C eds., From environmental to
ecological law . England, UK: Routledge: 14.
Giddens, A .1 9 9 1 . The consequences of modernity .1st ed .
Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Graeber, D .2 0 1 4 . Debt: The first 5,000 years . Brooklyn,
NY: Melville House.
Granjou, C ,Salazar, JF . 2019. The stuff of soil. Nature and
Culture 14(1): 39–60. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
3167/nc.2019.140103.
Grossman, E. 2014 May 27. As dairy farms grow bigger,
new concerns about pollution. Yale E360 . Available
at https://e360.yale.edu/features/as_dairy_farms_
grow_bigger_new_concer ns_about_pollution.
Accessed May 16, 2022.
Hall, M . 2011. Plants as persons . Albany, NY: State Univer-
sity of New York Press. Available at https://www.Morgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 13 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

sunypress.edu/p-5089-pla nts-as-persons.aspx.
Accessed May 5, 2021.
Haraway, D . 1988. Situated knowledges: The science
question in feminism and the privilege of partialperspective. Feminist Studies 14(3): 575–599. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3178066.
Haraway, D .2 0 1 3 . When species meet . Minneapolis, MA:
University of Minnesota Press.
Held, L . 2021. Efforts to strengthen the USDA organic
standard pick up steam. FoodPrint . Available at
https://foodprint.org/blog/organic-standards/.Accessed May 11, 2022.
Henry, J . 2004. The social origins of money: The case of
Egypt, in Wray, LR, Innes, AM eds., Credit and state
theories of money: The contributions of A. Mitchell
Innes . Cheltenham, UK/orthampton, MA, USA:
Edward Elgar Pub.
Hobson, J . 1999. Seeking wholeness: An ecofeminist
investigation into the work of David Bohm [PhDthesis]. Murdoch University. Available at https://researchrepository.murdoch.edu.au/id/eprint/50268/. Accessed May 23, 2022.
Holt-Gime ´nez, E . 2017. A foodie’s guide to capitalism:
Understanding the political economy of what we eat .
New York, NY: Monthly Review Press.
Hunt, GR . 1996. Manufacture and use of hook-tools by New
Caledonian crows. Nature 379 (6562): 249–251. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/379249a0.
Ingham, G . 1996. Money is a social relation. Review of
Social Economy 54(4): 507–529.
Ingham, G . 2004. The nature of money .1st ed . Cambridge,
UK/Malden, MA: Polity.
Kimmerer, RW .2 0 1 3 . Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous
wisdom, scientific knowledge and the teachings of
plants . Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed Editions.
Kopittke, PM ,Menzies, NW ,Dalal, RC ,McKenna, BA ,
Husted, S ,Wang, P ,Lombi, E . 2021. The role of soil
in defining planetary boundaries and the safe oper-ating space for humanity. Environment International
146 : 106245. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2020.106245.
Kornei, K . 2022 May 10. This antioxidant may provide
a key link between regenerative agriculture and
human health. Civil Eats . Available at https://
civileats.com/2022/05 /10/ergothioneine-
regenerative-agriculture -longetive-soil-health-
bionutrients-crops-pro ducing-farming-human-
health/. Accessed May 16, 2022.
Krishna Bahadur, KC ,Dias, GM
,Veeramani, A ,Swan-
ton, CJ ,Fraser, D ,Steinke, D ,Lee, E ,Wittman, H ,
Farber, JM ,Dunfield, K ,McCann, K ,Anand, M ,
Campbell, M ,Rooney, N ,Raine, NE ,Van Acker, R ,
Hanner, R ,Pascoal, S ,Sharif, S ,Benton, TG ,Fra-
ser, EDG . 2018. When too much isn’t enough: Does
current food production meet global nutritionalneeds? PLoS One 13(10): e0205683. Public Library
of Science. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0205683.
LaDuke, W . 2018. Decolonizing the food system. Commu-
nity Food Systems Conference; Boston, MA.Available at https://nesfp.org/updates/2018/2/1/
decolonizing-food-system. Accessed November 24,2020.
Lehmann, J ,Bossio, DA ,Ko¨gel-Knabner, I ,Rillig, MC .
2020. The concept and future prospects of soilhealth. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 1(10):
544–553. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s43017-
020-0080-8.
Lennon, WM ,Regan, RB ,Penniman, L ,Vitale-Penni-
man, PN . 2018. Sowing the seeds of food justice .
Albany, NY: Soul Fire Farm. Available at https://cdn.sare.org/wp-content/uploads/20180307095610/Sowing- the-Seeds-of-Food-
Justice-SARE-Manual-2018.2.7.pdf.
Leopold, A . 1949. A sand county almanac and sketches
here and there .N e wY o r k ,N Y :O x f o r dU n i v e r s i t y
Press.
Liboiron, M . 2021. Pollution is colonialism . Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Mankiw, NG . 2008. Macroeconomics .6th ed . New York,
NY: Worth Publishers.
Marris, E . 2022. A call for governments to save soil.
Nature 601 (7894): 503–504. DOI: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/d41586-022-00158-8.
Marx, K . 2007. Economic and philosophic manuscripts of
1844 .Dover ed . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
McCallin, AM . 2004. Pluralistic dialoguing: A theory of
interdisciplinary teamworking. The Grounded Theory
Review: An International Journal 4(1): 25–43.
McGregor, D . 2009. Honoring our relations, in Agyeman,
J ed., Speaking for ourselves: Environmental justice in
Canada . Vancouver, Canada: UBC Press: 27–41.
Meadows, DH . 2008. Thinking in systems: A primer .
White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Mellor, M . 1997a. Feminism and ecology: An introduction .
New York, NY: NYU Press.
Mellor, M . 1997b. Women, nature and the social construc-
tion of “economic man.” Ecological Economics 20(2):
129–140. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(95)00100-X.
Mellor, M . 2015. Debt or democracy: Public money for
sustainability and social justice . London, UK: Pluto
Press.
Merchant, C . 1989. The death of nature: Women, ecology,
and the scientific revolution . New York, NY: Harper &
Row.
Mies, M ,Shiva, V . 1993. Ecofeminism . Halifax, NS/Lon-
don, UK/Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Fernwood Publica-tions and Zed Books.
Minasny, B ,Malone, BP ,McBratney, AB ,Angers, DA ,
Arrouays, D ,Chambers, A ,Chaplot, V ,Chen, Z-S ,
Cheng, K ,Das, BS ,Field, DJ ,Gimona, A ,Hedley,
CB,Hong, SY ,Mandal, B ,Marchant, BP ,Martin,
M,McConkey, BG ,Mulder, VL ,O’Rourke, S
,
Richer-de-Forges, AC ,Odeh, I ,Padarian, J ,Paus-
tian, K ,Pan, G ,Poggio, L ,Savin, I ,Stolbovoy, V ,
Stockmann, U ,Sulaeman, Y ,Tsui, C-C ,Vågen, T-G ,
van Wesemael, B ,Winowiecki, L . 2017. Soil car-
bon 4 per mille. Geoderma 292 : 59–86. DOI: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2017.01.002.Art. 11(1) page 14 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Mitchell, SL .2 0 1 8 . Sacred instructions: Indigenous wisdom
for living spirit-based change .B e r k e l e y ,C A :N o r t h
Atlantic Books.
Morgan, CB ,Trubek, AB . 2020. Not yet at the table: The
absence of food culture and tradition in agroecologyliterature. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene
8(1): 40. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1525/elementa.
437.
Morton, T .2 0 1 0 . The ecological thought . Cambridge, MA/
London, UK: Harvard University Press.
Morton, T .2 0 1 3 . Hyperobjects: Philosophy and ecology
after the end of the world . Minneapolis, MN: Univer-
sity of Minnesota Press. (Posthumanities; vol. 27).
Muir, J . 1911. My first summer in the Sierra . New York, NY:
Modern Library.
Overstreet, KK .2 0 1 8 .Aw e l l - c a r e df o rc o wp r o d u c e s
more milk: The biotechnics of (dis)assembling cowbodies in Wisconsin dairy worlds [dissertation].
Santa Cruz, CA: UC Santa Cruz. Available athttps://escholarship.o rg/uc/item/3q05z3wb.
Accessed August 10, 2020.
Papadopoulos, D . 2011. Alter-ontologies: Towards a con-
stituent politics in technoscience. Social Studies of
Science 41(2): 177–201. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1177/0306312710385853.
Pimm, SL ,Russell, GJ ,Gittleman, JL ,Brooks, TM . 1995
July 21. The Future of Biodiversity. Science 269 :
347–350. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.269.5222.347.
Plumwood,V . 1993. Environmental culture: The ecological cri-
sis of reason . England, UK: Routledge & CRC Press. Avail-
able at https://www.routledge.com/Environmental-Culture-The-Ecological-Cri sis-of-Reason/Plumwood/p/
book/9780415178785. Accessed May 5, 2021.
Plumwood, V . 2003. Feminism and the mastery of nature .
Reprinted 1997. Transferred to digital print 2003.London, UK: Routledge. (Feminism for today).
Polanyi, K .1 9 7 1 . The great transformation . Boston, MA:
Beacon (Beacon Paperback). Available at https://books.google.com/books?id ¼o-VtnQEACAAJ.
Polanyi, K . 2001. The great transformation: The political
and economic origins of our time .2nd ed . Boston,
MA: Beacon Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M . 2015. Making time for soil:
Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 691–716. DOI: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851.
Quammen, D .2 0 1 9 . The tangled tree: A radical new his-
tory of life . New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Raffles, H
. 2011. Insectopedia .1st ed .N e wY o r k ,N Y :
Vintage.
Robbins, R . 2019. The transcendental meanings of
organic food, in Chrazan, J, Ricotta, J eds., Organic
food, farming, and culture: An introduction . London,
UK/New York, NY: Bloomsbury Academic. Availableat https://illiad.uvm.edu/illiad/VTU/illiad.dll?Action ¼10&Form ¼75&Value ¼245251. Accessed
March 18, 2019.
Rockstro ¨m, J ,Steffen, W ,Noone, K ,Persson, A ,Cha-
pin, III FS ,Lambin, EF ,Lenton, TM ,Scheffer, M ,Folke, C ,Schellnhuber, HJ . 2009. A safe operating
space for humanity. Nature 461 (7263): 472.
Roux-Rosier, A ,Azambuja, R ,Islam, G . 2018. Alterna-
tive visions: Permaculture as imaginaries of theAnthropocene. Organization 25(4): 550–572. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1350508418778647.
Savage, B . 2020. Practicing post-nature. Antennae 50:
189–204.
Schumpeter, JA . 1954. History of economic analysis . Lon-
don, UK: Allen & Union.
Shiva, V .2 0 1 5 . Soil not oil: Environmental justice in an age
of climate crisis. Reprint ed .B e r k e l e y ,C A :N o r t h
Atlantic Books.
Simpson, LB .2 0 1 7 . As we have always done: Indigenous
freedom through radical resistance . Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Smith, P ,Bustamante, M ,Ahammad, H ,Clark, H ,
Dong, H ,Elsiddig, EA ,Haberl, H ,Harper, R ,
House, J ,Jafari, M ,
Clark, H ,Dong, H ,Elsiddig,
EA,Haberl, H ,Harper, R ,House, J ,Jafari, M .
2014. Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use(AFOLU), in Edenhofer, O, Pichs-Madruga, R, Sokona,Y eds., Climate change 2014: Mitigation of climate
change: Working group III contribution to the fifth
assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on
climate change . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415416.
Snyder, G . 1990. The practice of the wild: Essays . San Fran-
cisco, CA: North Point Press.
Soil Science Division Staff . 2017. Soil survey manual, in
Ditzler, C, Scheffe, K, Monger, HC eds., USDA hand-
book 18 . Washington, DC: Government Printing
Office.
TallBear, K . 2014. Standing with and speaking as faith: A
feminist-indigenous approach to inquiry. Journal of
Research Practice 10(2): N17.
The Environmental Impact of Food Packaging . 2020.
Food print. Available at https://foodprint.org/issues/the-environmental-impact-of-food-packaging/. Accessed May 16, 2022.
The Sioux Chef . n.d. About—The Sioux Chef. Available at
https://sioux-chef.com/about/. Accessed May 11,
2022.
The´ret, B . 1999. The socio-political dimensions of the
currency: Implications for the transition to the Euro.Journal of Consumer Policy 22(1): 51–79. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1006142028937.
Todd, Z . 2016. An indigenous feminist’s take on the onto-
logical turn: “Ontology” is just another word forcolonialism. Journal of Historical Sociology 29(1):
4–22. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1111/johs. 12124.
Todd, Z . 2017. Fish, kin and hope: Tending to water viola-
tions in amiskwaciwa ˆskahikan and treaty six terri-
tory. Afterall: A Journal of Art, Context and Enquiry
43: 102–107. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/
692559.
Tsing, AL .2 0 1 5 . The mushroom at the end of the world: On
the possibility of life in capitalist ruins . Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.Morgan et al: Humans in nature Art. 11(1) page 15 of 16Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Ursell, LK ,Metcalf, JL ,Parfrey, LW ,Knight, R .2 0 1 2 .
Defining the human microbiome. Nutrition Reviews
70(suppl_1): S38–S44. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/j.1753-4887.2012.00493.x.
Wallach, AD ,Batavia, C ,Bekoff, M ,Alexander, S ,
Baker, L ,Ben-Ami, D ,Boronyak, L ,Cardilin, APA ,
Carmel, Y ,Celermajer, D ,Coghlan, S ,Dahdal, Y ,
Gomez, JJ ,Kaplan, G ,Keynan, O ,Khalilieh, A ,
Kopnina, H ,Lynn, WS ,Narayanan, Y ,Riley, S ,
Santiago-A ´vila, FJ ,Yanco, E ,Zemanova, MA ,
Ramp, D. 2020. Recognizing animal personhood
in compassionate conservation. Conservation Biology
34(5): 1097–1106. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1111/
cobi.13494.
Warren, KJ . 1990. The power and the promise of ecolog-
ical feminism. Environmental Ethics 12(2): 125–146.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5840/enviroethics199012221.
Watts, V . 2013. Indigenous place-thought and agency
amongst humans and non humans (first woman andsky woman go on a European world tour!).Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 2(1):
20–34. Available at https://jps.library.utoronto.ca/index.php/des/article/view/19145. Accessed Septem-ber 7, 2021.
Weil, RR . 2016. The soil underfoot—Infinite possibilities
for a finite resource. Edited by G. Jock Churchman
and Edward R. Landa. CRC Press, 6000 Broken
Sound Parkway Nw # Boca Raton, FL 33487. 2014.421 pp. Print ISBN 978-1-4665-7156-3. Soil Science
Society of America Journal 80(3): 803–804. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2016.0003br.
White, MA . 2013. Sustainability: I know it when I see it.
Ecological Economics 86: 213–217. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.12.020.
Wickson, F ,
Carew, AL ,Russell, AW . 2006. Transdisci-
plinary research: Characteristics, quandaries andquality. Futures 38(9): 1046–1059. DOI: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2006.02.011.
Worthy, K .2 0 1 3 . Invisible nature: Healing the destructive
divide between people and the environment . Amherst,
NY: Prometheus.
How to cite this article: Morgan, CB, Brevik, K, Barbieri, L, Ament, J. 2023. Humans in/of/are nature: Re-embedding reality in
sustainability sciences. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene 11(1). DOI: https:/ /doi.org/10.1525/elementa.2021.00083
Domain Editor-in-Chief: Alastair Iles, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
Knowledge Domain: Sustainability Transitions
Published: August 02, 2023 Accepted: May 05, 2023 Submitted: September 22, 2021
Copyright: ©2023 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,provided the original author and source are credited. See http:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
Elem Sci Anth is a peer-reviewed open access
journal published by University of California Press.Art. 11(1) page 16 of 16 Morgan et al: Humans in natureDownloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article-pdf/11/1/00083/785678/elementa.2021.00083.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

