Article
Critique of Anthropology
2025, Vol. 45(1) 25 –36
© The Author(s) 2025
Article reuse guidelines:sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0308275X251315268
journals.sagepub.com/home/coaImagine air: Global commons,
‘ecological civilization ’, and
citizen visions beyond carbonmarkets in China
Charlotte Bruckermann 
University of Cologne, Germany
Abstract
In global environmental governance, efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ofteninvolve turning pollution rights into commodities, essentially privatizing the air. Policies
like carbon pricing and market approaches are considered effective solutions, especially
within capitalist systems, and continue to rely on logics of the tragedy of the (atmo-spheric) commons. In China, the Communist Party proposed environmental policiesaligning with capitalist development principles under the concept of ‘ecological civili-
zation ’. However, the perspectives on the ground differ from the government ’s plans.
Citizens, including sci- ﬁenthusiasts and eco-utopian thinkers in both rural and urban
areas, have their own visions for a shared future that go beyond the narrow focus oneconomic growth, markets and pricing. Contrary to of ﬁcial narratives, interviews, social
media discussions and popular artworks reveal that many envision the future ‘ecological
civilization ’with clean air as commons for the more-than-human world. I argue that
anthropological perspectives must attend to such creative spaces in which politicalsubjects become enfolded in the commons, without eclipsing their potential to reinforceclass divisions and social inequalities in environmental aspirations.
Keywords
carbon pricing, China, atmospheric commons, ‘ecological civilization ’, global
environmental governance
Corresponding author:
Charlotte Bruckermann, Department of Social and Cultural Anthropology and Global South Studies Center,
University of Cologne, Albertus-Magnus-Platz, Cologne 50931, Germany.Email: Charlotte.Bruckermann@uni-koeln.de

Carbon: From molecule to credit –and then back to element
Economic approaches to mitigating climate change largely assume the atmosphere as a
global commons, focusing on pollution practices as “external ”to conventional economic
accounting, with degradation avoided by privatizing pollution rights and trading them on
markets, carbon markets. In what follows, I explore questions and conundrums thatemerge from understanding carbon through theories of commons, including: How did thecarbon cycle become commodi ﬁed? How is this process entangled with understandings of
the atmosphere as a commons? How might shifting perspectives on commons contributeto forging horizons around an anthropology of carbon?
To address these questions, I begin by tracing the shift of carbon from molecule to a
credit, and then outline possible horizons through theories of an elemental commons for
carbon anthropology. The concept of carbon credits originally has its roots in discourse of
the “tragedy ”of the commons. These economic solutions, devised to combat climate
change, transform carbon dioxide from a molecular entity into a tradeable credit.However, exploring recent theoretical interventions takes carbon back full circle to itselemental form. This raises the question whether an elemental commons tied to the air, theatmosphere, and carbon can be brought to bear on an emerging political subjectivity inChina and beyond. Within the Chinese world, actions envelop individuals in bubbles ofclean air, extending from lungs to domes, in highly uneven ways. Moreover, examining
state policies reveals how unequal burdens, especially based on class and locality, fall on
those subjected to the Chinese carbon economy.
Ethnographic insights from ﬁeldwork conducted among carbon consultants, forest
carbon offset workers, and sci- ﬁenthusiasts in the People ’s Republic between 2016 and
2019 highlight how ideas of carbon consciousness and atmospheric commons are takenup on the ground. Foresters critique the isolation of elements for commodi ﬁcation and a
beekeeper pins holistic hopes on interspecies cooperation in ways that enfold carbonlogics within grassroots conceptions of the commons for imagining the future. Literary
examples of pan-species communism and artistic engagements with our shared atmo-
sphere further deepen understandings of carbon ’s political potential within the elemental
commons.
Carbon dioxide as a molecule
Antoine Lavoisier ﬁrst put forward the idea of the carbon cycle between 1772 and 1790
(Galvez and Gaillardet, 2012 ). In the 1840s J.J. Ebelmen proposed a connection to
atmospheric composition, describing the alteration of silicates on continents and car-
bonates in the ocean, and considering the latter a carbon dioxide sink ( Galvez and
Gaillardet, 2012 ). In the early 20th century, a synthetic model of the carbon cycle emerged
that comprehensively linked carbon in sediments, atmosphere, oceans, and organisms, aswell as fossil fuels ( Galvez and Gaillardet, 2012 ). In 1896, Swiss electrochemist Svante
Arrhenius argued that changes in terrestrial temperatures could be related to ﬂuctuations
in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO
2) concentration ( Galvez and Gaillardet, 2012 ). He and
colleague Nils Ekholm predicted that industrial emissions would lead to a noticeable26 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
increase in CO 2levels within a few centuries, but these theories were initially dismissed
(Calel, 2011 : 5). Only in 1938 was British engineer Guy Stewart Callendar, a steam
engineer and inventor, able to show that land temperatures had increased in the inter-vening 50 years ( Weart, 2008 ). Callendar proceeded to link these ﬁndings to rising carbon
dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere ( Weart, 2008 ).
In subsequent decades, data linking rising temperatures and industrial emissions led to
military funding for climate science, particularly in the US ( Weart, 2008 ). By the 1970s,
concerns about anthropogenic climate change grew, culminating in the 1985 Viennaconference, where climatologists warned of rising temperatures and sea levels. Econo-mists translated these ﬁndings about atmospheric composition into policy, shaping en-
vironmental governance, including their explicit references to the atmosphere as a “global
commons ”–a perspective that persists in academic papers and research centers on climate
policy.
Atmosphere as commons
Carbon trading as a mechanism to address climate change arose from economic debateson pollution management that, explicitly or implicitly, treated (clean) air as unboundedcommons. In the 1920s, economist Arthur Cecil Pigou recommended taxing privateentities for negative social outcomes not conventionally accounted for in economiccalculations ( Calel, 2011 ). His teacher, Alfred Marshall (1920) previously proposed that
economic externalities (of costs beyond balance sheets) could be offset by a tax to factor
the actual costs of economic activities into decisions ( Choy, 2021 : 239). By contrast,
Ronald Coase (1960) argued that privatizing the commons and then trading the resulting
property rights more ef ﬁciently integrated externalities (such as environmental costs) in
economic calculations, especially if transaction costs stayed low ( Hepburn, 2007 ). Al-
though both Pigou and Coase referred to air pollution and factory smoke in making theirarguments ( Choy, 2021 : 240), it took decades for their ideas to evolve into policy ad-
vocating government regulation and pollution limits for permit trading.
Support for this approach was augmented by Garrett Hardin ’s (1968) assertion that
resource depletion was a result of property held in common and administered by openaccess. Within a “ﬁnite world ”he argued that private property regulations could avert this
disaster. However, Hardin himself exempted air and water pollution from this solution dueto their potentially unbounded effects (see Pena-Valderrama, 2016 : 44). Nonetheless,
Hardin ’s thesis of the “tragedy of the commons ”was extended to the claim that di-
minishing clean air was best countered by privatizing pollution rights. The resultingcarbon markets effectively de-territorialize emissions reductions, supposedly displacing
them to places where they can be sold at the highest price or produced at the lowest cost
(Lo, 2016 : 19).
Markets for greenhouse gas emissions
Early US environmental services markets paved the way for global CO 2markets
(Hepburn, 2007 ;Pena-Valderrama, 2016 ). The 1977 US Clean Air Act created an offsetBruckermann 27
program allowing ﬁrms to trade emission quotas and therefore also expand and build in
non-regulated areas. Reagan ’s 1980s neoliberal policies further promoted emissions
trading as a cost-effective strategy for pollution control. The 1990 Clean Air ActAmendments introduced a national sulfur dioxide emissions market to combat acid rain.Meanwhile, in 1988, the UN established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) to assess the causes and consequences of global warming. Carbon trading gained
global signi ﬁcance with the 1997 Kyoto Protocol that took effect in 2005, and extended
the 1992 UNFCCC commitment to limit greenhouse gases.
Framing the atmosphere as a commons frequently arises in the context of new in-
stitutional economics, often emphasizing multi-stakeholder solutions and applying ElinorOstrom ’s principles for managing common pool resources. For instance, Paavola (2011)
delves into the issue, posing the question in a chapter title, “Climate change: The ultimate
tragedy of the commons? ”and responding by advocating polycentric climate governance
to reduce carbon emissions. This approach treats the atmospheric commons merely as a
resource for humans, with state-market governance and public-private cooperation assolutions for its depletion. Anthropologically, these policy approaches overlook thecreative potential of carbon ’s political effects, and its ties to political subjectivity ( Günel,
2014 ,2016 ;Whitington, 2016 ,2020 ). Nonetheless, China has put these theories into
practice through carbon market experiments in recent years.
Carbon in China
As the “workshop of the world ”China faces acute environmental challenges, reaping both
proﬁts and pollution from global industrial production and manufacturing. To address
this, China ’s 2011 Five-Year-Plan set in motion the progressive establishment and in-
stitutionalization of a domestic carbon market. The government established its ownChinese Certi ﬁed Emissions Reductions and launched eight trial cap-and-trade schemes
inﬁve cities (Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Shenzhen, Chongqing) and three provinces
(Guangdong, Hubei and Fujian). Each pilot tested alternative variables to inform best-
practice scenarios for an eventually uni ﬁed carbon market. Launched in 2021, it covered
fewer sectors than initially anticipated, but remains the world ’s largest carbon market by
the amount of emissions covered.
The Chinese carbon market ’s“experimentation ”approach has sparked cynicism and
critique within the country, including from those charged with its roll-out ( Bruckermann,
2023 ). As the government tries to maneuver the country away from heavy industries and
manufacturing and towards an “ecological civilization ”(shengtai wenming ), the idea of
harnessing the power of the economy to save the environment seems like a win-win. As
propaganda expounds the virtues of “low-carbon life ”(ditan shenghuo ) to companies,
households, and individuals, carbon has become a centerpiece of efforts to steer Chinainto a greener future. At a more personal scale, even citizens unmoved by state rhetoric on“low-carbon development ”and “ecological civilization ”sometimes see themselves as
evidence of an increasing “ecological consciousness ”(shengtai yishi ) in China
(Bruckermann, 2024 ).28 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
Carbon and the elemental commons
Carbon: a chemical element, C, ﬁfteenth most abundant element in the earth ’s crust, fourth
most abundant element in the universe, second most abundant element in the human body, thekey element for all known human and non-human life on earth.
What might persuade you that anthropology should discard the distinction between life and
non-life if not carbon? ( Cross, 2019 )
Starting with “the elements ”as a cosmological and chemical point of departure, the
hazards, hopes, and harms, as well as the efforts, struggles, and labor of elementaltransformation become apparent, de-centering conventional framings of resources,
productivity, and the market ( Papadopoulos et al., 2021 ). Taking the poetics, and politics,
of these shifts seriously, raises the question of how to locate sovereignty and subjectivityin these theoretical maneuvers.
In terms of elemental poetics, Dimitris Papadopoulos (2018) traces techno-scienti ﬁc
practices entangled with, and generative of, alternative ontologies as experimentalprocesses. Elizabeth Povinelli (2016) theorizes the late liberal order through geonto-
power, which distinguishes between life and non-life, and traces grassroots struggles thatchallenge this normative view, including incorporating the perspectives of fossils, fogs,
and weirs. Deepening this methodological approach through “care ”for the earth, Mar ´ıa
Puig de la Bellacasa (2015) engages with soil as a living community, not a lifeless
receptacle for crop production. Moreover, Bellacasa ’s attentiveness to the temporalities of
breakdown and reconstitution in soil ’s constitutive elements can be brought to bear on
carbon cycles. For carbon, too, a myopic focus on raising productivity by burning fossilfuels, which took millions of years of vegetative decomposition to accumulate, cannot be“offset ”by brief capture and containment in forest carbon. These temporal cycles simply
cannot be made to sync up (see Lohmann, 2008 ).
Kathryn Yusoff (2017) expands the geologic notion of the commons, again not as
standing reserves for capitalism, but as a domain for political subjecthood within An-thropocene thought, and defying invocation of a false “we”. Yusoff ’s political subjectivity
afﬁrms historical rupture, burns with communist generosity, and refuses to serve capi-
talism. She calls for a political subjectivity that rejects calculative logics in favor of“awakening a private life that is organized around the depths of an emotional experience ”
(Yusoff, 2017 : 265) From this political subjecthood, inequalities, exclusions, but also
elements held in common through fragile alliances, emerge on the threshold of the self.
Pollution and politics of the self in the Chinese world
Extending this elemental approach to carbon, ethnographic studies can analyze stateprojects and societal responses to managing carbon emissions in China. This involvesexamining government policies, local engagement, and broader social dynamics sur-rounding carbon-related initiatives. Although not primarily focused on the notion ofBruckermann 29
carbon, Timothy Choy ’s work in Hong Kong and Jerry Zee ’s in Beijing offer insights into
air and pollution in the region, opening up possibilities for an anthropology of carbon.
Choy (2021) explores the economic concept of “externalities, ”focusing on social and
environmental costs ignored in pricing. Quoting his lecturer in environmental economics,Choy recalls the phrase, “Breathers pay, ”highlighting the unequal burden of air pollution.
He calls for an “atmospheric reckoning ”to address how unevenly the conditions of
contaminated and clean air are distributed ( Choy, 2021 : 236). Choy also warns of the
dangers in assuming the universality of the “breather ”and emphasizes the speciest, racial
and class inequalities within the “commons of breathing ”(Choy, 2021 : 241). From
asthmatic baby rats exposed to particulate matter in laboratories to water bodies and oceanworlds sequestering carbon, Choy provides thought-provoking sketches of who populatesa potential “museum of breathers. ”In an ethnographic exploration of the uneven dis-
tribution of air pollution in Hong Kong ’s urban fabric, Choy (2011 : 159 –60) shows how
pockets of air, undulating topography, and architectural constructions merge with colonial
histories and contemporary practices of mobility, race, and class to stratify exposure, thussegmenting environmental harm from toxic particulate matter.
Facing related ethnographic concerns, Jerry Zee (2015) begins his exploration of
Beijing with Chen Guangbiao ’s 2013 stunt of selling fresh air in cans. As Zee points out,
walking in the city is also breathing in the city, and the political consequences of pollutionare manifold, yet strati ﬁed. When President Xi Jinping stepped in front of cameras without
a mask on a polluted day in 2014, he nonetheless proclaimed we are “Breathing together,
sharing a common destiny, ”eclipsing the lived realities of unequal exposure to noxious
atmospheres ( Zee, 2015 : 49). While the air of Beijing is held in suspension by the
mountains, inside the city ’s architectural spaces –from old courtyards to modern high-
rises –act as enclosures for the consumption of clean(er) air. From face masks to air ﬁlters,
experiments with massive chambers and covering over playgrounds, Zee points out howmany solutions rely on privatized spaces and the creation of personal bubbles. As thecyborg meme “I don ’t want to be a human vacuum cleaner ”circulated alongside masked
selﬁes in 2011 exempli ﬁes, the line between body and machine, with both lungs and
buildings acting as permeable ﬁlters, are increasingly blurred in the production of spaces
to breathe ( Zee, 2015 : 54).
Carbon offset forest in Fujian
I now turn to my own ethnographic ﬁeldwork. Within a carbon offset project in rural
Fujian, a lush, forested province in southeast China, the forest as commons was in tensionwith the notion of an atmospheric commons, as local ecological engagement with the
forest outweighed global concerns of atmospheric composition and climate change.
Moreover, class relations played a key role in restructuring forest work according to thelogics of climate ﬁnance.
Yasen,
1a state forest company, navigated the complexities of carbon trading due to the
inclusion of forestry offsets in Fujian carbon markets. Yasen received a substantialprovincial subsidy, and intended to pro ﬁt from selling carbon credits on the Fujian
emissions exchange. However, generating forest carbon credits involved intricate30 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
accounting, requiring external consultants and signi ﬁcant bureaucratic hurdles. The
company ’s dependence on ﬁnancial expertise from carbon auditing and trading com-
panies meant much of the funding went to these consultants, while pressure increasedinternally through sub-contracting forest management work to local villagers. One of thecompany ’s accountants, Kuaiji, criticized the temporal mismatch between slow ecological
changes and rapid ﬁnancial turnover, as well as how funds dissipated through the division
of labor. Turning the forests into carbon reservoirs also required extensive measurementsby the forest company itself.
Measuring the vegetation in mid-2017 for a carbon capture inventory involved
marking trees and assessing their carbon capture capacities. Forester Celiang initiallysupported the carbon credit scheme, but later questioned whether monetizing individualforest elements was worthwhile, instead emphasizing a more holistic view that forestswere a “public good ”(gongyi ). As he had spent months measuring sample plots, I asked
whether he gained new perspectives on carbon through working on project. He answered:
I didn ’t learn anything new [from taking measures for a carbon offset forest project] in
relation to carbon. I am a biologist ( shengwuxuejia ), very familiar with the carbon cycle. I
mean, all life is carbon-based ( tanji shengwu ), right? So, what I did learn, is how economists
can monetize a natural process, and make money from a tree without cutting it down, butinstead from growing it. It ’s quite clever, even if measuring the plots feels kind of absurd.
Beyond measuring and monitoring exemplary plots of carbon capture in the forest, the
rationale of maximizing the carbon metric was also affecting management practices.Another forester, Haokan, explained how the size of the individual tree and therefore itscapacity to bind carbon dioxide from the atmosphere had become its main measure ofvalue according to the carbon logic. In a training on how to increase forest carbon, theforesters had been instructed to clear the brush and any competing seedlings around agiven “target ”tree that they marked with a cross. However, he found this painful, as
saplings and trees designated for clearing often included rarer species that he found more
ecologically valuable, or simply more aesthetically appealing, “just beautiful, ”and he
found himself secretly leaving them in the forest.
Local forest guardians ( hulinyuan ), part of the “village committee ”governing forest
land held in common, lamented access dif ﬁculties. For instance, Hulin explained that he
often turned a blind eye to activities he deemed inconsequential, despite their problematicstatus within carbon forestry rules. These included hunting, ﬁshing, swimming, and
gathering ﬁrewood in the forests that were of ﬁcially administered by the village com-
mittee, but rented out to the forest bureau, which sought to minimize human “disturbance ”
in the forest.
Mifeng, a driver for Yasen, also navigated this terrain of the forest as a commons for
conservation with his wild beekeeping activities. Raised in the mountains in the 1980s, hejoined Yasen in 2013, ﬁnding satisfaction in both his day job and parallel practice of
beekeeping. His beekeeping skills, learned from his grandfather, had ﬁrst attracted the
attention of the forestry experts who hired him as a driver. After placing bee boxes inprotected areas, he returned annually to harvest honey. Mifeng claimed to have spreadBruckermann 31
thousands of boxes to preserve ancient knowledge and native bee species. Refusing to
quantify his efforts or monetize the honey, he emphasized passion over pro ﬁt.
In January 2018, we climbed a rockface to ﬁnd some of these hives. Pouring golden
honey, Mifeng marveled at the bees ’“miraculous ”(shenqi ) labor. Rejecting extractive
thinking, he believed they shared honey with him in return for his stewardship in
providing housing. Far from conforming to the ﬁnancialization of nature in the heart of the
carbon forest, Mifeng embodied an “ecological consciousness, ”according to local media
that praised him for his forest beekeeping. His vision rejected green arithmetic, andinstead represented a reclaimed pocket of ecological thinking based in a homegrown, non-human labor theory of value that included his apian co-workers.
Carbon in speculative ﬁction in Guangzhou
In downtown Guangzhou, a vibrant mega-city in the Pearl River Delta, employees of a
local government carbon accounting scheme I call Inclusive Carbon were developing aneveryday carbon footprint app for consumers. Discussing their work in a local fast-foodrestaurant in late 2017, they shared their thoughts on building ecological civilization withme. All three believed decarbonization must surpass environmental protection, andadvance technological development to fully realign “humanity and nature ”(renyuziran ).
Aike, a fervent proponent of technological solutions, attributed China ’s ecological
progress to advanced data integration through mobile phone tracking. However, his
enthusiasm extended to a dystopian vision where robotics and arti ﬁcial intelligence,
despite potentially saving the planet, could lead to a confrontation with humanity, re-sulting in either extinction or enslavement. Aike ’s imaginative musings reached a climax
as he humorously envisioned a future where humans might be con ﬁned to zoos, observed
by robots as evolutionary relics. His colleague Yuntian, who had spent several yearsworking on carbon offsets for the UN ’s Clean Development Mechanisms, attempted to
steer our conversation back to carbon-related matters. However, she also found herself
unable to redirect our trajectory from the realms of science ﬁction. Instead, Yuntian
elaborated on her favorite book, The Three-Body Problem (Liu, 2008 ), part of the
contemporary science ﬁction boom sweeping across China. The narrative revolves around
a pact between scientists and a superior alien species to either destroy or reform humanity.
Yuntian empathized with characters who, frustrated by human destructiveness, engage
in a quest for the annihilation or violent reform of humanity to save the planet. In thenovel, this mirrors the protagonists ’experiences during Maoist high socialism, marked by
political campaigns and ecological devastation. Yuntian admired the American character
Mike Evans, who moves to China disaffected with exploitative fossil capitalism, hoping
to initiate “pan-species communism ”through reforestation. Yet, when confronted with the
negative impacts of environmental degradation in the People ’s Republic, Evans supports a
faction seeking humanity ’s total annihilation. The novel entangles frustrated utopian
communism, extractive capitalism, and alien intervention in shaping humanity ’s destiny,
reﬂecting on the complex relationship between ideology and ecological salvation in the
Chinese context.32 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
Carbon in artistic expressions
As discussed above, dystopian impulses around carbon also surfaced in infrastructural
poetics and art installations addressing pollution, like the cynical sale of cans of fresh air
or the circulation of “human vacuum cleaner ”memes. Some artworks, however, offer a
more hopeful horizon for an atmospheric commons in China. For instance, artist KongNing frequently merges intimacy and resistance in her performance art on Chinese streets(Johnson and Fürst, 2022 ). Notably, the evocative union of human matrimony and
environmental de ﬁance in her October 2014 piece entitled “Marrying the Blue Sky ”
epitomizes this fusion of the personal and the political. Adorned in a wedding dresscrafted from 999 white 3M anti-pollution face masks, Kong emerged as a “smog bride ”
who longs to wed the blue sky ( Johnson and Fürst, 2022 ). The artwork ’s poignant irony
lies in its impossible realization, as the emergence of the clear sky heralds the demise of
smog and its emblematic face masks ( Johnson and Fürst, 2022 ). Arguably, this wedding
of the human and the atmosphere captures the intimate union between carbon-based lifewithin a carbon-infused environment.
Similarly, in December 2015, Kong donned an orange dress embellished with orange
plastic horns that resembled megaphones, amplifying the warning calls of “orange alerts ”
during Beijing ’s polluted days. Notably, she re ﬂected on this piece by saying,
I want to use this type of approach to remind people, to urge everyone to take care of
themselves and to pay attention to environmental protection. This is because controllingsmog isn ’t just the government ’s business. Everybody can take action to save energy and
reduce emissions. (China Radio International, 2015, quoted in Johnson and Fürst, 2022 : 82)
Here Kong ’s emphasis on care, and care for the self, as part of caring for the envi-
ronment, come together in a call to action to protect the atmosphere. As I have arguedelsewhere ( Bruckermann, 2023 ), the con ﬂuence of care for the self, the family, and the
environment intersect very acutely in crises of social reproduction and sustainability.
Moreover, Kong ’sd eﬁance of pollution is not individual, but relational. She draws on
ritual idioms and symbolic power to reject reducing a blue sky, or clean air, to a matter ofmechanical, infrastructural, or architectural intervention. Instead, the carbon self emergesfrom the fusion of cosmological and chemical elements in her performance.
Conclusion
This article traced carbon credits back to their roots in the “tragedy ”of the commons. I
examined how economic solutions to climate change involved transforming carbondioxide from the molecular level to a tradeable credit, before exploring how recenttheoretical interventions could return carbon to its elemental form. My central questionwas how an elemental commons in relation to air and atmosphere, could shape vibrantpolitical subjectivities. I argued that an anthropology of carbon shatters the dualism of lifeand non-life both ethnographically and theoretically ( Cross, 2019 ).Bruckermann 33
Theoretically, I sketched how resources-for-humans perspectives on the commons,
often found in academic literature contributing to resource management, offer direct pathsto policy, including the establishment of carbon markets. However, these approaches areinadequate for understanding carbon encounters on the ground, which can enter realms ofspeculation, imagination, and potentiality. Recent interdisciplinary literature on the more-
than-human commons challenges these earlier (often institutional) approaches for being
too formalistic, exclusionary, and anthropocentric ( Bodirsky, 2023 ).“New commons ”
literature, grounded in ethnography of urban commons, is emerging from a Marxiananthropological perspective ( Bodirsky, 2023 ). This research points towards postcapitalist
possibilities, while challenging the stubborn persistence of inequalities of class, race, andgender ( Kalb and Mollona, 2019 ;Susser, 2017 ).
Ethnographic investigation of air and atmosphere in the Chinese world shows that
individuals protect themselves from pollution with masks, ﬁlters, and buildings (see Zee,
2015 ), while sharing in the concern, consequences, and crises of breathing noxious
particles, as they, quite literally, form a community of “a-spiration ”(Choy, 2021 ). In
relation to my own ﬁeldwork, the metric of carbon opened unexpected pathways to the
hopes and dreams that participants in the carbon economy harbor for a world where thecommons become a constitutive element of imagination. Forest carbon offset workers inrural areas, as well as sci- ﬁenthusiasts who doubled as carbon app developers and users,
drew on natural sciences, carbon economics, local histories and speculative futures toenvision possibilities for a more-than-human commons. Speci ﬁcally, foresters re ﬂected
upon the contradictions of isolating carbon dioxide for commodi ﬁcation in biologically
and ecologically informed ways, while others, such as the beekeeper focused on in-terspecies cooperation, took an even more holistic approach. For instance, interactionswith science ﬁction enthusiasts led to visions of human nihilism and pan-species
communism, and they even entertained the possibilities of extraterrestrial and AI en-tanglements. Artistic examples, such as Kong Ning ’s intimate act of marrying the at-
mosphere, challenged the boundaries of the body while reinforcing how care for the selfand the environment can go hand-in-hand.
Building on the above theoretical critiques, utopian impulses of commoning emerged
from ﬁeldwork in the People ’s Republic of China. These encounters raised the possi-
bilities of a carbon poetics suspended in atmospheres and elements, while simultaneouslyuncovering the contradictory forces of extraction and exploitation in carbon economies,and the intimate yet political subjection to its logics. Moreover, my research revealed thecontributions rural imaginaries and digital engagements could make to a coming an-thropology of carbon, not only by blurring the distinction between life and non-life, butalso by enfolding temporal horizons of the future into past experiences and present lives.
Crucially, through this theoretical and ethnographic exploration I emphasized a critical yet
under-acknowledged concern for any future carbon anthropology: the unequal burdenplaced on those sharing in the atmospheric commons.34 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/
or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
ORCID iD
Charlotte Bruckermann https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7115-3034
References
Bodirsky K (2023) The new commons. In: Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Anthropology .
Available at: https://oxfordre.com/anthropology/display/10.1093/acrefore/9780190854584.
001.0001/acrefore-9780190854584-e-351 .
Bruckermann C (2023) Care for the family and the environment in China ’s coal country. The China
Quarterly 254: 325 –339.
Bruckermann C (2024) The good life as the green life: Environmental consciousness between the
country and the city in China. Positions: Asia critique 32(1): 129 –149.
Calel R (2011) Climate Change and Carbon Markets: A Panoramic History. In: Working Paper No.
62. Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy . University of Leeds.
Choy TK (2011) Ecologies of Comparison: An Ethnography of Endangerment in Hong Kong .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Choy T (2021) Externality, breathers, conspiracy: Forms for atmospheric reckoning. In:
Papadopoulos D, Puig de la Bellacasa M and Myers N (eds) Reactivating Elements . Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 231 –256.
Coase RH (1960) The problem of social cost. Journal of Law & Economics 3(Oct.): 1 –44.
Cross J (2019) Life after chemistry or a carbon anthropology. Somatosphere , Available at:
https://somatosphere.com/f orumpost/life-after-chemist ry-or-a-carbon-anthropology/
(accessed 14 December 2024).
Galvez ME and Gaillardet J (2012) Historical constraints on the origins of the carbon cycle concept.
Comptes Rendus Geoscience 344: 549 –567.
Günel G (2014) Ergos: A new energy currency. Anthropological Quarterly 87(2): 359 –379.
Günel G (2016) What is carbon dioxide? When is carbon dioxide? PoLAR 39(1): 33 –45.
Hardin G (1968) The tragedy of the commons. Science 162(3859): 1243 –1248.
Hepburn C (2007) Carbon trading: A review of the Kyoto mechanisms. Annual Review of En-
vironment and Resources .
Johnson T and Fürst K (2022) Praying for blue skies: Artistic representations of air pollution in
China. Modern China 48(1): 73 –104.
Kalb D and Mollona M (2019) Worldwide Mobilizations: Class Struggles and Urban Commoning .
New York: Berghahn.
Liu C (2008) Santi (Three Body) . Chongqing: Chongqing Chubanshe (Chongqing Press).Bruckermann 35
Lo A (2016). Carbon Trading in China: Environmental Discourse and Politics . Houndmills, UK:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Lohmann L (2008) Carbon trading, climate justice and the production of ignorance: Ten examples.
Development 51(3): 359 –365.
Marshall A (1920 [1890]) Principles of Economics , 8th edn. London: Macmillan.
Paavola J (2011) Climate change: The ultimate tragedy of the commons? In: Cole D and Ostrom E
(eds). Property in Land and Other Resources . Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute for Land
Policy.
Papadopoulos D (2018) Experimental Practice: Technoscience, Alterontologies, and More-than-
social Movements . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Papadopoulos D, Puig de la Bellacasa M and Myers N (2021) Introduction: Elements: from
cosmology to episteme and back. In: Papadopoulos D, Puig de la Bellacasa M and Myers N(eds) Reactivating Elements . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1 –17.
Pena-Valderrama S (2016) Entangling Molecules: An Ethnography of a Carbon Offset Project in
Madagascar ’s Eastern Rainforest . UK: Durham University. PhD thesis.
Povinelli E (2016) Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism . Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace of care.
Social Studies of Science 45(5): 691 –716.
Susser I (2017) Introduction: For or against commoning? Focaal –Journal of Global and Historical
Anthropology 79: 1 –5.
Weart S (2008) The Discovery of Global Warming: Revised and Expanded Edition . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Whitington J (2016) Carbon as a metric of the human. PoLAR 39(1): 46 –63.
Whitington J (2020) Earth ’s data: Climate change, Thai carbon markets, and the planetary at-
mosphere. American Anthropologist 122(4): 814 –826.
Yusoff K (2017) Politics of the Anthropocene: Formation of the commons as geologic process.
Antipode 50(1): 255 –276.
Zee J (2015) Breathing in the city: Beijing and the architecture of air. Scapegoat: Architecture,
Landscape, Political Economy 8: 46 –56.
Author Biography
Charlotte Bruckermann is an anthropologist whose research focuses on the imaginaries of
carbon and the role of green labor in shaping China ’s‘ecological civilization ’. Since
completing her DPhil. at the University of Oxford in 2012, she has conducted extensiveethnographic ﬁeldwork across China. Her studies have explored carbon in diverse
contexts, including families in a transitioning coal region, climate ﬁnance experts, de-
velopers of carbon footprint apps in urban areas, and afforestation workers at rural carbon
offset sites. She is currently a lecturer and researcher at the Department of Social andCultural Anthropology and the Global South Studies Center at the University of Cologne.36 Critique of Anthropology 45(1)
