11. Introduction: reimagining ways of 
talking about the Anthropocene
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala
THE ANTHROPOCENE?
In the current epoch, known as the Anthropocene, humans interfere with the 
geological and biological processes of the world to a greater extent and at 
a faster rate than ever before. The term was coined by Nobel laureate Paul 
Crutzen (2002), and it is commonly used to refer to a range of human-induced 
phenomena, such as climate change, mass extinction of species and the pol-
lution of the oceans and the air, which all have profound consequences for 
the wellbeing of every inhabitant of the earth (Crutzen & Stoermer, 2000; 
Hamilton, 2016; Wright et al., 2018).
While it is a contested term (Malm & Hornborg, 2014), the ‘Anthropocene’ 
has aroused an upsurge of interest in the natural and social sciences, as well 
as in fields across the arts and humanities. As a result, journals dedicated to 
the topic, such as Anthropocene  and The Anthropocene Review , have been 
launched, several collaborative projects and seminars have been organised, 
a wealth of books, articles and special issues have been published (e.g. Angus, 
2016; Grusin, 2017; Tsing et al., 2017) and courses on the Anthropocene 
have been included in the curricula of higher education around the world. 
Furthermore, a range of diverse cultural projects engaging with the idea of the 
Anthropocene has been organised all over the globe, such as art exhibitions, 
performances, theatre plays and podcasts. We have also witnessed the emer-
gence of grassroots activism aiming to change ineffectual political and eco-
nomic efforts to transform current modes of living. The world-scale movement 
initiated by 16-year-old Greta Thunberg provides a case in point.
These burgeoning activities act as evidence that the Anthropocene is more 
than merely a term for an epoch (Toivanen et al., 2017); it has proved to be 
a malleable concept used in creative ways in different contexts. Perhaps most 
importantly, it has raised much-needed awareness about the magnitude of the 
environmental problems concerning the earth, inspired people to act and pro-
vided an umbrella term that enables people representing different backgrounds 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 2
and fields to collaborate in solving urgent earthly problems. The debate has 
also deepened common knowledge of the complexity of the ongoing trans-
formation. It has highlighted that all planetary subsystems are deeply inter -
connected, rendering visible the fact that the whole earth, from its crust to the 
outermost reaches of its atmosphere, has been profoundly disrupted by human 
activities (Wright et al., 2018, p. 457). In academia, the Anthropocene has 
facilitated cooperation between disciplines, in particular between the natural 
and social sciences. It has pushed scholars representing different disciplines to 
search for a common ground that would enable them to work together instead 
of falling into the ‘science wars’. The development of geosocial perspectives 
integrated with geological and social-scientific insights provides a good 
example (Clark & Yusoff, 2017). The planetary situation clearly demands this 
kind of collaborative effort.
THE ANTHROPOCENE AS A CRISIS OF THINKING
As the above discussion suggests, alongside the ecological crisis, the 
Anthropocene articulates a crisis of thinking (Zylinska, 2014, p. 19). It 
poses a range of intellectual challenges to scholars, inviting them to develop 
a greater degree of critical reflexivity (Wright et al., 2018). This relates, in 
particular, to the assumptions inscribed in the commonly used conceptual 
categories through which human–nature relations are considered. The debate 
has rendered strikingly evident the fact that ‘natural’ and ‘cultural’ entangle in 
so many ways that their separation must – at last – be questioned, and novel 
formulations introduced.
Nature and culture are so inextricably intertwined in our bodies, our land-
scapes, our technologies and our ways of doing research that the artificial and 
harmful (yet persistent) division merits bridging. The debate has also called 
into question the human-centric foci of much of social-scientific research – as 
well as the question of the ‘human’ in the Anthropocene. While humans are 
considered geological forces, and the very term focalises human impact on 
the earth, not ‘all humans’, but a small a powerful subset living in the global 
north, are primarily responsible for the crisis. The activities of this group are 
fuelled by global corporate capitalism, which is reliant upon continued growth, 
ever-expanding consumption and the use of fossil fuel based energy (Angus, 
2016; Malm, 2016; Moore, 2016; Salminen & Vaden, 2015). Furthermore, 
the Anthropocene demands new reflection on the very category of human, 
which commonly rests on a distinction between biology and culture (Frost, 
2016; Haraway, 2016). By challenging the fantasy of human as separate from 
inhuman, Frost (2016), for instance, proposes a conceptualisation of humans 
as biocultural creatures, and in so doing opens up one possible avenue for 
challenging the human exceptionalism enshrined in disciplinary categories. 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 3
She elucidates the imbrication of the biological and cultural within the cor-
poreal self, building thereby a bridge between humanities and the sciences. In 
the same vein, Wright and his colleagues (2018) remark that ‘purely inhuman 
nature – the imagined object of most science – was never a valid construct 
because the human was always an inextricable element in the view of nature’ 
(p. 457).
This debate has hence encouraged social-scientific scholars to think beyond 
the dichotomy of nature and culture and to recognise that there is a pleth-
ora of other species and creatures living on the same planet besides the 
one named humans. Many scholars have recently argued for the need 
to accord more-than-humans expanded agential status in social-scientific 
inquires instead of treating them as ‘resources’ or as having the role of merely 
‘serving human needs’. As a result, we have witnessed an increasing number 
of social-scientific studies that include more-than-humans in their inquiries 
and make much-needed efforts to find conceptualisations apt for thinking 
about how different earthly creatures could, and should, coexist and co-live 
as kin (e.g. Haraway, 2016; Kalonaityte, 2018; Lorimer, 2015; Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015; Tsing et al., 2017). Furthermore, the development of novel 
pedagogies (Jickling et al., 2018) and methods that enable the exploration of 
life and coexistence in a more-than-human world is underway (e.g. Salmela & 
Valtonen, 2019; Springgay & Truman, 2018; Ulmer, 2017). All in all, then, the 
Anthropocene has stimulated a necessary reflection on the ontological, epis-
temological and methodological assumptions that underpin social-scientific 
knowledge production.
In continuing this timely debate, this book focuses on discussing the 
Anthropocene through the concepts of ethics and politics by emphasising 
the question of space. Many issues of the Anthropocene revolve around the 
question of how space between the human sphere and the rest of the world 
is, or is not, shared – an ethical and political question in itself. Furthermore, 
the Anthropocene profoundly challenges the temporal and spatial horizons of 
ethical actions, rousing novel ethical concerns. Indeed, the ontologies of space 
radically affect the episteme through which human–earth relations are under-
stood, challenging the conventional norms for coexistence between various 
inhabitants of the earth. The Anthropocene also invites us to reassess the often 
Eurocentric, rationalistic and human-centred assumptions baked into ethical 
theories and to explore conceptual and practical links between ethics and poli-
tics. This book therefore seeks to consider the scope of such ethical and polit -
ical analyses in a broad sense to better capture the complex and novel nature 
of these ongoing transformations. It thereby expands the important openings 
made by previous scholars (e.g. Biermann, 2014; Schmidt et al., 2016). The 
guiding question of the book, therefore, reads as: how should the ethics and 
politics of space be thought about in the current epoch? In answering this 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 4
question the book asks, and tries to address, more detailed questions such as 
what does this mean conceptually, politically and empirically? For instance, 
how should we think about ethics when applied not only to humans but also to 
more-than-humans (Beacham, 2018; Kinnunen & Valtonen, 2017; Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015; Zylinska, 2014)? How, then, ought ethical relations between 
various inhabitants of the earth be reimagined? For instance, what does it mean 
for energy politics if we acknowledge that the social and biological intertwine?
To address these pressing questions, this book draws inspiration from 
several up-to-date theoretical sources. For instance, the recent new materialist 
and post-colonialist literatures, which challenge the Western, rational view 
of science and ethics, enable us to better address the social, political and 
environmental injustices that different regions of the world are facing and to 
develop more just, localised solutions (Seppälä, 2016). They also provide apt 
conceptual tools for capturing the complex ways that the social and cultural, 
humans and more-than-humans, are intertwined (Rantala et al., 2019). The 
book also places much emphasis on the lived and embodied experiences of 
people to grasp how the Anthropocene is felt and lived in different spaces and 
places around the globe. The narrative nature of the Anthropocene concept 
forms another crucial characteristic that underpins this book. As narratives 
have performative qualities, causing people to think and act in a particular 
way, it is vital to carefully reflect on the narratives that scholars, among other 
groups, tell.
NARRATIVES OF THE ANTHROPOCENE
While the Anthropocene, as a condition, motivates all the chapters of this 
book, it is primarily the narrative aspect that connects them. Prior scholars 
have identified a range of narratives that inform the way the Anthropocene 
is thought about and acted upon. The Anthropocene opens up an evolution -
ary narrative in itself, which ‘reimagines human origins and endings within 
a geologic rather than an exclusively biological context’ (Yusoff, 2016, p. 3). 
In so doing, it radically rewrites concepts of life, moving ‘from predominantly 
biopolitical notions of life toward an understanding of life’s geophysical 
origination (geontics)’ (Yusoff, 2016, p. 3). The basic narrative also involves 
a debate about the beginning of the Anthropocene, and casts several symbolic 
steps, such as the Industrial Revolution and the Great Acceleration that fol-
lowed the Second World War, as key markers of the transformation. The end, 
for the narrative’s part, is concerned with the future of humanity, or the planet 
after humans, displaying either a ‘good Anthropocene’ with ‘happy endings’ 
or more dystopian and apocalyptic alternatives (Toivanen et al., 2017).
On the other hand, the ‘business-as-usual’ narrative downplays or even 
denies the existence of an earthly crisis. Advocates of such a narrative (i.e. 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 5
global corporations and political elites) continue to rely on the current neo-
liberal agenda valuing business expansion and growth and viewing the earth 
as ‘simply a source of natural resources and a sink for the disposal of our 
economies’ (Wright et al., 2018, p. 460). The ‘techno-rational’ narrative, in 
turn, portrays the crisis as a business opportunity, based on the optimistic 
belief that new technology, corporate innovations, economic development and 
markets can enable the minimisation of planetary harm and ultimately remake 
the world (for a critique, see e.g. Heikkurinen, 2017; Wright et al., 2018). The 
heroic role accorded to markets and technology is visible, for instance, in the 
development of new green products, green technology and geoengineering. 
This narrative thus promotes the view that these problems can be solved by the 
same means that caused them in the first place.
In contrast to worldviews portrayed in these two narratives, this book advo-
cates – as do many others (Wright et al., 2018; Heikkurinen, 2017) – a more 
radical reimagination of prevalent economic and social structures, as well as 
associated systems of belief. It also promotes a plurality of narratives about 
the Anthropocene, rather than a single grand narrative. Here, plurality refers to 
the range of voices represented in the narratives: voices from different spheres 
of the world, from different groups of people in terms of class, gender and 
ethnicity, from activists and from those who are most vulnerable to the crisis. 
The ‘voice’ of the more-than-humans must be included. With plurality, we also 
refer to the worldviews exhibited in these narratives – and the very style of nar-
rating as such. Reimaging ways of telling narratives about the Anthropocene, 
such as through the arts, is an important step, as it offers a new and potentially 
far more extensive way of ‘seeing, sensing, thinking, and dreaming that creates 
the conditions for material interventions in, and political sensibilities of the 
world’ (Yusoff & Gabrys, 2011, p. 516; see Wright et al., 2018, pp. 464–465). 
As Zylinska notes (2014, p. 11), stories have a performative nature: they can 
enact, not just describe, things. They have the power to promise some futures 
and conceal others. The work of telling new stories is not an easy practice; it 
requires ongoing engagement and a willingness to unpack the social, disci-
plinary and ideological structures within which we are embedded (Loveless, 
2019, p. 20).
TOWARD SITUATED NARRATIVES IN 
A MORE-THAN-HUMAN WORLD
The uniqueness of this book lies in the fact that it outlines new and more 
radical ways of addressing the current crisis. To this end, it envisages 
a narrative of change that renders visible the range of transformations taking 
place throughout the globe. This allows us, we posit, to better capture the 
complex nature of these ongoing transformations, and to alter unjust practices 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 6
and power structures in a more sustainable and context-specific manner. 
Importantly, this new narrative highlights the localised and situated nature 
of the Anthropocene, allowing the differences between regions and contexts 
– and subsequent ethical and political questions – to be taken seriously. In 
other words, such a view urges us to discuss ethics in specific social, political, 
environmental and cultural contexts (Cui & Xu, 2019). It also highlights the 
potentiality residing in non-Western ways of relating to and living on the earth, 
taking more-than-humans into account.
Ontologically, this book challenges the practice of assigning different forms 
of life to normatively fixed roles and categories, engaging instead in thinking 
about the world in terms of continuity, openness and messiness. This ontology 
functions as the inspiration for conceptual innovation. This book employs 
and develops a number of concepts that open up intriguing insights into the 
ethics and politics of space in the Anthropocene. To illustrate, concepts such 
as more-than-human care, scientific fabulation, prefigurative epistemologies, 
resistance, activism, technologies, sacredness and human–energy–nature rela -
tionships invite the reader to engage in critical reflection about how to tackle 
the earthy crisis.
Thus, the core pillars that form the base of the narrative outlined in this 
book are (1) the generation of situated in-depth knowledge, (2) the recog-
nition of non-Western knowledge and (3) the entanglement of humans and 
more-than-humans. Next, we elaborate on these pillars.
Situated In-Depth Knowledge
Due to the dominant role of the natural sciences in defining the Anthropocene, 
and the earth-level scale inscribed into the very concept, many studies have 
produced macro-level analyses based upon natural-scientific, statistical and 
quantitative methods and measures. While this kind of knowledge is vitally 
important, no doubt, and widely used in well-known reports and studies, 
such as those of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and 
the Global Footprint Network, it seems to be ineffective in eliciting change 
(Bonnedahl & Heikkurinen, 2018). Much of the diverse social and cultural 
phenomena related to the Anthropocene are, indeed, resistant to modelling 
(Palsson et al., 2013, p. 6). Furthermore, such a macro-level approach creates 
a homogenising and universalising account of the earth, neglecting the vast 
biological, geographical and social particularities, inequalities and complex -
ities of different regions and contexts. Therefore, there is a pressing need 
for more situated and localised analyses of the Anthropocene, as noted by 
many (Biermann et al., 2016; Palsson & Swanson, 2016). Moreover, Forrest 
Clingerman (Chapter 2 in this book) calls for emplaced analyses, arguing that 
‘participation in political life is possible only when political action recognizes 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 7
and upholds the need to flourish in a location, context, or place’. These situated 
analyses necessitate the development and employment of methods suitable for 
enabling the provision of in-depth and down-to-earth knowledge of the social 
and environmental changes taking place in different regions, as well as for 
gaining an understanding of how these changes are lived-with and experienced 
by different groups.
The chapters in this book respond to this challenge by offering situated and 
empirically well-grounded analyses of various places and spaces around the 
globe. The offered analyses remain sensitive to the biological, geological and 
social – as well as ethical and political – particularities and complexities of the 
places in question. The chapters also exemplify the use of a range of methods 
that enable researchers to grasp how human–nature relations are articulated in 
these places at a grassroots level. For instance, Outi Rantala, Anu Valtonen 
and Tarja Salmela (Chapter 3) explore the lively relationalities between 
human bodies and rocks by employing the walking method (Springgay & 
Truman, 2018) in the context of a national park situated in Finnish Lapland. 
Their chapter also articulates a different story than is commonly told about the 
Arctic, of which Finnish Lapland is a part. Staging rocks, instead of melting 
ice and polar bears, illustrates how small, situated stories can provide a more 
nuanced picture of life lived and experienced in the Anthropocene.
The power of small, situated stories is further highlighted by the study of 
Emily Höckert (Chapter 4). By using the familiar practice of telling fairy 
tales, she sets out to reimagine the practice of storytelling and story-listening 
in the Anthropocene. The chapter deliberates on the ways in which scientific 
fables would allow us to gather around matters of care in more-than-human 
worlds. The introduced conceptual innovation of scientific fabulation allows 
multiple voices to be involved in the narrative of the Anthropocene and regards 
complicating, specifying, slowing down and hesitating as important aspects 
of narration. Such notions give voices to more-than-humans, an act that is 
urgently needed, and creates new forms of language and representation that 
help to speculate on the futures of humanity and the planet.
Afroja Khanam and Tiina Seppälä (Chapter 5) and Paul Routledge (Chapter 
6), in turn, bring us to Bangladesh, one of the countries in the world most 
vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and rising sea levels. Khanam and 
Seppälä analyse the injustices faced by displaced people and communities in 
two slums in Dhaka. Throughout their in-depth fieldwork, they use a mixture 
of qualitative methods (e.g. interviews, observations, group discussions) to 
give voices to marginalised people and to highlight the forms of resistance 
and grassroots activism they enacted to take agency. Routledge’s study, for its 
part, is based upon a prolonged ethnographic and collaborative engagement 
with two rural-based peasant movements in Bangladesh. It presents politically 
engaged research among the rural poor. By highlighting – and contesting – 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 8
unequal social and environmental relations, as well as the historical legacy 
behind them, his study works toward an ethical politics of climate justice that 
acts through interventions. Then, in Chapter 7, Arbita Bisht gives a voice to 
the Adivasis, the indigenous people of India, many of whom are dispossessed 
of their land due to ‘development’ projects. She presents a document-based 
analysis of ecological distribution conflicts related to mineral extraction, high-
lighting social resistance movements that aim at defending the cultural and 
sacred spaces of Adivasi  communities against exploitation.
All these chapters contest the capitalist, growth-based and techno-oriented 
business-as-usual narrative, demonstrating how it brings about uneven solu-
tions both socially and environmentally in different local contexts. In contrast, 
the chapters highlight how local-level activism, interventions, resistances and 
social movements can be mobilised to work toward justice, equality, dignity 
and rights. They also demonstrate how local-level resistance can act as a pow-
erful mediator of transformation. In so doing, they exemplify how the alterna -
tive narrative of the Anthropocene that includes political action, protest, civil 
disobedience and community engagement is put into practice (Wright et al., 
2018, p. 463). Altogether, these contributions provide a rich body of contextual 
understanding from different places and spaces around the world, entangling 
with social, legislative, ethical and political issues.
Furthermore, in Chapter 10, Paolo Davide Farah and Marek Prityi highlight 
the role of agile governance in addressing ‘wicked problems’ related to the 
Anthropocene, such as climate change. They argue that agile governance 
systems must include a broad array of stakeholders with both vertical and 
horizontal governance backgrounds – from local, state, national and interna -
tional levels to the private, public and non-governmental organisation (NGO) 
sectors. These forms of governance, based solely on collaboration, aim to 
ensure that democratic principles are not compromised as a result of the need 
to address the issues presented by the Anthropocene. Seen from the perspective 
of ‘the knowledge generation’, stakeholder collaboration may allow access to 
the expertise necessary to combat false narratives. In the context of the global 
north–south divide, collaborative approaches harness the potential to improve 
both mitigative and adaptive paradigms for addressing climate change. In so 
doing, the chapter illustrates the way geographical and social particularities, 
inequalities and complexities of different regions and contexts could be taken 
into account when earthly challenges are addressed.
Recognising Non-Western Knowledge
Many scholars have raised concerns that the narrative of the Anthropocene 
continues to reproduce the Western – and masculine – rationalistic world-
view (e.g. Springgay & Truman, 2018). This is strikingly visible in the 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 9
techno-rational narrative that assumes environmental problems should, and 
could, be solved by technology. As Grusin (2017) points out:
Scientists and engineers continue to rely on many of the same masculinist and 
human-centred solutions that have created the problems in the first place, whether 
through offsetting carbon emissions, by developing new and cleaner energy sources, 
or, most dramatically, through heroic agency of geoengineering. (p. ix)
Furthermore, environmental politics scholar Lövbrand (Wright et al., 2018) 
aptly notes that the concept of the Anthropocene has emerged within 
a historically situated context dominated by modernist and masculinist forms 
of science, which contributes to proposed science-led solutions, such as 
geoengineering.
Relying on a Western, rationalist view of science and knowledge is also 
problematic, as it downplays different worldviews and understandings of 
knowledge, including local and indigenous knowledge. As a result, while 
the people of the global south are dramatically affected by the economic 
and political activities of those of the global north, their own knowledge and 
ways of thinking about nature–culture relations is not given adequate value or 
recognition. To overcome this scientific bias, Zylinska (2014, pp. 14–15) talks 
about a ‘post-masculinist rationality’ and ‘post-masculinist politics’. The aim 
is not, then, to exert control over everything through the force of instrumental 
rationality, but rather to face the uncertainty, the unpredictable and specula -
tive nature of things (see also Puig de la Bellacasa, 2012). This book aligns 
with this suggestion; it responds to Western rationalism by giving a voice to 
non-Western people and their own worldviews and systems of belief and by 
employing theoretical sources that depart from the masculinist, rational modes 
of science.
As exemplified in the above-mentioned studies conducted in Bangladesh 
and India, voices are given to the marginalised people of the global south. 
The study of Bisht on the Adivasi indigenous community (Chapter 7) brings 
to the fore a worldview that contrasts with the prevalent Western one. For the 
Adivasis, nature has value in itself: their cultural identity, livelihood, ways of 
living and social structures are deeply embedded within local ecosystems. No 
wonder, then, that they face conflicts with the economically and politically 
powerful groups for whom nature – forests and minerals – represents merely 
monetary value. Khanam and Seppälä (Chapter 5), for their part, base their 
study on slum communities in Dhaka on the epistemological conviction 
that researchers must listen to the voices of the excluded and marginalised. 
Importantly, instead of theorising about them from a distance, they try rather to 
build theory with them, in dialogue. This epistemological approach, informed 
by the post-colonial theorist Motta (2011) in particular, seeks to transcend the 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 10
binary between theoretical and practical knowledge, challenging, in particular, 
the presumption that the researcher has ‘the epistemic privilege’ in produc-
ing theoretical knowledge. Rather, in prefigurative epistemologies, as their 
approach is called, theory is produced collectively via reflection and is based 
upon the lived experiences and struggles of excluded and marginalised com-
munities. Speaking and theorising from the epistemological margins provides 
one way of leveraging more equal and sustainable insights for policymaking.
Post-colonial theories, together with lived experiences, are also employed 
by Höckert (Chapter 4), who uses them to challenge the idea of knowledge as 
completed and distanced, as well as to unpack the often problematic nature–
culture or human–animal relations portrayed in fairy tales, which perpetuate 
the Western economic worldviews underpinning these stories. The dominant 
legacy of science is further challenged by Rantala, Valtonen and Salmela 
(Chapter 3), who draw from feminist new materialist literature to problematise 
and refigure human–nature relations.
The Entanglement of Humans and More-Than-Humans
The Anthropocene has accentuated the need to recognise and retheorise the 
more-than-human inhabitants of the earth, such as animals, plants, trees, 
minerals or bacteria (Haraway, 2016; Lorimer, 2015). While there has 
been a tendency in the Western scientific legacy to think of humans and 
more-than-humans as separate entities, and to accord active agency only to the 
former, recent theorisations have challenged this assumption. Barad (2003), 
among others (Alaimo & Hekman 2008; Bennett, 2010), has forcefully argued 
for the need to grant agency to more-than-humans and to think of the rela -
tion between them and humans in terms of entanglement. This need is quite 
understandable if we consider the issue of plastics (Hawkins, 2017a, b) and, 
in particular, the ubiquity of micro-plastics: they can now be found in oceans, 
freshwater lakes, air, fish, birds, mosquitoes – and human bodies are no excep-
tion. Our bodily systems are inextricably intertwined with the micro-plastics 
that have entered them. Post-masculinist rationality might help in tackling this 
kind of situation. It calls for a different understanding of rationality, one that 
is ‘always already embodied and immersed, responding to the call of matter 
and to its various materialisations – materialisations such as humans, animals, 
plants, inanimate objects, as well as the relations between them’ (Zylinska, 
2014, pp. 14–15).
The chapters in this book provide several examples of how humans and 
more-than-humans coexist and entangle. Chapter 2, by Clingerman, while 
deliberating on the imaginative and conceptual effects of the Anthropocene 
in the political sphere, argues that ‘we must discover ways to “re-place” 
the Anthropocene within the task of imagination and our future, and to 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 11
do so in a way that engages the complexity and uniqueness of human and 
more-than-human communities’. This complexity and uniqueness are empir -
ically demonstrated by Rantala, Valtonen and Salmela (Chapter 3), who 
explore the ways in which humans and rocks relate and intertwine in the 
context of a national park. They accord agency to rocks and demonstrate how 
they are intertwined with embodied and affective human knowers, both shaped 
by and shaping them. This way of thinking allows them to offer a complex 
picture of how more-than-human care is articulated in that particular context.
Giovanni Frigo (Chapter 8) sets out to explore the transition of energy 
from fossil fuels to renewable and sustainable energy sources. His conceptual 
study starts from the premise that such a transition implies the transformation 
of complex energy systems and is intertwined with a range of economic, 
gendered, socio-political, religious and eco-systemic dimensions. To grasp 
this complexity, he coins the term ‘human–energy–nature relationship’ to 
highlight how various biological and cultural relations are embedded in it. 
Such a notion, he suggests, facilitates a reorientation toward eco-centric under-
standing. Thus, Frigo claims that we need to recognise the intrinsic value of the 
more-than-human inhabitants of the earth, listing the possible effects of this 
recognition on environmental law.
Chapter 9, by Jana Lozanoska, employs Hannah Arendt’s political theory 
to analyse the intersection between temporality, technology and justice in the 
Anthropocene. Starting from the premise that growing technological develop-
ments have shifted conceptions of humanity, the chapter focuses on Arendt’s 
concept of ‘non-time space’ to explore the idea of justice, suggesting that it is 
in this small crack of time and space that a temporality of judgement occurs. 
The chapter elaborates that technology relates to public space, politics and 
justice itself. It does not lean on the techno-utopic narrative that casts technol -
ogy as a means to tackle environmental problems, but rather it suggests that 
unpredictable new beginnings play a crucial part in the human condition of 
plurality, which is characterised by apolitical freedom and political equality, 
a concept Arendt attempts to teach us.
STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
Taken together, the contributions to this book provide a diverse, timely and 
perhaps provocative set of perspectives on the Anthropocene. The contributors 
come from a number of different disciplinary backgrounds, including law, 
organisational studies, tourism studies, philosophy, cultural geography, politi -
cal sciences and international relations.
The chapters are grouped into three thematic parts. The first part of the 
book – Reimaginations – opens up the conceptual landscape of the debates 
surrounding the Anthropocene and reveals pathways to reimaginations. First, 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 12
in Chapter 2, Clingerman provides an up-to-date critique of the concept 
of the Anthropocene, discussing its legacies and challenges, as well as its 
potentialities for and reimaginations of thinking about place and space in the 
Anthropocene. Second, Rantala, Valtonen and Salmela discuss in Chapter 3 
how the concept of care must be reimagined when it is applied to the local 
context of ‘walking-with’ rocks in an Arctic region. They thereby provide 
a contextual, micro-level analysis of more-than-human care, with the help 
of a novel method. Third, in Chapter 4, Höckert sets out to reimagine the 
practice of storytelling and story-listening, deliberating on the ways in which 
scientific fables allow us to gather around matters of care in more-than-human 
worlds. The introduced conceptual innovation of scientific fabulation allows 
multiple voices to be involved in the narrative of the Anthropocene, regarding 
complicating, specifying, slowing down and hesitating as important aspects of 
narration.
The second part of this book – Stories from Marginalised Communities 
– presents studies conducted within marginalised communities in the global 
south, namely Bangladesh and India. It grants voices to often-silenced and 
marginalised groups, such as poor peasants, displaced people, slum communi -
ties and indigenous people. By providing down-to-earth analyses of everyday 
struggles, conflicts, social movements, interventions and grassroots activism 
enacted in these vulnerable contexts, the chapters by Khanem and Seppälä 
(Chapter 5), Routledge (Chapter 6) and Bisht (Chapter 7) render visible the 
experiences of people affected by the practices of the economic and political 
elite (such as mining, ‘development’ or biotechnologies), demonstrating how 
marginalised people take agency to respond to the exploitation they face. 
These studies also render visible worldviews that portray nature–culture rela-
tions beyond monetary terms, thereby opening up a different system of belief 
that merits respect. In so doing, this part develops a view of epistemology that 
values non-Western local knowledge and know-how, questioning the epis-
temic privilege of scientific knowledge.
The third part of this book – Law and Technology – takes up the issues of 
technology, law and justice, pondering their significant yet changing role in 
the debates surrounding the Anthropocene. The contributions of this part lean 
on different theoretical perspectives to reimagine prevalent ways of thinking 
about key concepts and practices. For instance, in Chapter 8, Frigo employs 
a philosophical perspective to reimagine the energy transition from fossil 
fuels to renewable energy sources. Through the term human–energy–nature 
relationship, he captures the complexity of various biological and cultural 
relations embedded in the use of energy. As such, he facilitates a reorientation 
of the human–energy–nature relationship toward eco-centric understanding. 
In Chapter 9, Lozanoska mobilises Hannah Arendt’s work to analyse the 
intersection between temporality, technology and justice in the Anthropocene. 
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 13
Assuming first that growing technological developments have transformed 
conceptions of humanity, the chapter takes up Arendt’s concept of non-time 
space to explore the idea of justice: it is in this small crack of time and space 
that a temporality of judgement occurs. Farah and Prityi (Chapter 10) introduce 
the age of the Anthropocene through reference to both the warnings of expert 
reports and the urgency of several challenges associated with the epoch. They 
describe the challenges and implications that such climatic chaos presents for 
governance and how such unprecedented challenges must be tackled by agile 
governance systems that include a broad array of stakeholders from both verti -
cal and horizontal governance backgrounds, ranging from local, state, national 
and international levels to the private, public and NGO sectors. Chapter 11 by 
Farah wraps up the contents of the volume by discussing the ways in which the 
approach proposed in the book contributes to the debate on the Anthropocene.
REFERENCES
Alaimo, S., & Hekman, S. (2008). Material feminism . Indiana University Press.
Angus, I. (2016). Facing the Anthropocene: Fossil capitalism and the crisis of the earth 
system. Monthly Review.
Barad, K. (2003). Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how 
matter comes to matter. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , 28(3), 
801–831. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1086/ 345321.
Beacham, J. (2018). Organising food differently: Towards a more-than-human ethics of 
care for the Anthropocene. Organization, 25(4), 533–549. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177/ 
1350508418777893.
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant matter . Duke University Press.
Biermann, F. (2014). Earth system governance: World politics in the Anthropocene . 
MIT Press.
Biermann, F., Bai, X., Bondre, N., Broadgate, W., Chen-Tung, A., Dube, O. P., Willem 
Erisman, J., Sandravan der Hel, M. G., Seitzinger, M. C., & Seto, K. C. (2016). 
Down to earth: Contextualizing the Anthropocene. Global Environmental Change, 
39(July), 341–350. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1016/ j .gloenvcha .2015 .11 .004.
Bonnedahl, K. J., & Heikkurinen, P. (Eds). (2018). Strongly sustainable societies: 
Organizing human activities on a hot and full earth . Routledge.
Clark, N., & Yusoff, K. (2017). Geosocial formations and the Anthropocene. Theory, 
Culture and Society, 34(2–3), 3–23. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177 %2F0263276416688946.
Crutzen, P. J. (2002). Geology of mankind: The Anthropocene. Nature, 415(6867), 23. 
https:// doi .org/ 10 .1038/ 415023a.
Crutzen, P. J., & Stoermer, E. F. (2000). Have we entered the ‘Anthropocene’? IGBP 
Global Change Newsletter , 41, 17.
Cui, Q., & Xu, H. (2019). Situating animal ethics in Thai elephant tourism. Asia Pacific 
Viewpoint , 60(3), 267–279. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1111/ apv .12221.
Frost, S. (2016). Biocultural creatures: Towards a new theory of the human. Duke 
University Press.
Grusin, R. (2017). Anthropocene feminism . University of Minnesota Press.
Hamilton, C. (2016). The Anthropocene as rupture. The Anthropocene Review , 3(2), 
93–106. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177 %2F2053019616634741.
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Ethics and politics of space for the Anthropocene 14
Haraway, D. (2016). Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene . Duke 
University Press.
Hawkins, G. (2017a). Plastics. In I. Szeman, J. Wenzel, & P. Fordham Yaeger Fordham 
(Eds), Fueling culture: 101 words for energy and environment  (pp. 271–274). 
Fordham University Press.
Hawkins, G. (2017b). Ethical blindness: Plastics, disposability and the art of not caring. 
In V. Kinnunen & A. Valtonen (Eds), Living ethics  (pp. 15–28). University of 
Lapland.
Heikkurinen, P. (Ed.). (2017). Sustainability and peaceful coexistence for the 
Anthropocene . Routledge.
Jickling, B., Blenkinsop, S., Timmerman, N., & De Danann Sitka-Sage, M. (Eds). 
(2018). Wild pedagogies: Touchstones for re-negotiating education and the environ-
ments in the Anthropocene . Palgrave Macmillan.
Kalonaityte, V. (2018). When rivers go to court: The Anthropocene in organization 
studies through the lens of Jacques Ranciere. Organization, 25(4), 517–532. https:// 
doi .org/ 10 .1177 %2F1350508418775830.
Kinnunen, V., & Valtonen, A. (Eds). (2017). Living ethics in a more-than-human 
world. University of Lapland.
Lorimer, J. (2015). Wildlife in the Anthropocene: Conservation after nature. University 
of Minnesota Press.
Loveless, N. (2019). How to make art at the end of the world: A manifesto for 
research-creation. Duke University Press.
Malm, A. (2016). Fossil capital: The roots of steam power and the roots of global 
warming. Verso.
Malm, A., & Hornborg, A. (2014). The geology of mankind? A critique of the 
Anthropocene narrative. The Anthropocene Review , 1(1), 62–69. https:// doi .org/ 10 
.1177 %2F2053019613516291.
Moore, J. W. (Ed.). (2016). Anthropocene or capitalocene? Nature, history, and the 
crisis of capitalism . PM Press.
Motta, S. (2011). Notes towards prefigurative epistemologies. In S. C. Motta & A. G. 
Nilsen (Eds), Social movements in the global south: Dispossession, development and 
resistance in the global south (pp. 178–199). Palgrave Macmillan.
Palsson, G., & Swanson, H. A. (2016). Down to earth: Geosocialities and geopoli -
tics. Environmental Humanities, 8(2), 149–171. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1215/ 22011919 
-3664202.
Palsson, G., Szerszynski, B., Sörlin, S., Marks, J., Avrile, B., Crumley, C., Hackmanng, 
H., Holm, P., Ingram, J., Kirman, A., Buendía, M. P., & Weehuizenl, R. (2013). 
Reconceptualizing the ‘anthropos’ in the Anthropocene: Integrating the social 
sciences and humanities in global environmental change research. Environmental 
Science and Policy , 28(April), 3–13. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1016/ j .envsci .2012 .11 .004.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2012). ‘Nothing comes without its world’: Thinking with 
care. The Sociological Review , 60(2), 197–216. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1111 %2Fj .1467 
-954X .2012 .02070 .x.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and 
the pace of care. Social Studies of Science , 45(5), 691–716. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177 
%2F0306312715599851.
Rantala, O., Höckert, E., & Ilola, H. (2019). ‘Knowing-with’ in the era of the 
Anthropocene. Matkailututkimus , 15(2), 4–8. https:// doi .org/ 10 .33351/ mt .88263.
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

Introduction: reimagining ways of talking about the Anthropocene 15
Salmela, T., & Valtonen, A. (2019). Towards collective ways of knowing in the 
Anthropocene: Walking-with multiple others. Matkailututkimus , 15(2), 18–32. 
https:// doi .org/ 10 .33351/ mt .88267.
Salminen, A., & Vaden, T. (2015). Energy and experience: An essay on naftology . 
M.C.M.
Schmidt, J. J., Brown, P. G., & Orr, C. J. (2016). Ethics in the Anthropocene: 
A research agenda. The Anthropocene Review , 3(3), 188–200. https:// doi .org/ 10 
.1177 %2F2053019616662052.
Seppälä, T. (2016). Feminizing resistance, decolonizing solidarity: Contesting neolib -
eral development in the global south. Journal of Resistance Studies , 2(1), 12–47.
Springgay, S., & Truman S. E. (2018). Walking methodologies in a more-than-human 
world: WalkingLab. Routledge.
Toivanen, T., Lummaa, K., Majava, A., Järvensivu, P., Lähde, V., Vaden, T., & 
Eronen, T. J. (2017). The many Anthropocenes: A transdisciplinary challenge for the 
Anthropocene research. The Anthropocene Review , 4(3), 183–198. https:// doi .org/ 10 
.1177/ 2053019617738099.
Tsing, A. L. (2017). The mushroom at the end of the world: On the possibility of life in 
capitalist ruins . Princeton University Press.
Ulmer, J. B. (2017). Posthumanism as research methodology: Inquiry in the 
Anthropocene. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education , 30(9), 
832–838. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1080/ 09518398 .2017 .1336806.
Wright, C., Nyberg, D., Rickards, L., & Freund, J. (2018). Organizing in the 
Anthropocene. Organization, 25(4), 455–471. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177 
%2F1350508418779649.
Yusoff, K. (2016). Anthropogenesis: Origins and endings in the Anthropocene. Theory, 
Culture and Society , 33(2), 3–28. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1177 %2F0263276415581021.
Yusoff, K., & Gabrys, J. (2011). Climate change and the imagination. WIREs Climate 
Change, 2(4), 516–534. https:// doi .org/ 10 .1002/ wcc .117.
Zylinska, J. (2014). Minimal ethics for the Anthropocene . Open Humanities Press.
Anu Valtonen and Outi Rantala - 9781839108709
Downloaded from https://www.elgaronline.com/ at 10/07/2025 10:48:37PM
via free access

