Social Analysis: The International Journal of Anthropology, Volume 68, Issue 2, 1–20  
© The Author(s) •  doi:10.3167/sa.2024.680201 • ISSN 0155-977X (Print) • ISSN 1558-5727 (Online)IntroductIon
Bioethical Regimes and Commoning Practices
Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist 
Abstract: This introduction outlines an approach to commons that cap -
tures and responds to intersecting social, environmental, and political 
complications. The extractive power of states and corporations has long 
threatened the lives and livelihoods of the poor. However, contemporary 
local struggles are not adequately understood by frameworks that rest 
exclusively on social and political power. Climate change and the lin -
gering effects of colonial and industrial extraction multiply the threats to the wider ecologies on which human lives depend. Debates on the 
commons have addressed such struggles, but without sufficient atten-
tion to the diverse bioethical regimes that underpin conventional com -
mons. We propose that such attention can inform analyses by moving 
beyond the narrow singularities of modern categories. Our introduction 
lays the groundwork for an approach to the commons that pays attention 
to multiple and intersecting modes of dispossession, while also looking 
at convening or ‘commoning’ practices that are oriented toward building 
alternative relational worlds.
Keywords:  Anthropocene, bioethical regimes, commoning, commons, 
compound dispossession, environmental justice
On 15 March 2023, in a provisional courtroom in Deatnu -Tana, North Norway, 
the Finnmark Commission is gathered for a two-day hearing of local rights 
claims concerning the landscape and seascape. Wivian, a woman in her sixties who identifies as coastal Sámi, is asked to take a seat at the table facing the 
members of the commission. Like many other villagers giving testimonies dur -
ing the hearing, she makes detailed references to long-established practices. She 
talks about berry-picking, fetching sea trout from the fjord and Arctic charr from the river, collecting grass and branches to feed sheep, hunting, cutting seaweed, picking seagull eggs, and gathering turf for burning. After a while, a member of the commission asks: “Has your family ever asked for permission to do this?” 
This article is available open access under a CC BY NC ND 4.0 license as part of Berghahn Open Anthro, 
a subscribe-to-open model for APC-free open access made possible by the journal’s subscribers.
2   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
Wivian responds that except for when cutting firewood, they have never asked 
for permission. Then she adds: “Regarding asking for permission, nature is not 
there just for our use . We always ask for permission. And we never take more 
than we need.” The commission member looks puzzled for the moment and 
then asks about her neighbors, whereupon Wivian responds: “They also ask for 
permission. And like us, they do not take more than they need.”
The commission member’s question suggests that the resources that Wivian 
uses are not self-evidently hers to take; her sense of entitlement does not pre -
clude competing property claims. Wivian’s response indicates that she concurs 
with this position, but it is also clear that her understanding of the source of 
the necessary permission does not coincide with that of the commission mem -
ber. While the commission member’s question suggests the possible existence 
of conflicting property claims, and an institutional authority with the power to 
settle these, Wivian’s response challenges this assumption, invoking a notion 
of permission that includes the rights and needs of other-than-human beings 
and other-than-human forces. To take no more than one needs is to show 
restraint and to preserve life-giving resources for future use by oneself and 
others. Her position recognizes a multi-dimensional relationality as opposed to 
individual rights established by a singular authoritative law.
The Finnmark Commission, which was set up to investigate rights of use 
and ownership in the region at a time of political and environmental transi -
tion, was the outcome of a political process to mitigate a series of disposses -
sions suffered by the Sámi indigenous minority. In 2005, the Finnmark Act 
transferred the legal responsibility for the management of 95 percent of the 
land and natural resources of Finnmark county from the Norwegian state to 
a newly established regional body, the Finnmark Estate, managed by a board 
with equal representation from the Sami Parliament of Norway and the Finn -
mark County Council (Ween and Lien 2012). This legal arrangement required 
the ongoing negotiation of diverse local interests and concerns. Wivian had 
come to the Commission to uphold her local user rights in response to the 
planned expansion of a quartz mine. The mining company, Elkem, is seen by 
some as contributing to the viability of the local village, but others worry that 
the planned expansion will result in irreversible enclosures and threaten sub -
sistence practices in the local estuary and hillsides (Ween 2020). The expansion 
will also complicate the livelihoods of reindeer herders who have never owned 
pasture as private property, but instead rely on access to extensive pastures 
along seasonal migration routes (Lien, this issue). For Wivian, as for the rein -
deer owners, such rights exceed the legal terminology of the state and evoke 
ethics and sociality beyond the human domain.
We open our discussion of future commons with this example because it 
allows us to acknowledge the ongoing importance of what might be referred to as 
‘traditional commons’, while also drawing attention to the many complications 
Introduction    |   3
and provocations that take us beyond the story of a local community struggling 
against the extractive interests of a mining company. There are real challenges 
posed by the question of how to balance ownership rights against access rights, 
and between institutional permissions enshrined in legal frameworks against 
other-than-human permissions that rest on alternative notions of authority, as 
Wivian’s case indicates. The Finnmark Commission  has been asked to inves -
tigate the existence of user rights and property rights in a place that is marked 
by the reverberations of assimilation and colonial practices, where the formal -
ization of rights is uneven, and where there is no singular vision of a common 
viable future.
The Sámi example may superficially appear to juxtapose commons to prop -
erty, but Wivian’s intervention is also a reminder of the stubborn existence of 
commoning practices, in spite of historical and contemporary dispossession. 
The Sámi, like most others, are not in agreement with each other about optimal 
solutions. Some see mining operations as the most viable option for continu -
ity. Yet Sámi voices also extend understandings of what it takes to protect and 
sustain the fundamental conditions of existence in the face of climate change, 
environmental degradation, and widespread species extinction. They insist on 
drawing attention to alternatives (Joks et al. 2020). They also demonstrate the 
need to fight for a common ground, and to draw attention to the intrinsic mul -
tiplicity of ecological futures, even in the face of imminent loss.
The ‘commons’ has always been conceptually oriented to analyze the politics 
of differential access to life. Today, when climate change and environmental deg -
radation dramatically alter the distribution of basic resources (including air, food, 
and water), there is an urgent need to reconsider how the commons, as an ana -
lytical tool, can generate new insights into the complexities that such changes 
bring about. We thus propose to extend the concept of the commons beyond 
issues of access to land and/or collective ownership to include an ethnographic 
focus on (1) compound, multi-layered forms of dispossession; (2) the historically 
specific bioethical regimes that shape diverse, often conflicting understandings 
of environmental justice; (3) the ways in which contemporary theorization of 
the commons addresses the ongoing transformation of bioethical regimes; and 
(4) the ‘commoning’ or ‘convening’ practices, that are locally deployed to build 
a more expansive understanding and enactment of commons in response to 
contemporary modes of dispossession.
Compound Dispossessions
Access to common foundations for livable lives is curtailed not only by classic 
forms of enclosure, but also by various modes of degradation, contamination, 
and unseasonal instability that intensify processes of exclusion and erasure. 
4   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
The articles collected here document how the entangled configurations of air, 
water, and soil come to comprise the fragile conditions of existence across 
extensive and intersecting ecosystems. They attend not only to uneven rela -
tionships of access, but also to the lingering effects of colonial occupation, the 
ambiguities of multi-scalar dispossessions and environmental threat, and the 
difficulties of holding specific agencies to account in a world of distributed 
and multi-layered responsibilities. They show how some forms of disposses -
sion emerge directly from social structures that enable the imposition of limits 
through property regimes and the enactment of legislation and/or of regulatory 
systems. Other forms of dispossession are not easily traced to specific sources, 
making it difficult to identify lines of responsibility through which to respond. 
The ethnographic accounts presented in this special issue explore such compli -
cations as they track experiences and understandings of contemporary dispos -
session and the possibilities of collective responses.
All the case studies in this special issue are attentive to what we call ‘com -
pound dispossessions’ and how they affect the foundations for existence. They 
show how enclosures selectively restrict access to key resources through exclu -
sionary property claims, while transforming the possibilities for life within 
those same environments. Some of the dispossessions have, over time, brutally 
destroyed local ecologies.  David Bond, for example, describes the disposses -
sions that emerged following the installation of a major oil refinery on the 
island of St. Croix in the US Virgin Islands. Here people were forced to cede 
their land and hence their possibilities of subsistence farming. Those who had 
work were employed by the oil refinery. The island residents were further dis -
possessed by the lingering and ongoing contamination of water, soil, and air 
quality that compromised life expectancy and left people with deep anxieties 
about how to survive the eventual closing of the facility.
Camelia Dewan’s account of life among fishermen living near the shipbreak -
ing industry in coastal Bangladesh describes irreversible ecological destruction 
of the fragile wetlands. The case highlights how the enclosure of commons 
goes beyond access rights. Dewan coins the phrase ‘enclosure by contamina -
tion’ to refer to the ways in which access to healthy food, air, and water is 
curtailed not by fences but by seeping toxicity. As with Bond’s example of oil 
contamination in the Caribbean, local Bangladeshi people lose their autonomy 
from an industry that offers work but destroys the quality of life and thereby 
also creates new dependencies. What is ultimately at stake are ways in which 
such enclosures harm both human and more-than-human health and thereby 
the possibilities to sustain coastal livelihoods. In both these cases, the multiple 
enclosures that protect the interests of those who profit from the industry 
contribute to social and environmental injustice, as they allow the industry to 
ignore the contamination that destroys the lives and livelihoods of those who 
live and work near these toxic enclosures.
Introduction    |   5
Penny Harvey’s discussion of nuclear wastes addresses the destructive force 
of extremely hazardous and highly mobile radionuclides, which have a half-life 
that extends well beyond that of existing planetary life forms. Here again the 
dispossessions enacted are multiple and intersecting. In the case of nuclear 
wastes, the source of the contamination is perceived to come from another time, 
when nuclear wastes were discarded with no concern for environmental futures. 
The uncontrolled dispersal of nuclear materials certainly had detrimental con -
sequences for both human and other-than-human lives, but contemporary 
containment projects are also transformative of life forms and of livelihoods. 
Harvey considers the enclosures enacted by the technologies of ‘protective’ 
containment and by the exclusionary worlds of technical expertise and political 
decision making that so often foreclose the emergence of alternatives.
Such foreclosures are characteristic of colonial, state, and corporate con -
trol. Knut Nustad  describes how relations between people and fish are key 
to understanding processes of dispossession and enclosure in contemporary 
South Africa, where British settlers used trout to legitimize the appropriation 
of key resources. The introduction of trout to KwaZulu-Natal transformed 
riparian landscapes while imposing restrictions on the use of waters that were 
designated trout waters, affecting primarily Black communities who were fur -
ther deposed from their land. Today, the labeling of trout as ‘alien species’ has 
become a tool for the African National Congress (ANC) to impose a new bio -
ethical regime by taking control over natural resources. Highlighting the active 
world-making abilities of trout themselves, Nustad argues that it is their ability  
to thrive in the cold water that enabled British appropriation in the first place, 
while their inability  to reproduce in still waters makes them part of ongoing 
debates about state control over natural resources on private property.
Ben Campbell traces the effects of state policy on the livelihoods of poor 
farmers and of the landless in his case study of energy commons in Nepal. 
The article draws attention to the social relations required to support technical 
innovation, as well as the political will required to promote and sustain energy 
justice. The widespread adoption of biogas systems, which were introduced to 
reduce dependence on wood fuel and to increase the protection of environmen -
tal resources, was short-lived. Neither state nor technical agencies appreciated 
the ways in which the energy commons are constituted in complex socio-
technical relational fields. When wealthier citizens decided that it would make 
more economic sense to prioritize tourism income over the collective rights to 
pasture, on which the biogas systems relied, the poor could no longer feed the 
biogas digesters and therefore stopped using them. 
Marianne Elisabeth Lien also draws attention to local effects of the search for 
sustainable energy sources. For years, Sámi reindeer owners in North Norway 
have fought against the interests of mining, energy infrastructures such as wind 
power, roads, and recreational tourism in order to sustain the viability of reindeer 
6   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
pastures. Recently, more frequent episodes of freeze-thaw cycles have tempo -
rarily blocked reindeers’ access to the lichen in winter pastures. Herders have 
responded by establishing supplementary feeding regimes, but these threaten to 
fundamentally change the nature of Sámi reindeer herding practices. Lien shows 
how Sámi herders must negotiate not only the uncertainty of climate change, but 
also the political pressure to adjust to infrastructural expansion associated with 
the ‘green transition’. This ultimately limits herders’ flexibility and thus their 
capacity to respond to the effects of Arctic warming.
People’s response to situations created by the compounding of climate 
change and historical enclosure is also a key theme in Jon Nyquist’s  article, 
which takes us to the fire prone landscapes of Western Australia. The forests of 
this region have become increasingly dangerous and hard to manage, and fire 
managers experience troubling changes in how fire behaves and interacts with 
the forest. The capacity of fire managers to maintain the region as a safe place 
to live with fire may be lost when anchored features of the landscape are com -
plicated by unanticipated consequences of practices from beyond established 
horizons of expectation. Laura Ogden’s article documents the complications 
inherent in an attempt to stem the tide of species extinction by creating new 
possibilities for future species survival. The species in question is the once 
nearly extinct Californian condor. The uncertainties surrounding the reintro -
duction of the condor are of a quite different nature than those faced by the 
forest fire managers. However, the specter of extinction produces an informa -
tive parallel. The condor can survive only if land is set aside, if the well-being 
of these birds is privileged over competing interests, and if scientific veterinary 
expertise is deployed to ensure that these carrion feeders are not contaminated 
by what they eat. The ethos of a moral commitment to counteract biodiversity 
loss involves managed surveillance of both birds and potential human intrud -
ers. The ambiguity here lies in the politics and ethics of containment, and in 
the limitations of new or alternative possibilities.
The complications of these compound, multi-layered forms of dispossession, 
which have emerged in times of radical environmental change, push us to go 
beyond the classic literatures on the commons. Following political scientist and 
Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom (1990), these foundational literatures attended 
to the mechanisms underpinning the maintenance of commons by specify -
ing the importance of systemic components such as ‘common pool resources’ 
and ‘common property regimes’. Such common resources typically included 
land, fisheries, forests, wildlife, and irrigation systems, while common property 
regimes denoted the systems through which rights of use were exercised. More 
recently, Lauren Berlant (2016) has proposed that the commons can usefully 
be reconfigured as a conceptual infrastructure for times of transition. Ber -
lant’s approach resonates with many of our examples, where the controversy 
not only involves a local community posed against the extractive interests of 
Introduction    |   7
corporate or state entities, but also reveals local communities in tension with 
themselves in the face of emergent vulnerabilities and divergent views of their 
common future. In our opening example the protocols that guide resource use 
and access are not tied to questions of legal rights in any straightforward way. 
The Sámi insistence on never taking more than you need suggests a way of 
being in the world that precedes the emergence of state regulation and prop -
erty relations and opens us to what Berlant calls “nonsovereign relationality as 
the foundational quality of being in common” (ibid.: 394). In this collection, 
we build on this insight and show that such non-sovereign relationality often 
entails forms of more-than-human sociality (Tsing 2014) that transcend the 
modern distinction between nature and society, while incorporating the uncer -
tainty that climate change necessarily entails.
Commons Revisited
On the one hand, ‘commons’ is the concept used to refer to the possibility of 
carving out and stabilizing a sense of shared belonging and semi-ownership; 
it has been applied to public spaces in densely populated cities, open-access 
Internet software, genetic codes, and heritage sites. Commons thus becomes an 
attribute that justifies resistance against private property encroachment and/
or shifts the responsibility for maintenance to a broader collective, such as the 
municipality or the state (e.g., Ostrom 1990).1 At the other end of the spectrum, 
there is the assumption that commons are bound to fail, due to human greed 
and over-exploitation. Despite several decades of scholarly critique, Garett Har -
din’s (1968: 1244) claim that “freedom in commons brings ruin to all” has been 
surprisingly robust (but see Mildenberger 2019). His reference to the alleged 
‘tragedy of the commons’ continues to circulate, and to justify the rejection of 
collective rights. Presented as an inevitable ‘law of nature’, Hardin’s theory 
fails to recognize the social complexity of the traditional English commons.
A particularly insightful critique comes from medieval historian Susan Buck 
Cox (1985), who shows that Hardin’s account of the tragedy that befell the com -
mon lands of villages in medieval and post-medieval England was historically 
false. She details how the legal rights of common in sixteenth-century England 
were not granted by a landlord, but “were the residue of rights that were much 
more extensive” and probably older than the modern conception of private 
property itself (ibid.: 53). These rights were vested in those employed in culti -
vation and were a necessary part of the agricultural system. Furthermore, they 
were “painstakingly regulated,” and “those instances in which the common 
deteriorated were most often due to lawbreaking and to oppression of the poorer 
tenant rather than to egoistic abuse of a common resource” (ibid.: 56). The con -
textual backdrop for illegality, then, was the long-standing dispossession of the 
8   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
tenant due to the impacts of the Industrial Revolution, agrarian reform, and 
transfigured farming practices. As a result, the common system “was falling 
into disuse [while] a new system was taking its place, and with the change 
the actual use made of the common or common rights declined” (ibid.: 50). 
Cox thus established that what led to the decline of the commons in medieval 
England was not unlimited access, but the processes of enclosure driven by 
people in power wanting to take advantage of the possibilities that came with 
developments in agriculture. These developments were resonant with a new 
way of looking at ‘nature’ and a wider shift in what Van Rensselaer Potter had 
referred to as the bioethical relations that underpin human flourishing.2 The 
transition that interested Cox (1985: 59) was from a system of collective rules 
and stewardship practices among neighbors who agreed and exerted a moral 
pressure on each other to a very different system based on private ownership, 
market production, and economic growth. In other words, the ‘failure’ of the 
commons was not the greed of ‘commoners’ or a lack of effective regulation 
but emerged in the course of a transition to a new bioethical regime.
Such bioethical transitions were not unique to medieval England. Cox drew 
on the work of Potter, who had introduced the concept of the bioethical to his 
analysis of the sub-Saharan region of the Sahel, where overgrazing was tradi -
tionally avoided and water access ensured by arrangements among tribal chiefs. 
Traditionally, peoples of the Sahel were semi-nomadic, combining farming and 
transhumant herding. Since the 700s AD, this flat, open region sustained power -
ful kingdoms and trading relations, reliant on the mobility and connectivity of 
camels and horses. It became an area of extreme colonial extraction through the 
integration of the region into the global slave trade and later through colonial 
occupation. By the time of independence in the late 1950s, political and envi -
ronmental destabilization already ran deep. Drought and famine were common, 
and while explanations were often couched in terms of over-farming, over-
grazing, and over-populating of marginal lands, the deliberate destabilizations of 
the colonial past were of fundamental importance. Soil erosion, desertification, 
extreme food shortages, and the violent conflict between herders and farmers 
were directly produced in the long colonial histories that marked this region. 
Potter (1974) detailed this period of transition as follows (cited in Cox 1985: 60; 
emphasis added):
… before the colonial era ‘over-pasturage was avoided’ by rules worked 
out by tribal chiefs. When deep wells were drilled to obtain water, the 
boreholes threw into chaos the traditional system of pasture use based 
on agreements among tribal chieftains …  we see the tragedy of the com -
mons not as a defect in the concept of a ‘commons’ but as a result of the 
disastrous transition period between the loss of an effective bioethic and its 
replacement by new bioethics  that could once again bring biological reali -
ties and human values into a viable balance.
Introduction    |   9
Potter had coined the term ‘bioethics’ to encourage reflection on more gen -
eralized ecological concepts and values. Over a decade later, in her book The 
Global Commons  (1998), Susan Buck (who had previously published as Susan 
Buck Cox) wrote in more general terms about the complex historical layering of 
what became known as ‘global commons’. Her work, which scales up Ostrom’s 
approach, stresses the importance of international arrangements that foster 
enforceable commitments for the long-term protection of specific commons 
that are not regulated by existing nation-states.3 These include the resources of 
Antarctica, the high seas, the deep seabed, the atmosphere, and outer space. 
It is Cox’s interest in bioethical transitions that we build on here, pointing out 
shifting orientations toward fragile commoning practices, as well as how such 
practical arrangements and complications have consequences for livability. 
This approach is particularly useful when the commons are not necessarily 
either visible or available, or when conflicting bioethical regimes challenge the 
possibility for any mutual accommodation.
Environmental Justice in Times of Transition: Bioethical 
Regimes for Future Commons
The concept of bioethics is widely associated with the field of medicine and 
life sciences, and in relation to new parameters of life and death, such as 
new reproductive technologies, cross-species organ transplants, and genetic 
research (Brodwin 2000; Edwards and Salazar 2009; Franklin 2013; Strathern 
1992). However, from its early beginnings, the concept was also intended to 
refer to planetary life in a broader sense, as evidenced in Potter’s (1988) idea 
of ‘global bioethics’. Recently, some have been calling for a return to Potter’s 
more encompassing notion of the term to reconnect human health with the 
ecosphere and the global planetary changes of the Anthropocene (Churchill 
and Schenck 2021; Ehrlich 2009; Lee 2017). Taken in this sense, bioethics 
encompasses threats to biodiversity and ecosystems and questions about sus -
tainability and environmental justice, while also highlighting how such threats 
are deeply connected to discussions about equitable access to life for human 
beings. A focus on the ethical thus introduces discussions of fairness, equity, 
and responsibility, as well as preoccupations with the boundaries of human 
intervention and the rights of the non-human.
We suggest that the concept of ‘bioethical regimes’ offers a useful  analytic 
with which to approach the situations in which commons and access to livable 
worlds are at stake today. Bioethical regimes connect Cox’s important critique 
of Hardin with the contemporary anthropology of environmental change, which 
has sought to uncover the logics, ideologies, and practices driving environmen -
tal degradation, destruction, and injustice (Harvey et al. 2019; Hetherington 
10   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
2020; Moore 2016). Much of this literature also exhibits a strong emphasis on 
the non-innocent effects that historically anchored assumptions, ideas, and 
practices have for human and non-human life. The notion of bioethical regimes 
draws attention to the foundations or infrastructures that maintain access to life. 
In using bioethics in this way, we intend ‘bio’ to refer to life (not just organ -
isms) without drawing a sharp line between biological life and other non-living 
dynamics and elements on which life depends. As such, bioethical regimes 
also encompass the interplay between living things and landforms, wind, fire, 
chemical elements, and so on, as they together form foundations for life. All 
the articles in this issue concern cases where what is at stake are precisely the 
possibilities for life, be it through livelihoods, access to safe water and food, or 
conditions for safe living now or in the future.
A focus on bioethical regimes allows us to amplify several ways in which 
a focus on commons can contribute to contemporary anthropological debate. 
First, bioethical regimes bring together perceptions, ideas, regulations, patterns 
of practice, and modes of being that have consequences for the possibility of 
life. In this way, bioethics points to what enables or constrains access to life 
in specific times and places. Second, a focus on bioethical relations implies an 
orientation to life beyond the here and now. An example is ‘shadow ecologies’ 
(Dauvergne 1997; Swanson 2015), which point to how a landscape interven -
tion in one place may place an ecological burden on landscapes elsewhere. 
Similar long-distance bioethical implications are evident in writings on toxicity 
and exposure, where we see how toxins accrete in soils, waters, and bodies as 
lingering effects of colonial inequality and industrial production (Agard-Jones 
2013).4 Bioethical regimes are present in the very large and the very small, from 
the atmospheric to the microbial; their effects and traces circulate in both jet 
streams and blood streams.
Third, a focus on bioethical regimes draws attention to vital relations along 
with the practical and conceptual infrastructures through which these relations 
are maintained. The importance of this interplay is particularly clear in rela -
tion to contemporary critiques of anthropocentric logics. For example, Davis 
and Todd (2017: 770) argue that at the heart of Anthropocene logics is a way 
of relating to the world built on “a severing of relations … between humans 
and the soil, between plants and animals, between minerals and our bones.” 
Similarly, Puig de la Bellacasa (2015: 700) shows how “productionism,” an 
ethos that, in the case of soil, is “aimed at increasing soil’s efficiency … at the 
expense of all other relations,” fails to recognize the vital role of microbial life 
for the fertility of soil (see also Lyons 2020).
Nowhere is this colonial and capital-driven logic of production, elimination, 
and disconnection more apparent than in the case of the plantation. The plan -
tation is an assemblage comprising regulatory regimes and values, as well as 
patterns of practice involving simplification, improved varieties, upscaling, and 
Introduction    |   11
usually also foreign capital and exploited labor (see Perfecto et al. 2019). Such 
“shape-shifting forms of plantation colonialism” (Paredes et al. 2024: 2) can 
become concentrated in a specific landscape formation, changing it to adapt 
to its own needs, or it can travel and be replicated. Sometimes it is the plant 
itself—for instance, soy beans (Hetherington 2020) or palm oil (Chao 2022)—
that is identified as demanding a regime with implications for other life forms. 
In this way, the landscape becomes a bioethical formation as it is shaped by 
the assumptions entailed in specific bioethical regimes, but also in the ways 
that it allows or constrains access to life for both humans and non-humans. For 
instance, a production forest makes life possible in a very different way than a 
satoyama forest (Tsing 2015), just as a tree or an animal can carry the possibil -
ity of life for another (Rose 2012).
The conceptual frameworks that underlie the plantation and other colonial 
and capital-driven projects carry deep-seated assumptions about time and life. 
Productionism is driven by a relentless and restless futurity, “marked by a lin -
ear imperative of progress” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015: 694). Progressive time, 
moreover, is also a severance, cutting off the future from the past (Dawdy 2010; 
Rose 2004). Settler thought, for example, requires the elimination of the native 
(Wolfe 1994), including native nature, as the disjunctive point beyond which 
the future unfolds. There is, in other words, “a link between time concepts and 
violence” (Rose 2004: 15) or a “doubling up of violence” that “not only kill[s] 
parts of a living system but actually disables or kills the capacity of a living 
system to repair itself” (ibid.: 7). This “indifference to or justification of the 
suffering of others” (ibid.) is linked to the ways in which progressive, forward-
oriented notions of time encourage people to think of destructive events as 
merely ‘disjunctive moments’ after which they can move on to something new.
In many instances, the effects of decades of landscape interventions, driven 
by a modern logic of production, combine with climate change effects to cause 
disasters and destruction, such as when production forests burn in wildfires, 
when flooding is exacerbated by landscape alterations, or when pathogens 
are encouraged to spread by the homogenization of landscapes. Such inter -
plays across scales are discussed in several of the articles in this issue. What 
concerns some reindeer herders in the Nordic Arctic, for example, is not only 
that episodes of freeze-thaw make pastures less accessible, exacerbating other 
pressures on the land, but that the effects of such adaptations are unknown 
and could compromise fundamental notions of what reindeer herding is about 
(Lien, this issue). What troubles fire managers in the Australian southwest are 
the ways that forests are made more dangerous and more difficult to manage 
by the ways in which extractive activities, invasive pathogens, and popula -
tion growth fragment the landscape and change the structure and hydrology 
of forests (Nyquist, this issue). This combination of practical and conceptual 
12   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
regimes and runaway Anthropocene effects is one of the patterns that charac -
terize dispossession in today’s world.
This leads to a fourth point that a bioethical lens supports, namely, that life 
is always relational and always lived. Progressive time supports a biopolitics 
that is “enamoured with the proliferation of new life” (Parreñas 2018: 188) 
and indifferent to living well. Writing about the processes that structure and 
surround the lives of orangutans that can no longer live in the wild, Parreñas 
shows how colonial occupation destroyed conditions of life for orangutans and 
then forced them to stay alive and reproduce for the sake of the survival of the 
species. This case resonates strongly with Ogden’s (this issue) account of the 
condor recovery program, and can be described as “a particular modernist ide -
ology that aesthetically values forests in the midst of their destruction, orang -
utans on the brink of their extinction, and the appearance of their freedom in 
the midst of their active enclosure” (Parreñas 2018: 141). A colonial biopolitics 
promotes the bare life of abstract individuals making up a population, who are 
valued for the mere fact of being alive, even while the possibility of living well 
is kept from them (see also Stevenson 2014).
The possibilities for an alternative bioethics also motivate recent anthro -
pological literature on ecological futures. For Lyons (2020), the alternative to 
a monocrop agricultural regime is a life politics geared not toward production 
but toward creating the conditions for a viable future. For Parreñas (2018: 185), 
the alternative lies in “interconnected vulnerability” and an openness to being 
affected. Deborah Bird Rose (2012) simply calls for a cosmopolitics that begins 
with the realization that one’s life is reliant on others. Several of the cases in this 
issue also occupy this uncertain edge, drawing attention to the complicated pat -
terns through which life is both supported and undermined—torn between the 
hegemonic and the alternative—and the sense that both may, each in a different 
way, be impossible. It is in response to these kinds of tensions—where the cur -
rent world seems impossible to live in, but another kind of world seems impos -
sible to achieve—that Berlant (2016) reaches for the concept of the commons. 
But rather than seeing commons as a solution, a model, or a fully conceived 
alternative, Berlant refers to it as a ‘pedagogy’, a conceptual and practical infra -
structure for the conception and creation of alternatives. For Berlant, commons 
is the infrastructure that enables us to nurture attachments that are “felt but yet 
unestablished” (ibid.: 399), not a vision of how life can be organized better, but 
a strategy for “living with the malfunctioning world” (ibid.: 396).
Commoning and Convening Practices in Times of Transition
Susan Buck Cox (1985) described the decline of the commons in medieval Eng -
land as a historical moment of transition from one bioethical regime to another 
Introduction    |   13
not yet fully in place. The ethnographic cases gathered in this issue high -
light similarly complex bioethical regimes at times of transition. Many transi -
tions are marked by ecological crises, toxic enclosures, extinctions, or shifting 
weather patterns associated with climate change (cf. Bond, Dewan, Ogden, 
Lien, Nyquist, Harvey, this issue). Some involve the dismantling of established 
patterns of access and user rights through colonial, state, or other forms of dis -
possession (cf. Nustad, Campbell, this issue). All generate uncertainty, unpre -
dictability, and uneven access to that which is needed to uphold precarious 
livelihoods. The challenge of how to carry on in these situations invites us to 
explore a more expansive understanding of the concept of commons.
In our opening vignette, Wivian’s testimony to the Finnmark Commission 
shows an encounter between contrasting bioethical regimes—two different 
frameworks for understanding what ‘permission’ might entail. One approach 
to a case like this is to highlight indigenous knowledge and epistemic dispos -
session, or, as Verran (2023) suggests, to mobilize ethnographic disconcertment 
as an epistemic tool. Another is to trace out the ambiguities, uncertainties, and 
contestations that are revealed. Alongside these approaches, we would like to 
draw attention to the mundane work required to create some degree of com -
mon foundation from which to carry on together across differences (see also 
Verran 2023). Efforts may fail, mistranslations occur, and conflicts will surely 
endure. However, as all the case studies in this special issue reveal, people 
continue to secure a degree of common ground to carry on, seeking to carve 
out a livelihood in spite of the compound dispossessions in the ruins of envi -
ronmental disaster, amid the brutal consequences of colonial occupation, or in 
the face of deep uncertainty about the future and the ecological changes that 
are increasingly felt.
We focus on ‘commons’ to capture mundane engagement with contem -
porary environmental, social, and political complications. We hold on to the 
term, not as a notion of shared interest or liberal democratic values, or as a 
way to specify a particular governance regime, but rather as a way of “learning 
to live with messed up yet shared and ongoing infrastructures of experience” 
(Berlant 2016: 395). Ethnographic work on commoning and convening prac -
tices can highlight those relational commitments that are ongoing even when 
governance fails, when shared livelihoods are radically threatened, and when 
what is provisionally shared requires continuous effort to be created or main -
tained. Burnett and Gordon (2021: 42) propose the commons “not as a promise 
for another world per se, but as an expression of  the vital relations holding 
together the worlds we are already in.” What is ‘common’ then, is not just 
shared vulnerability or shared interests, but rather “the unspectacular activity 
of existing in proximity and thereby creating social worlds” (ibid.: 43). This 
may include relational commitments beyond the human, as well as mutual 
self-restraint in worlds that cannot always be mapped in advance.
14   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
To insist upon attention to vital relations of co-existence in more-than-
human worlds (Lyons 2020) is to call for an attention to practice, which is 
perhaps better described as ‘commoning’ rather than ‘commons’ (see also 
Bollier and Helfrich 2015; Linebaugh 2008). Commoning suggests a practice 
rather than a system and highlights the work that is needed to build and 
maintain something in common.5 The term challenges the premise that things 
(resources, regimes, ways of thinking or of being) are held ‘in common’, an 
assumption that rests on “the foundational liberal myth of common interest 
on which democratic politics relies” (Burnett and Gordon 2021: 44). Instead, 
it emphasizes heterogeneity, fragility, and sometimes disconcertment (Verran 
2023). Commoning can be the gathering of altered  life (cf. Murphy 2017) into 
new foundations for further  life. In this sense, it relates to the infrastructural 
work to which Berlant (2016) refers. It is the work being done in relational 
commitments that assemble and align beyond the human, underpinning sur -
vival and supporting life. It is an enrollment and a convening practice (Amin 
and Howell 2016) that draws people together without necessarily assuming 
singularities of purpose or shared predicaments.
Part of what commoning draws together will always be an uncontrolled 
excess, what Blaser and de la Cadena (2017) refer to as ‘the uncommons’. 
The idea of uncommons gestures toward an endlessly proliferating excess that 
arises through involvement in more-than-human relations, as well as, crucially, 
the excess that occurs despite, alongside, and below such efforts, such as the 
liveliness in ruins and rubble (Gordillo 2014; Ogden 2021) or the equivoca -
tions that mark all engagements across difference (Viveiros de Castro 2004). It 
includes the stuff created by the unpredictable and creative subversions of peo -
ple in response to ordering projects (see Bond, Dewan, Campbell, this issue) 
and the hybridity that proliferates from efforts at purification (Latour 1991; see 
also Nustad, this issue). The ambiguous effects of the global planetary changes 
emerge in uneven and patchy ways (Tsing et al. 2020), like uncommons, as do 
radioactive wastes (Harvey, this issue). The value of the alternative is always 
partial and emergent, and the weaving together is never complete. Commoning 
is always an ongoing attainment in dialogue with inherited conditions, with life 
already altered (Murphy 2017).
We thus end our introduction with the observation that commoning amid 
the inherited, contemporary, and anticipated complications of the present is 
not automatically coherent or heroic. When a return to traditional commons 
is no longer an option, when people find themselves faced with irreversible 
changes and erasures (Bond, Dewan, Campbell), we nevertheless find subtle 
but crucial elements of commoning in how people respond to their situation 
through their relational worlds. Infrastructures for livable lives often start, 
simply, from a response. This can be an affective response, such as anger and 
desperation toward an oil refinery (Bond), or comments and stories that try 
Introduction    |   15
to make sense of changing fire patterns (Nyquist), or a practical solution to a 
loss of access to pasture (Lien), or even a sense of moral obligation toward a 
threatened species (Ogden), landscape (Nustad), or energy source (Campbell, 
Harvey). Such responses can make a difference. They may reveal to people 
some deep truths about their situation and reorient their ways of being in 
the world (Nyquist). Somewhat more tangibly, creating foundations for liv -
able worlds can be a response in the form of using what one’s situation offers 
(Dewan), and working creatively and ambivalently with the regulatory devices 
that also underpin dispossession (Lien, Nustad, Harvey). More concerted still, 
commoning can be an explicit attempt to create new connections between 
people, non-humans, things, and regulations. All of these efforts—from the 
unacknowledged responses to the conscious attempts to create new connec -
tions—are bioethical involvements ultimately geared toward creating, sustain -
ing, or repairing the foundations that give access to life. But at the same time, 
they all have to confront unclear, tentative, and ambiguous paths, as well 
as shifting environmental affordances in worlds that are inherently unstable 
(Campbell, Harvey, Lien, Ogden). And even if there is a path, there may not 
be an endpoint, a stable regime of rights and obligations, as suggested by the 
conventional literature on the commons. Response, reorientation, improvisa -
tion, and ambivalence do not necessarily end with concerted effort but may 
continue in unpredictable ways. The compound nature of ongoing disposses -
sion implies that even when a degree of ‘livability’ is reclaimed, there is no 
guarantee that the conditions allowing people to carry on will be long-lasting. 
Spatial and temporal reverberations of environmental destructions, as well as 
actions and liabilities that are hardly traceable, will continue to have an effect 
on people’s lives. A focus on contemporary practices as a bioethical orientation 
offers a place from which to make space for alternatives.
Acknowledgments
This special issue draws on papers and discussions from two previous events 
on the concept of future commons: a panel at the 2022 EASA conference in Bel -
fast, and a workshop in 2023 at the University of Oslo. We are grateful for the 
inspiration and input from all our participants, and especially from the panel co-
convenors, Thomas Hylland Eriksen, Ingjerd Hoem, and Elisabeth Schober. Our 
collaboration has been facilitated by the generous support of the Department of 
Social Anthropology, University of Oslo, as well as a grant from Research Coun -
cil Norway on “Ecological Globalization.”
16   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
Penny Harvey  is a Professor of Social Anthropology at the University of 
Manchester and a Fellow of the British Academy and of the Norwegian Acad -
emy of Science and Letters. Her ethnographic research on infrastructures 
explores the material and social relations of modern statecraft, knowledge 
practices, and the politics of value. She has conducted ethnographic research 
in Peru over several decades, and is currently working on nuclear decommis -
sioning in the UK. She co-founded the Beam network for social research within 
the Dalton Nuclear Institute and is currently Deputy Chair of the UK Govern -
ment Committee on Radioactive Waste Management. ORCID-ID: https://orcid.
org/0000-0001-7765-1221. E-mail: Penny.harvey@manchester.ac.uk
Marianne Elisabeth Lien  is a Professor in the Department of Social Anthropol -
ogy, University of Oslo, and a Fellow of the Norwegian Academy of Science 
and Letters. Her research explores human-animal relations, food production, 
contested landscapes, and modes of knowing and commoning. She has done 
research in Norway, the Nordic Arctic/Sápmi, and Tasmania, Australia. Her 
books include Becoming Salmon: Aquaculture and the Domestication of a Fish  
(2015) and Domestication Gone Wild: Politics and Practices of Multispecies Rela -
tions (2018, with co-editors Heather Anne Swanson and Gro B. Ween). ORCID-
ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5216-6219. E-mail: m.e.lien@sai.uio.no
Jon Rasmus Nyquist  is an Associate Professor in the Department of Social 
Anthropology, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. He 
received his PhD from the University of California, Santa Cruz. He has done 
fieldwork in Australia, and his research has focused on fire management, land -
scapes, human-animal relations, and knowledge formation. ORCID-ID: https://
orcid.org/0000-0001-5587-079X. E-mail: jon.r.nyquist@ntnu.no 
Notes
 1. For a nuanced critique of ‘equality without equivalence’, see Walker (2020).
 2. As discussed below, Cox was explicitly referencing the work of Potter (1970, 
1988), who had coined the term ‘bioethics’ in the 1970s to address basic prob -
lems of human flourishing and environmental relations instead of the biomedi -
cal contexts to which it was later applied.
 3. We acknowledge the insights of William Blomquist (2001) in his review of 
Buck (1998).
 4. In this way, “industrially produced chemicals like PCBs have become a part of 
human living-being” (Murphy 2017: 495).
 5. The move to commoning has happened not just in the anthropological literature 
on commons (see Kalb 2017) but also in adjacent fields and interdisciplinary 
Introduction    |   17
spaces (e.g., see Partelow and Manlosa 2023,) as well as among those who 
write about commons for a broader popular audience (Bollier and Helfrich 
2015; Standing 2019).
References
Agard-Jones, Vanessa. 2013. “Bodies in the System.” Small Axe: A Caribbean Jour -
nal of Criticism 17 (3): 182–192. https://doi.org/10.1215/07990537-2378991.
Amin, Ash, and Phillip Howell, eds. 2016. Releasing the Commons: Rethinking the 
Futures of the Commons. New York: Routledge.
Berlant, Lauren. 2016. “The Commons: Infrastructures for Troubling Times.” 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 34 (3): 393–419. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0263775816645989.
Blaser, Mario, and Marisol de la Cadena. 2017. “The Uncommons: An Introduc -
tion.” Anthropologica 59 (2): 185–193. https://doi.org/10.3138/ANTH.59.2.T01.
Blomquist, William. 2001. “Susan J. Buck, ‘The Global Commons: An Introduc -
tion. London, UK: Earthscan, 1998.” Ecological Economics  36 (1): 181–182. 
https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/ecolec/v36y2001i1p181-182.html.
Bollier, David, and Silke Helfrich, eds. 2015. Patterns of Commonin g. Berlin: Com -
mons Strategies Group and Off the Commons Books.
Brodwin, Paul, ed. 2000. Biotechnology and Culture: Bodies, Anxieties, Ethics. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Buck, Susan J. 1998. The Global Commons: An Introduction . 1st ed. London: 
Routledge.
Burnett, Hannah Eisler, and Talia R. Gordon. 2021. “Reimagining the Commons: 
Survival Ethics and Collective Endurance.” Journal for the Anthropology of 
North America 24 (1): 42–45. https://doi.org/10.1002/nad.12141.
Chao, Sophie. 2022. In the Shadow of the Palms: More-Than-Human Becomings in 
West Papua. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Churchill, Larry R. and David Schenck. 2021. “Essential Readings for Bioethicists 
in the Anthropocene Era.” The Hasting Center Report 51 (4): 3. https://doi.
org/10.1002/hast.1262.
Cox, Susan Buck. 1985. “No Tragedy of the Commons.” Discussion paper. Work -
shop in Political Theory and Policy Analysis. Bloomington, Indiana University.
Dauvergne, Peter. 1997. Shadows in the Forest: Japan and the Politics of Timber in 
Southeast Asia. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Davis, Heather, and Zoe Todd. 2017. “On the Importance of a Date, or, Decolo -
nizing the Anthropocene.” ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geog -
raphies 16 (4): 761–780. https://acme-journal.org/index.php/acme/article/
view/1539.
Dawdy, Shannon Lee. 2010. “Clockpunk Anthropology and the Ruins of Moder -
nity.” Current Anthropology 51 (6): 761–793. https://doi.org/10.1086/657626.
Edwards, Jeanette, and Carles Salazar, eds. 2009. European Kinship in the Age of 
Biotechnology . New York: Berghahn Books.
18   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
Ehrlich, Paul R. 2009. “Ecoethics: Now Central to All Ethics.” Journal of Bioethical 
Inquiry 6: 417–436. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11673-009-9197-7.
Franklin, Sarah. 2013. Biological Relatives: IVF, Stem Cells, and the Future of Kin -
ship. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Gordillo, Gastón. 2014. Rubble: The Afterlife of Destruction . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Hardin, Garrett. 1968. “The Tragedy of the Commons.” Science  162 (3859): 1243–
1248. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.162.3859.1243.
Harvey, Penny, Christian Krohn-Hansen, and Knut G. Nustad, eds. 2019. Anthro -
pos and the Material. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hetherington, Kregg. 2020. The Government of Beans: Regulating Life in the Age of 
Monocrops.  Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Joks, Solveig, Liv Østmo, and John Law. 2020. “Verbing meahcci : Liv-
ing Sámi Lands.” Sociological Review  68 (2) 305–321. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0038026120905473.
Kalb, Don. 2017. “Afterword: After the Commons—Commoning!” Focaal 79: 
67–73. https://doi.org/10.3167/fcl.2017.790106.
Latour, Bruno. 1991. We Have Never Been Modern . Trans. Catherine Porter. Cam -
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lee, Lisa M. 2017. “A Bridge Back to the Future: Public Health Ethics, Bioeth -
ics, and Environmental Ethics.” American Journal of Bioethics 17 (9): 5–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15265161.2017.1353164.
Linebaugh, Peter. 2008. The Magna Carta Manifesto; Liberties and Commons for 
All. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lyons, Kristina M. 2020. Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners and Life Politics. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Mildenberger, Matto. 2019. “The Tragedy of the  Tragedy of the Commons .” Ed. 
Michael D. Lemonick. Scientific American , 23 April. Former blog network, 
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/voices/the-tragedy-of-the-tragedy-of-the-
commons/.
Moore, Jason W., ed. 2016. Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and the 
Crisis of Capitalism . Oakland, CA: PM Press.
Murphy, Michelle. 2017. “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations.” Cultural 
Anthropology 32 (4): 494–503. https://doi.org/10.14506/ca32.4.02.
Ogden, Laura A. 2021. Loss and Wonder at the World’s End . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for 
Collective Action . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paredes, Alyssa, Sophie Chao, and Andrés León Arraya. 2024. “Introduction: 
Plantation Methodologies: Questioning Scale, Space, and Subjecthood.” Anti-
pode Online , 4 January . Intervention Symposium, ”Plantation Methodolo -
gies: Questioning Scale, Space, and Subjecthood.” https://antipodeonline.
org/2024/01/04/plantation-methodologies/.
Parreñas, Juno Salazar. 2018. Decolonizing Extinction: The Work of Care in Orang -
utan Rehabilitation . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Introduction    |   19
Partelow, Stefan, and Aisa O. Manlosa. 2023. “Commoning the Governance: A 
Review of Literature and the Integration of Power.” Sustainability Science 18: 
265–283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-022-01191-2.
Perfecto, Ivette, M. Esteli Jiménez-Soto, and John Vandermeer. 2019. “Coffee 
Landscapes Shaping the Anthropocene: Forced Simplification on a Complex 
Agroecological Landscape.” Current Anthropology  60 (S20): 236–250. https://
doi.org/10.1086/703413.
Potter, Van Rensselaer. 1974. “The Tragedy of the Sahel Commons.” Science 185 
(4154): 813. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.185.4154.813.b
Potter, Van Rensselaer. 1988. Global Bioethics: Building on the Leopold Legacy . 
East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity 
and the Pace of Care.” Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691–716. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851.
Rose, Deborah Bird. 2004. Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics for Decolonisation. 
Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Rose, Deborah Bird. 2012. “Cosmopolitics: The Kiss of Life.” New Formations 76: 
101–113. https://doi.org/10.3898/NEWF.76.07.2012.
Standing, Guy. 2019. Plunder of the Commons: A Manifesto for Sharing Public 
Wealth . London: Pelican.
Stevenson, Lisa. 2014. Life Beside Itself: Imagining Care in the Canadian Arctic. 
Oakland: University of California Press.
Strathern, Marilyn. 1992. Reproducing the Future: Essays on Anthropology, Kin -
ship, and the New Reproductive Technologies. New York: Routledge.
Swanson, Heather Anne. 2015. “Shadow Ecologies of Conservation: Co-production 
of Salmon Landscapes in Hokkaido, Japan, and Southern Chile.” Geoforum 61: 
101–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.02.018.
Tsing, Anna. 2014. “More-Than-Human Sociality: A Call for Critical Description.” 
In Anthropology and Nature , ed. Kirsten Hastrup, 27–42. New York: Routledge.
Tsing, Anna. 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World . Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt, Andrew S. Mathews, and Nils Bubandt. 2020. “Patchy 
Anthropocene: Landscape Structure, Multispecies History, and the Retooling 
of Anthropology.” Current Anthropology  60 (S20): S183–S197. https://doi.
org/10.1086/703391.
Verran, Helen. 2023. “How to Use Disconcertment as Ethnographic Field-Device.” 
In An Ethnographic Inventory: Field Devices for Anthropological Inquiry , ed. 
Tomás Sánchez Criado and Adolfo Estalella, 43–51. London: Routledge.
Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo. 2004. “Perspectival Anthropology and the Method of 
Controlled Equivocation.” Tipití: Journal of the Society for the Anthropology of 
Lowland South America 2 (1): 3–22.
Walker, Harry. 2020. “Equality without Equivalence: An Anthropology of the Com -
mon.” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 26 (1) 146–166. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1467-9655.13183.
20   |   Penny Harvey, Marianne Elisabeth Lien, and Jon Rasmus Nyquist
Ween, Gro B. 2020. “The Map Machine: Salmon, Sámi, Sand Eels, Sand, 
Water and Reindeer. Resource Extraction in the High North and Collat -
eral Landscapes.” Polar Record  56 (e19):  1–10. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0032247420000236.
Ween, Gro B., and Marianne Elisabeth Lien. 2012. “Decolonialisation in the Arc -
tic? Nature Practices and Land Rights in Sub-Arctic Norway.” Journal of Rural 
and Community Development  7 (1) 93–109. https://journals.brandonu.ca/jrcd/
article/view/557.
Wolfe, Patrick. 1994. “Nation and MiscegeNation: Discursive Continuity in the 
Post-Mabo Era.” Social Analysis 36: 93–152. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
i23171725.
