Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Agriculture and Human Values (2021) 38:271–282 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-020-10152-3
SYMPOSIUM/SPECIAL ISSUE
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect 
and the uneven trajectories of land transformation’
Sarah Ruth Sippel1 · Oane Visser2
Accepted: 12 September 2020 / Published online: 19 October 2020 
© The Author(s) 2020, corrected publication 2021
Abstract
Over the past decade land has again moved to the centre of resource conflicts, agrarian struggles, and competing visions 
over the future of food and farming. This renewed interest in land necessitates asking the seemingly simple, but pertinent, 
question ‘what is land?’ To reach a more profound understanding of the uniqueness of land, and what distinguishes land 
from other resources, this symposium suggests the notion of ‘land imaginaries’ as a crucial lens in the study of current land 
transformations. Political-economy, and the particular economic, financial, or political interests of various actors involved 
in land projects do not directly result in, or translate into, outcomes, such as dispossession and enclosure, increased com-
modification, financialization, and assetization, or mobilization and resistance. All these processes are informed by different 
imaginaries of land—the underlying understandings, views, and visions of what land is, can, and should be—and associated 
visions, hopes, and dreams regarding land. Drawing on a variety of case studies from across the world, crossing Global North/
South and East/West, and including contemporary and historical instances of land transformation, this symposium addresses 
the multifaceted ways in which implicit, explicit, and emergent understandings of land shape current land transformations.
Keywords Imaginaries · Land rush · Land transformations · Political ecology
Introduction
Over the past decade land has again moved to the centre of 
resource conflicts, agrarian struggles, and competing visions 
over the future of food and farming. The renewed attention 
to land is reflected specifically in ‘land rush’ literature, 
which has brought new attention to long-standing debates 
regarding land, access to resources, development, and rural 
livelihoods. This renewed attention is a stark breach with 
decades-long neglect of land in rural and agri-food studies, 
particularly in the Global North,1 that started around the 1970s. Remarkably, this happened despite a proliferation of 
studies on landscape and ‘more-than-human’–nature interac-
tions. From 2007 to 2008 onwards, triggered by sharp food 
price hikes and the global financial crisis, rural land has 
turned from being an un-investable, forgotten object into 
a much sought-after target for investment. Multinational 
companies, banks, and states suddenly saw (farm)land and 
agriculture as stable ground for profit making. The renewed 
interest in land necessitated asking the seemingly simple, 
but pertinent, question ‘what is land?’ (Li 2014). How is 
it possible that something as banal as land has attracted so 
much renewed attention, and has been able to conjure up 
new investment vehicles (Clapp et al. 2017); geopolitical 
conflicts (McMichael 2013); and worldwide political mobili-
zations (Borras and Franco 2013) after decades of urbaniza-
tion, rural outmigration, de-agrarianization, and economic 
growth that has increasingly relied on seemingly footloose 
capital and digital economies? Within the land rush, inves-
tors and financial institutions sought to return to the ‘real’, The original online version of this article was revised due to severe 
mis-referencing.
 * Sarah Ruth Sippel 
 sippel@uni-leipzig.de
 Oane Visser 
 visser@iss.nl
1 Institute of Cultural Anthropology/SFB 1199, Leipzig 
University, Leipzig, Germany
2 International Institute of Social Studies (ISS) of Erasmus 
University Rotterdam, The Hague, The Netherlands1 We use the terms Global North/South as a shorthand to distinguish 
contexts marked by highly industrialized agricultural systems (US, 
Canada, some parts of Europe, Australia, New Zealand) from those 
where smallholder farming structures prevail. Obviously, there are 
important differences between and within the respective contexts.
272 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
and ploughed capital back into land as a ‘tangible’ asset, 
following the financial crisis of 2008, and the poor perfor -
mance of ‘traditional’ asset classes. Land, however, turned 
out to be a resource unlike any other. Due to its multiple 
ontologies, its life-giving affordances, and its strong associa-
tion with national territory, land is not only challenging to 
‘assemble’ as a resource for global investment (Li 2014, p. 
590), it is also an especially contested investment object. To 
reach a more profound understanding of this uniqueness of 
land, and what distinguishes land from other resources, this 
symposium suggests the notion of ‘land imaginaries’—the 
underlying understandings, views, and visions of what land 
is, can, and should be—as a crucial lens in the study of cur -
rent land transformations.
In what follows, we first outline the neglect of land in 
rural and agri-food studies over the past decades and the 
(partial) resurgence of attention for land since 2007/08. We 
then develop the notion of ‘land imaginaries’, drawing on the 
literature on ‘environmental imaginaries’ (Peet and Watts 
1996; Mitchell 2011); ‘sociotechnical imaginaries’ (Jasa-
noff 2015; Jasanoff and Kim 2015); and ‘spatial imaginaries’ 
(Wolford 2004; Watkins 2015). Subsequently, the following 
three sections will zoom in on three lines of inquiry sur -
rounding land imaginaries that we see as particularly fruitful 
for research. These are: (1) the trajectories of land imaginar -
ies and land transformations; (2) land imaginaries and mate-
riality; and (3) the affective dimension of land imaginaries. 
This symposium consists of four papers, which examine 
land imaginaries within farmland investment contexts in the 
Global North (Fairbairn, LaChance, De Master, and Ash-
wood on US farmland investment in California); the Global 
South (Beban and Schoenberger on land title reform in Cam-
bodia); Global North investors in the ‘Global East’ (Visser 
on Western farmland investors in Russia and Ukraine); and a 
case of ‘reverse investment’ by emerging economy investors 
in the Global North (Böhme on Chinese farmland investment 
in rural Australia). The individual papers will be presented 
in the section(s) to which they contribute most.
From the neglect of land to the ‘land rush’
The late-2000 rush for land came as a surprise to many 
researchers in an era that had been described as ‘post-rural’ 
and ‘post-productivist’, with rural lifestyles and livelihoods 
(including those of farmers) supposedly becoming more 
multifunctional, transient, less grounded, or even hyper -
real (Cloke 1997). The question ‘what is land?’ was rarely 
asked anymore in rural, agri-food, and agrarian studies since 
the 1970s, and land as an object of study had increasingly 
moved to the margins of rural and agri-food studies (see e.g. 
Mormont 1990, p. 563). On the eve of the contemporary 
land rush, rural geographer Woods ( 2006 , p. 580) argued that ‘rural politics’—focussed on ‘political debates concern-
ing agriculture, or forestry, or the management of rural land 
more broadly’—had increasingly given way to rural social 
issues, such as rural identity or rural community as part of 
a ‘politics of the rural’. In politics of the rural, the ‘meaning 
and regulation of rurality itself is the primary focus of con-
flict and debate’ (Woods 2006, p. 580), rather than its natural 
resources. The rising prominence of global commodity or 
value chains, circuits, and network approaches in agri-food 
studies since the 1990s (see e.g. Hughes and Reimer 2004; 
Fold and Pritchard 2005; Pegler 2015; Neilson and Pritchard 
2011) equally represented a move away from farming and 
its embeddedness with land and the local environment, and 
redirected the focus on the sphere of global interconnections, 
entanglements, and flows.2
This shift away from rural politics, widespread in the 
Global North, was less notable in research on the Global 
South, where livelihoods of rural populations remained more 
strongly linked to farming and land.3 The decline in atten-
tion for land was thus less pronounced in agrarian studies 
of peasants and small-scale farmers, agrarian movements, 
and land reforms in contexts of the South. However, agrar -
ian studies focused primarily on actual land transformations 
and issues of accumulation and dispossession, and less on 
the specific relationships with, and understandings of, land, 
which were sometimes more assumed than comprehensively 
studied. For example, within the study of (continued) land 
reforms in many rural spaces outside the West—such as 
the market reforms in post-socialist Eurasia in the 1990s; 
the pink tide selective land reforms in Latin-America in 
the early 2000s; and ongoing market-based land reforms in 
Africa—land was mostly conceived of in terms of property 
and access, with relatively little attention for other ways of 
imagining and relating to land. ‘Other’—that is to say non-
property based—relationships with land, and land issues 
more generally, certainly remained a key focus in (anthro-
pological) studies of indigenous populations (e.g. Tomlinson 
2002; Barrera-Bassols and Zinck 2003), given the intimate 
relationship between land and colonial occupation, dispos-
session, and indigenous struggles for (land) rights and self-
determination. In contrast with agrarian studies, anthropo-
logical research also engaged widely with relationships with 
land beyond property and access. However, the overall result 
was that understandings of land were largely neglected in 
2 See also the increase of research on rural (seasonal) migration 
(Gertel and Sippel 2014; Corrado et al. 2016).
3 Obviously, various non-farm income sources, including wage 
labour and remittances, became more important in the Global South 
as well, but compared to the Global North, income from farming 
remained much more essential.
273
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect and the uneven trajectories…
1 3
agrarian studies, unless land was ‘othered’ (i.e. owned by 
indigenous populations, or occasionally peasants).
While the decline of scholarly interest in land fits within 
the general fading of interest in rural politics since the 1970s, 
it is remarkable that this decline has persisted within the 
surge of studies on landscape4 (e.g. Daniels and Cosgrove 
1993; Gosden and Head 1994; Schama 1995, for early exam-
ples; cf. Cloke 1997 ; Head 2000 ) and the emerging research 
strands that have developed new perspectives on the interre-
lationship between human and non-human ‘actors’, whether 
framed in terms of ‘hybridity’ (Haraway 1991; Whatmore 
2002 ) or actor-network theory (Callon et al. 1986 ; Latour 
1993). These new fields of environmental research have 
led to rich work on flora (e.g. trees, border plants, and food 
crops; cf. Heuts and Mol 2013; Martin 2020), animals (e.g. 
Saltzman et al. 2011; Holloway et al. 2014), and even mush-
rooms (Tsing 2018) and bacteria (Lorimer 2020). However, 
land (and soil) have remained remarkably understudied. 
Similarly, the literature on landscape has focused more on 
‘scape’ than on ‘land’,5 as illuminated by the proliferating 
use of ‘scapes’ in this literature, such as ‘countryscapes’ 
(Cloke 1997), ‘streetscapes’ (ibid.), ‘lifescapes’ (Convery 
et al. 2005 ), and ‘dreamscapes’ (Jaenke 2001 ). In short, 
these studies have re-focused on the diversity of more-than-
human actors that shape place, and have decentred political 
economy forces shaping land and landscape in favour of a 
multitude of actors across scales (McCall Howard 2018).
The land rush brought back rural politics with a venge-
ance, not only in the Global South but notably also in the 
Global North. Long standing concepts such as commodifi-
cation, (new) enclosures, and primitive accumulation (and 
later, accumulation by dispossession) rapidly took centre 
stage in the academic debate on the new rush for land, and 
were key in connecting academic and activist discourse. In 
the rush to make sense of the novel and escalating phenom-
enon of transnational land deals, or what Oya (2013) called 
the ‘land grab literature rush’, longstanding political econ-
omy concepts were applied, without much consideration of 
new strands of literature on landscape, more-than-human 
natures, or other relationships with land.6 While concepts 
such as enclosure and accumulation by dispossession have been effective in exploring general drivers and outcomes 
of the land rush, they have been less useful in doing jus-
tice to the geographical unevenness and highly divergent, 
place-specific outcomes of these land transformations. 
Scholars thus pointed to the need for longer term, in-depth, 
empirically and historically grounded studies (e.g. Ouma 
2014; Pedersen and Buur 2016; Goldstein and Yates 2017; 
Schoenberger et al. 2017). Rather than employing a global 
imaginary of land transformations within, as Le Billon and 
Sommerville (2017, p. 214) put it, ‘dualistic framings of 
victimization or beneficiation’, it is important to understand 
the situatedness and multiplicity of actors who engage with 
land, along with their various positions of power, interests, 
and constraints.
More recently, building upon, and going beyond, the ini-
tial ‘land rush’ period, a burgeoning body of research has 
added more nuance to the dynamics of current land trans-
formations. For example, scholars have started to unpack the 
intersections between farming and finance—initially often 
portrayed as the ‘big bad wolf’ hungry for farmland (Ouma 
2014, p. 163)—and have argued that turning land into a 
financial asset class is not a smooth pathway but requires 
active work on land’s ‘investability’ and is pursued by a host 
of actors with different interests, motivations and underlying 
moralities (e.g. Li 2014; Williams 2014; Ouma 2016; Kish 
and Fairbairn 2018; Sippel 2018). Similarly, scholars have 
critically investigated the role of China as another supposed 
‘key driver’ of the land rush and have argued that Chinese 
investments are not as dominant and different from ‘North-
ern’ investments as is often suggested, as well as neither 
necessarily state-led or food security driven (Bräutigam and 
Zhang 2013; Oliveira 2018; Böhme 2020b). While these 
recent studies have added a more nuanced understanding of 
the unevenness, complications, and contradictions involved 
in current land transformations, this symposium seeks to go 
one step further by placing the emphasis on the ‘imaginar -
ies’ of land, that is to say the various understandings of land 
that are implicitly or explicitly informing these projects in 
regard to land.
Land imaginaries as a lens to study current 
land transformations
This symposium employs the notion of ‘land imaginar -
ies’ to capture the underlying understandings, views, and 
visions of land, which we consider crucial within current 
land transformations. Political-economy, and the particular 
economic, financial, or political interests of various actors 
involved in land projects do not directly result in, or trans-
late into, outcomes, such as dispossession and enclosure, 
increased commodification, financialization, and assetiza-
tion, or mobilization and resistance. All these processes are 4 The rise of landscape studies was predominantly confined to the 
Global North, with a strong focus on the UK and the US.
5 For exceptions see the anthropological study by Peace (2005), 
which specifically focuses on land and landscape, and the studies by 
Puig de la Bellacasa (2015) and Krzywoszynska (2019).
6 Most of the early studies on the land rush (including, admittedly, 
by one of the authors, Visser and Spoor 2011) focussed primarily on 
mapping the unprecedented number, scale, and speed of global land 
acquisitions (e.g. Borras et al. 2011; Cotula 2012), subsequently rais-
ing debate about methodologies, measurements and ‘messy hectares’ 
(Edelman 2013).
274 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
informed by different understandings of land, and associated 
visions, hopes, and dreams regarding land. Land imaginar -
ies encompass the various societal understandings of what 
land is (land’s ontology), its different uses and values (land’s 
social ‘affordances’), and ideas of what it can, or should, 
do in society (Li 2014, pp. 589–590). Land imaginaries are 
highly divergent across time and space; they can become 
hegemonic, silenced, or marginalized; appear naturalized 
or be the grain for contestation; they work as a means of 
oppression as well as liberation. While recent scholarly 
interest in land has indicated the importance of these various 
views and understandings of land, they have so far mostly 
been addressed implicitly (for an exception see Panikkar and 
Tollefson 2018). This symposium moves the imaginary con-
structions of land to the centre of analysis and asks: What 
are the distinct views of land within current land transforma-
tions, how do they take shape, and what are their implica -
tions? We ground our notion of ‘land imaginaries’ in three, 
partly overlapping, bodies of literature on ‘environmental’, 
‘sociotechnical’, and ‘spatial’ imaginaries. We also concep-
tually distinguish between two dimensions of imaginaries, 
which, in reality, are not clearly separable from one another 
but interact in complex ways.
Firstly, land imaginaries can work as implicit compo-
nents that inform practical engagements with land in rather 
subtle, unconscious, or unreflective ways. These underlying 
mental and cultural frameworks are notably reflected in the 
notion of ‘environmental imaginaries’ in environmental his-
tory and political ecology (Peet and Watts 1996; Nesbitt and 
Weiner 2001; McGregor 2004; Davis 2011; Mitchell 2011). 
Here, environmental imaginaries refer to the ways in which 
societies collectively construct, interpret, and communicate 
nature (McGregor 2004, pp. 594–595). By providing the 
language, norms, metaphors, and meanings for constructing 
and expressing nature, land imaginaries, like environmen-
tal imaginaries at large, can become naturalized, determine 
how environmental issues are interpreted, and define what 
is considered ethically or morally right or wrong in regard to 
nature. This first dimension of land imaginaries thus refers 
to the often taken-for-granted, unreflexive, or subconscious 
ideas that groups of people have developed about their (or 
others’) environment. Underlying social constructions and 
land uses in a rather implicit manner, these imaginaries can 
nevertheless have wide-reaching implications. Environ -
mental imaginaries and their constructions of unused and 
‘empty’ lands, environmental crises, or ‘boom frontiers’ 
sustained the establishment of European colonial order, and 
were powerful narratives used to justify the imperial goals 
of intervention, settlement, and control (Davis 2007; Shetler 
2007; Mitchell 2011). Studying these notions about land 
through, for example, narratives, paintings, archival docu -
ments, or maps helps to understand how the relationship 
between society and land has been constructed by different people across time and space, and how land is valued within 
these contexts. It furthermore points to the political struggles 
and conflicts involved when imaginaries of land not only 
travel but also compete with, or triumph over, others (Dela-
ney 2001 ; Sodikoff 2007). Such clashing land imaginaries 
reflect struggles over control of natural resources, and can 
be driving forces behind nature politics (Nesbitt and Weiner 
2001).
Secondly, land imaginaries can also become an explicit 
and conscious driving force of land transformations if they 
express actively envisioned land futures (yet) to be real-
ized. In this second dimension of land imaginaries, we are 
thus interested in imagining as a social practice of actively 
envisioning and working towards new worlds and realities 
(Daniels 2011; Watkins 2015). The significance of imagina-
tion, as Ingold (2012, p. 3) holds, is more than the capacity 
to construct images or the power of mental representation, 
it means ‘to participate from within, through perception and 
action, in the very becoming of things’ (our emphasis). This 
dimension of imaginaries is especially prominent in Sheila 
Jasanoff’s concept of ‘sociotechnical imaginaries’, which she 
defines as the ‘collectively held, institutionally stabilized, 
and publicly performed visions of desirable futures’ (Jasa-
noff 2015, p. 322). The aspirational and normative compo-
nents in regard to social futures captured by Jasanoff’s notion 
of imaginaries are particularly important for this dimension 
of land imaginaries, as they invoke what the world is and 
should be, by performing and producing diverse visions 
of the collective good. Linking past, present, and future, 
here the focus is particularly on the dynamics of social 
change implicated in the notion of imaginaries, by placing 
the emphasis on the capacity of individuals and groups to 
see and think things differently from how they were previ-
ously thought. We suggest that this second dimension of 
land imaginaries—understood as active visions and novel 
understandings of what land can or should do—is equally an 
essential driver of (competing) projects of transforming land, 
materially or in regard to its social or moral understandings. 
These visions of land are reflected in the ways in which peo-
ple actively work to influence and reshape human relations 
to land, together with the aim of realizing a particular view 
of what land can do or afford in society.
Two main variants of ‘new’ explicit imaginaries can be 
distinguished. First, the extension or ‘translation’ of exist-
ing land imaginaries into new geographies, spheres, or 
periods. Imaginaries that are new to certain geographies or 
‘resource frontiers’ can be slight modifications of existing 
imaginaries. The newness is that certain areas are re-imag-
ined as suitable for these imaginaries. For example, new 
infrastructures (roads, storage), agricultural technologies 
(liming), and expanding global value chains for soy have 
enabled the extension of imaginaries of efficient, square, 
large-scale mono-cropped farmland from the United States 
275
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect and the uneven trajectories…
1 3
into the Brazilian Cerrado (Ofstehage 2016), previously seen 
as of no use to agriculture. Another example is the imagi -
nary of land envisaged and promoted in ‘The Mystery of 
Capital’ by De Soto (2000), which was key in extending the 
registration of private land property from Western ‘mature’ 
markets in urban real estate and commercial farmland to the 
marginal landholdings of slum dwellers and smallholders 
in the Global South. Second, new, explicit imaginaries can 
emerge as alternative or counter imaginaries, developed to 
contest and replace mainstream existing land imaginaries. 
Such alternative imaginaries have been identified by Panik -
kar and Tollefson (2018), who describe how a broad anti 
Pebble Mine coalition in Alaska foregrounded ‘subsistence 
imaginaries’—grounded in indigenous subsistence cultures 
and modes of relating to land—to counter the dominant 
‘extractive imaginaries’. These alternative imaginaries 
became key components of environmental justice and land 
sovereignty initiatives. Also Schoenberger and Beban (2020) 
discuss how a land titling campaign in Cambodia opened up 
spaces for alternative, more equitable land imaginaries in a 
setting where visions and practices of large-scale top-down 
land exploitation constituted the hegemonic land imaginary.
For various reasons, land imaginaries constitute a useful 
addition besides related but broader concepts, such as socio-
technical, environmental, and spatial imaginaries. Land has 
manifold features that (in most socio-cultural contexts) set 
it apart from other aspects of the natural environment, and 
which have important implications for how it is being imag-
ined. Different elements of the environment enable divergent 
practices and imaginaries, depending on their spatial and 
material features (Bakker and Bridge 2006; Richardson and 
Weszkalnys 2014). A first important characteristic of land is 
its relatively fixed state.7 Animals move, plants often expand 
(or are moved), and even large trees are logged and trans-
ported across the oceans as timber or biomass. Also, sub-soil 
resources like oil and minerals are widely moved across the 
world in global commodity chains. The bulkiness of land 
(and its generally lower value) impedes such transporta-
tion, which is rather limited, at least within the lifetime of a human. Moreover, land still remains, even if a layer of land 
(or soil) is removed (except for those cases where land is 
excavated in such large quantities that lakes or the sea make 
the land disappear, for example when sub-soil resources 
such as coal are extracted). Furthermore, land, more than 
any other object of our natural environment, often functions 
as a ‘birthplace’ or ‘reservoir’ of manifold resources. Land 
can be farmland or forest land, it can contain an endless 
number of mineral resources, and has recently gained value 
as a resource due to its  CO2 capturing capacity, via its soil 
or the trees growing on it. Further, and in contrast to many 
sub-soil natural resources, land itself—when used sustain-
ably—is a renewable resource in its function as farmland, 
forest land, biofuel land, or land for solar panels or wind 
mills. Finally, land has life-giving capacities (Li 2014 ; Mün -
ster and Poerting 2016), it enables growing, gathering, and 
hunting for food, pumping up water, and building a house to 
live in.8 In short, human survival is unimaginable without 
land (Münster and Poerting 2016 ), just as land would remain 
un-imagined without humans. Due to the above-mentioned 
features of (high degrees of) fixity, a reservoir of manifold 
resources, its capacity to constitute a renewable resource, 
and above all its life-giving capacities, land tends to have 
a high symbolic value in societies across space and time. 
Territory, belonging, identity—to mention just a few key 
aspects of the human condition—are strongly linked to land, 
more so than to other objects of the natural environment. 
Even water, which has at least the same life-giving feature 
as land, is less a symbol of territory or identity. Thus, the 
trajectories of land imaginaries, arguably more persistently 
than other imaginaries, have far-reaching real life conse-
quences, and are often wrapped up with emotions and strug-
gles. Overall, with this notion of land imaginaries we seek to 
inspire, focus, and bundle research on the above-mentioned 
aspects of land and their important implications for how we 
think of, and act in relation to, land.
To investigate the crucial role of land imaginaries in land 
transformations, the following questions guide the contribu-
tions to this symposium:
(1) What historical and place-based trajectories of land 
imaginaries can we identify? Which imaginaries have 
been dominant, suppressed, or contested within these 
trajectories? What are the implications of these trajec-
tories for current transformations across regional con-7 It needs to be stressed that we do not see fixity as an absolute fea-
ture of land. However, when placed on a continuum, and compared 
to other resources, land tends to have more fixity. An elaborate dis-
cussion of land’s (un)fixity is beyond the scope of the paper, but a 
few points are worth mentioning. Li’s (2014, p. 589) statement that 
the core characteristic of farmland as a natural resource is its fixity, 
commenting that it cannot be rolled up ‘like a mat’, seems a univer -
sal truth—but in fact, rare opposing land imaginaries can be found 
that highlight fluidity. For example, Mexican peasants in the erosion-
prone mountainous area of the Patzcuaro Basin imagine land as 
moveable (Barrera-Bassols and Zinck 2003). Sud (2019) describes 
the unfixity of land in Indian government policies. Furthermore, the 
boundaries of land, for instance vis-à-vis water, are often not clear cut 
or fixed, as ethnographic studies in muddy terrains have shown (Rich-
ardson 2016, 2018; Cortesi 2018).8 An additional feature of land is that whereas some natural resources 
depend on a lot of capital and technology to be assembled, land in 
many cases can generate food or value with relatively limited means. 
Related to that, land’s history as a natural resource is about as long 
as human history, whereas some objects have only become a natural 
resource relatively recently.
276 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
texts and settings, especially concerning the opening 
and closing of agricultural frontiers?
(2) How are the imaginary and the material interlinked and 
co-produced in land imaginaries? Does the materiality 
of land pose limits on land imaginaries, and how do 
new representations of biophysical materiality allow 
for new imaginaries to emerge?
(3) How are land imaginaries connected with emotional, 
affective, performative, and embodied aspects of land 
use? How do these interlink with anticipations of imag-
ined futures, and what role do these affective and antici-
patory aspects play in developing alternatives to domi-
nant or hegemonic understandings and uses of land?
Each of these sets of questions addresses a different gap in 
the land rush literature, and research on current land trans-
formations more generally.
Trajectories of land imaginaries
The first set of questions reflects our aim to go beyond the 
unilinear, somewhat homogeneous, view of land investment 
and commodification. To this aim, we place the emphasis on 
the spatio-temporal variation in land investment trajectories 
and consider land imaginaries as a field of contestation over 
different ideas and visions regarding land’s past, present, and 
future (Panikkar and Tollefson 2018). Rather than seeing 
land investments as a kind of juggernaut that relentlessly 
rolls over the global countryside in an undifferentiated way, 
it is crucial to uncover the—sometimes drastic—divergence 
in land investment trajectories across space (Visser 2017), 
thereby taking the historical dimension more seriously 
(Edelman and León 2013; Ouma 2016).
We do not contest the longue durée development of com-
modification—and more recently assetization—of farmland 
and other natural resources within the larger development 
of the ‘capitalization of almost everything’ (Leyshon and 
Thrift 2007). Land has invariably been an object of struggle 
through human history, both in the form of conquest and 
dispossession (whether induced by clan orientations, nation-
alism, (neo)colonialism, and/or capitalist expansion at large, 
Scott 1998; Layoun 2001; Moore 2005), and resistance and 
counter-mobilisation (Wolford 2010; Morris 2014; LaDuke 
2016). Yet, such trends are still uneven in their strength, 
pace, and sometimes direction. Looking closer at concrete 
regions and localities we find ‘sluggish commodification’, 
disappointed farmland investors and failed investments 
(Magnan 2015; Kuns et al. 2016; Visser 2017); contestations 
and renegotiations of land’s ‘investability’ and assetization 
(Ouma 2020; Sippel and Weldon 2020); and agricultural 
frontiers that have turned into ‘frontiers in ruins’ (Münster 
2017). As Crowley and Carter (2000) argued for western Kenya, agrarian change comprises complicated and contrast-
ing trends, some of which are more obvious than others, 
and thus always needs to be understood as a ‘heterogeneity’ 
and a ‘patterning or patchiness’ (Crowley and Carter 2000, 
p. 385).
Environmental history provides manifold examples of 
situations where environmental imaginaries have crucially 
influenced the ‘success’ or ‘failure’ of land projects, often 
with long-lasting detrimental implications for the affected 
communities. Davis (2007) reveals how, during the French-
colonial occupation of North Africa, the ‘declensionist envi-
ronmental narrative’, which primarily blamed Arab nomadic 
pastoralists for deforesting and desertifying the once highly 
fertile ‘granary of Rome’, became the dominant view of 
North Africa’s environmental history. The same legend of 
the ‘granary of Rome’ that, as Swearingen (1987, p. 35) 
shows, inspired the early French colonial wheat producing 
ventures in Morocco, but ‘proved to be a mirage that [v]
anished in the reality of the Moroccan natural environment’. 
These narratives, and associated classifications of Moroc -
can land as ‘productive’ or ‘unproductive’ (Maroc utile and 
Maroc inutile), were not only used to justify and enable the 
appropriation of land and resources and to control local 
populations, but their legacy survives in contemporary poli-
cies and, as ecological science, still informs environmental 
research. Similarly, environmental histories of the prairies 
(Worster 1979; Cronon 1991; Moon 2020), the Eurasian 
Steppe (Moon 2013), and the Amazon (Peluso 2012), and 
their insights on, amongst others, the construction, opening, 
and decay of agrarian resource frontiers, enrich the study of 
contemporary land transformations as they alert us to the 
myths these might be grounded on, and their potential delu -
sionary character.
While research on environmental and sociotechnical 
imaginaries has traced their emergence, phases of struggle, 
and fortification, little attention has been paid to how land 
imaginaries leave the stage. Jasanoff ( 2015 ) in her insight -
ful typology of phases of a sociotechnical imaginary dis -
tinguishes between origin, resistance, embeddedness, and 
extension of imaginaries. A phase of demise is remark -
ably absent. We believe that the demise of land imaginar -
ies is just as important to understand land transformations 
as their emergence or proliferation. Mitchell (2011) pays 
more attention to the demise of (environmental) imaginar -
ies and observes that they can disappear rather suddenly. 
Which factors contribute to the demise of an imaginary or 
the pace and trajectory of its demise are still open ques-
tions, opening up important avenues for further research on 
land imaginaries. What is, for instance, the ‘after life’ of 
large-scale transnational land investments? In the case, of oil 
palm plantations, Li (2018) argues that the materialization 
of the imaginary of rationalized, highly efficient plantations 
has brought about an infrastructural violence in the form of 
277
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect and the uneven trajectories…
1 3
monotonous grids of roads, and oil palm fields that leaves 
little room for alternative land imaginaries, let alone a return 
to the previous land uses. In the case of the French colonial 
visions of North African land, the imaginary of North Africa 
as the ‘granary of Rome’ disappeared rather quickly in the 
face of two combined factors, which came to the fore in the 
early 1930s: the high production costs and periodic crop fail-
ures given Morocco’s rather marginal environment for wheat 
cultivation, on the one hand; and the insight that Moroccan 
colonial wheat production competed directly with French 
production, on the other, as Moroccan wheat production was 
too expensive to be sold on the world market, and thus had 
to be absorbed by the ‘metropole’ (Swearingen 1987, p. 27). 
Recalcitrant nature, however, did not enhance the emergence 
of local counter-imaginaries, but rather led the same French 
colonisers to resort to a new, California-inspired imaginary, 
namely ‘to convert the Morocco first conceived as a gra-
nary of wheat into a vast [citrus] orchard’ (R. Hoffherr in 
L’Economie marocaine 1932, quoted in Swearingen 1987, 
p. 61).
Visser’s study of the ‘black earth’ ( 2020 ) is an example 
of how the longitudinal research of contemporary farmland 
investments can be fruitfully combined with perspectives 
from environmental history to gain deeper insight into farm-
land investment trajectories and the powerful, and poten -
tially delusionary, role of imaginaries within these. Visser 
demonstrates how optimistic farmland imaginaries celebrat-
ing the ‘black soil’ have dominated the land imaginaries 
of external actors, and have recurrently led them to under -
estimate other ‘hard’ agricultural facts, such as the harsh 
climatic conditions in the agrarian heartland of Russia and 
Ukraine. Contrary to the imaginary of abundance and fertil-
ity associated with the black earth soil, the material climatic 
conditions of unseasonal frosts, erratic rainfall, and severe 
droughts have repeatedly derailed large farmland investment 
projects of outsiders coming into the region.
Materiality and land imaginaries
The predominant focus of the land rush literature on com-
modification, often framed in terms of accumulation by 
dispossession, primitive accumulation, or enclosure (e.g. 
White et al. 2012; see Hall 2013 for a critical review), while 
being insightful in itself, means that land is predominantly 
conceived of in terms of private property (and to some 
extent territory). This focus on the legal status—or de facto 
control—of land has led to ignorance of other important 
aspects, such as the material dimension of land. The second 
set of questions seeks to open this ‘black box’ of materiality 
to further the debate on current land transformations. On 
a rather general or global level, debates regarding land—
within academia and beyond—are increasingly informed by the notion that material, and particularly biophysical, limits 
to human land arrangements have become more tangible 
and urgent. This widely shared notion is framed in differ -
ent, partly overlapping, ways, such as in terms of ecologi-
cal concerns (e.g. regarding fertile land as a non-renewable 
resource, Montgomery 2007); observations about closing 
frontiers of cheap nature (Patel and Moore 2017); the reali-
zation that specific types of land use can contribute to, or 
mitigate, climate change and global food insecurity (Weis 
2010); and pleas for a shift to (climate) smart or digital farm-
ing (Clapp et al. 2018).
However, when it comes to concrete cases of farmland 
investment and transformations, the role of material aspects 
has mostly featured only in a loose, more presupposed man-
ner. The papers by Böhme (2020a) and Visser (2020) show 
that when farmland investments take shape in specific farm 
sites, optimistic land imaginaries can meet different realities 
where the materiality of environmental conditions constitute 
obstacles to the envisaged projects. Böhme depicts how Chi-
nese investors mobilize ‘quality imaginaries’ of Australian 
farmland to market fresh milk to affluent, food safety con-
cerned Chinese consumers. Within this imaginary, the com-
pany has developed a narrative of a ‘natural’, ‘pure’, ‘pris-
tine’, ‘pollution-free’ paradise where ‘happy cows’ breathe 
clean and fresh ocean air at the ‘edge of the world’. This land 
imaginary, she argues, not only stands in stark contrast to 
the industrial and technological character of the farm and the 
heavy transportation infrastructure the export of fresh milk 
requires, the very notion of the remoteness it celebrates also 
represents a substantial material obstacle. The biophysical 
characteristics of fresh milk, Böhme concludes, make it a 
‘stubbornly local food’, which does not align well with the 
geographical remoteness of Australian land—potentially 
putting the investment project at risk. In a similar vein, Vis-
ser’s paper reveals how a land imaginary largely ignorant of 
climatic materialities has resulted in numerous farm failures 
and environmental damage. Nevertheless, the imaginary has 
been repeatedly invoked during various investment waves 
over the course of centuries, showing that land imaginar -
ies can be surprisingly resilient despite opposing material 
realities. Drawing on this insight, and further examples from 
other regional contexts, Visser finds a striking, long-standing 
ignorance of the less ‘visible’ and tangible climatic factors in 
(Western) scientific accounts of the environment. In essence, 
Visser’s paper raises crucial questions on the relationship 
between land imaginaries and knowledge production, which 
deserve further attention in the context of the increasing 
signs of climate emergency that humanity is facing.
Fairbairn et al.’s paper (2020) picks up on this and fur -
ther demonstrates the critical relationship between the rep-
resentation of materiality within land imaginaries and the 
power-laden terrain of knowledge production in regard to 
environmental futures. As Andersson and Westholm ( 2019 ) 
278 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
argue, future imaginaries are inherently selective construc-
tions, in which uncomfortable knowledge might be retained 
or marginalized by powerful stakeholders at the expense 
of other forms of knowledge. The dominance of (Western) 
scientific methods and institutions within these construc-
tions, as Panikkar and Tollefson (2018) observe, often leaves 
activists and environmental organizations no choice but to 
learn the language of scientific knowledge-making or find 
skilled translators. While in Visser’s case, the less tangi-
ble, not immediately observably climatic factors mislead 
the investors themselves, Fairbairn et al. demonstrate how a 
finance-backed farmland investor in the Californian Cuyama 
Valley uses land’s invisible—and therefore ‘uncertain’—
subterranean attributes to create a land imaginary of ample 
water resources conducive to the company’s financial and 
extraction interests. Given the strong financial capacities of 
the company, it could resort to the authoritative techniques 
of scientific modelling of water resources, underlying that 
modelling is an inherently political activity that rather than 
‘representing’ land is used to shape realities and futures of 
land imaginaries (Loconto and Rajão 2020).
Affective dimensions of land imaginaries
Our third set of questions deals with the affective and antici-
patory dimensions within land imaginaries and their impli-
cations for possible alternative land futures. The affective—
and sometimes spiritual, symbolical, or moral—dimension 
of land has been comprehensively addressed within anthro-
pological studies (e.g. Peters 2001; Tomlinson 2002). 
However, the affective aspects of land—e.g. soil—are not 
exclusive to the imaginaries of indigenous communities and 
long-standing farming traditions, as recent anthropological 
and geographical studies on contemporary land imaginar -
ies have demonstrated (e.g. Peace 2005; Beban and Work 
2014). As several contributions to the land rush literature 
have shown, land investment discourses have drawn heav -
ily on emotive ‘empty yet full’ narratives (Bridge 2001), 
well known from colonial history (Hongslo and Benjamin-
sen 2002). Employing notions such as ‘empty’, ‘marginal’, 
‘idle’, ‘waste land’, or ‘abandoned’, land was depicted as 
‘underutilised’ and ‘unused’, yet full of investment potential 
and ‘rapid, rising and hitherto underrecognised value’ (Li 
2014, p. 596; see also White et al. 2012; Nalepa et al. 2017). 
What is more, emotional and affective components do not 
only work in favour of investor interests, as the flipside of 
the ‘celebration’ of the black earth soil by Western farm-
land investors in Russia and the ‘clean and green’ image 
of remote Australian farmland suggest (Böhme 2020a; Vis-
ser 2020 ). Investors are not the ‘cold blooded’, rationality-
driven ‘homi economici’ they often like to think of, and present, themselves—and are not immune to falling prey to 
the limitations of their own land imaginaries.
The affective component within land imaginaries and 
their potential for contestation as well as aspiration for alter -
native—hopeful—futures is particularly prominent in Sch-
oenberger and Beban’s contribution ( 2020 ). Ideas of what 
land is and should be, the authors argue, are filled with pow -
erful emotions—and it is these emotions that enable land 
imaginaries to be reproduced, challenged, or transformed. 
However, how can people overcome fear associated with 
existing or dominant land imaginaries, so that alternative, 
more hopeful imaginaries can emerge within a context of 
aggressive land grabs and dispossession such as Cambo-
dia? Schoenberger and Beban suggest that it is moments of 
rupture that can open up such spaces, disrupting dominant 
imaginaries and allowing for alternative imaginaries to arise. 
Contrary to the complicit role the state often played in other 
‘land rush’ contexts (Wolford et al. 2013 ), in Cambodia it 
was a land titling campaign of the state that represented such 
a moment of ‘rupture’, and the villagers’ affective ties with 
students, acting as volunteer land survey officers, were key in 
bringing about new and hopeful land imaginaries. However, 
as the authors note, even hopeful ruptures of dominant land 
imaginaries are not without ambiguity: some people’s land 
did not get registered, powerful actors stirred the campaign 
towards their interests, and those whose power was threat-
ened sought to re-establish their dominance. What exactly 
the land title will hold in the future, and for which purposes 
it might be (mis)used, remains an open question for many 
rural people.
While future land imaginaries can be full of opportunity 
and hopeful, in other settings people may feel that there is 
little room for imagining or dreaming, with futures domi-
nated by (social) obligations attached to land (Visser 2006) 
or heavy debts linked to land (Hofman 2018). Fairbairn et al. 
(2020) also describe counter-imaginaries of the rural popu-
lation, which critically interrogate the investor’s farmland 
imaginaries and their far too rosy water availability situa-
tion. Yet, as their article notes, these alternative imaginar -
ies have not (yet) translated into more hopeful or just land 
trajectories. Farmland imaginaries of Harvard’s investment 
fund, assessing underground water reserves rather optimisti-
cally, have enabled it to convert relatively dry farmland into 
high value vineyard land. It remains uncertain how long this 
investor’s imaginary will hold sway in the face of further 
ground water depletion and its negative consequences for 
neighbouring farmers and villagers—potentially opening 
space for more hopeful ruptures of dominant imaginaries.
To sum up, drawing on a variety of case studies from 
across the world, crossing Global North/South and East/
West, and including contemporary and historical instances 
of land transformation, this symposium addresses the mul-
tifaceted ways in which implicit, explicit, and emergent 
279
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect and the uneven trajectories…
1 3
understandings of land shape current land transformations. 
Placing these imaginaries of land at the centre of analysis, 
this symposium adds an important analytical lens to the 
debate as it helps to comprehend the societal struggles that 
are fought over land as being rooted not only in the often 
competing interests and projects of what people seek to do 
with land, but also in the diverging, sometimes novel, and 
often long-standing or recurring understandings of what land 
can or ought to be in society.
Acknowledgements  Many thanks to Nicolette Larder, Juan Ignacio 
Staricco, and Tanya Richardson for their valuable feedback on an ear -
lier version of this introduction, as well as to Daniel Münster who 
contributed to the first conceptualization of this Symposium. We would 
also like to thank the participants of the workshop ‘Constructions, Rep-
resentations, Productions: Exploring Historical and Contemporary 
Imaginations of Land’ at the SFB 1199 in Leipzig 2018 for collectively 
exploring the theme of ‘land imaginaries’ with us. Lastly, thanks to 
Esther Riley for her editorial work.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL.. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. 
Sippel acknowledges support from the German Research Foundation 
(C04, SFB 1199) and Visser acknowledges support from European 
Research Council (ERC) grant LANDGRABRU (StG 313871).
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/.
References
Andersson, J., and E. Westholm. 2019. Closing the future: Environ-
mental research and the management of conflicting future value 
orders. Science, Technology, & Human Values 44 (2): 237–262.
Bakker, K., and G. Bridge. 2006. Material worlds? Resource geogra-
phies and the matter of nature. Progress in Human Geography  
30 (1): 5–27.
Barrera-Bassols, N., and A. Zinck. 2003. ‘Land moves and behaves’: 
Indigenous discourse on sustainable land management in Picha-
taro, Patzcuaro Basin, Mexico. Geografiska Annaler, Series A, 
Physical Geography 85 (3–4): 229–245.
Beban, A., and C. Work. 2014. The spirits are crying: Dispossessing 
land and possessing bodies in rural Cambodia. Antipode 46 (3): 
593–610.
Böhme, M. 2020a. ‘Milk from the purest place on earth’: examining 
Chinese investments in the Australian dairy sector Agriculture 
and Human Values. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1046 0-020-10153  
-2.Böhme, M. 2020b. Shared interest or strategic threat? A critical inves-
tigation of political debates and regulatory responses to Chinese 
agricultural investment in Australia. Globalizations 1–20.
Borras, S.M.J., and J. Franco. 2013. Global land grabbing and politi-
cal reactions ‘from below’. Third World Quarterly 34 (9): 
1723–1747.
Borras, S.M.J., R. Hall, I. Scoones, B. White, and W. Wolford. 2011. 
Towards a better understanding of global land grabbing: An edi-
torial introduction. Journal of Peasant Studies 38 (2): 209–216.
Bräutigam, D., and H. Zhang. 2013. Green dreams: Myth and reality in 
China’s agricultural investment in Africa. Third World Quarterly  
34 (9): 1676–1696.
Bridge, G. 2001. Resource triumphalism: Postindustrial narratives of 
primary commodity production. Environment and Planning A  
33 (12): 2149–2173.
Callon, M., J. Law, and A. Rip. 1986. Mapping the Dynamics of Sci-
ence and Technology: Sociology of Science in the Real World. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Clapp, J., S.R. Isakson, and O. Visser. 2017. The complex dynamics 
of agriculture as a financial asset: Introduction to symposium. 
Agriculture and Human Values 34 (1): 179–183.
Clapp, J., P. Newell, and Z.W. Brent. 2018. The global political econ-
omy of climate change, agriculture and food systems. Journal of 
Peasant Studies 45 (1): 80–88.
Cloke, P. 1997. Country backwater to virtual village? Rural studies 
and the ‘cultural turn’. Journal of Rural Studies 13 (4): 367–376.
Convery, I., C. Bailey, M. Mort, and J. Baxter. 2005. Death in the 
wrong place? Emotional geographies of the UK 2001 foot 
and mouth disease epidemic. Journal of Rural Studies 21 (1): 
99–109.
Corrado, A., C. de Castro, and D. Perrotta (eds.). 2016. Migration and 
Agriculture: Mobility and Change in the Mediterranean Area. 
London: Routledge.
Cortesi, L. 2018. The muddy semiotics of mud. Journal of Political 
Ecology 25: 617–637.
Cotula, L. 2012. The international political economy of the global land 
rush: A critical appraisal of trends, scale, geography and drivers. 
Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3–4): 649–680.
Cronon, W. 1991. Nature’s Metropolis. Chicago and the Great West. 
New York, London: W.W. Norton and Company.
Crowley, E.L., and E. Carter. 2000. Agrarian change and the changing 
relationships between toil and soil in Maragoli, Western Kenya 
(1900–1994). Human Ecology 28 (3): 383–412.
Daniels, S. 2011. Geographical imagination. Transactions of the Insti-
tute of British Geographers 36 (2): 182–187.
Daniels, S., and D. Cosgrove. 1993. Spectacle and text: Landscape met -
aphors in cultural geography. In Place/Culture/Representation, 
ed. J. Duncan and D. Ley, 57–77. London, New York: Routledge.
Davis, D.K. 2007. Resurrecting the Granary of Rome: Environmental 
History and French Colonial Expansion in North Africa. Athens, 
OH: Ohio University Press.
Davis, Diana K. 2011. Imperialism, orientalism, and the environment 
in the Middle East. In Environmental Imaginaries of the Middle 
East and North Africa, ed. D.K. Davis and E. Burke, 1–22. Ohio: 
Ohio University Press.
De Soto, H. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs 
in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. New York, NY: Basic 
Books.
Delaney, D. 2001. Running with the land: Legal-historical imagination 
and the spaces of modernity. Journal of Historical Geography  
27 (4): 493–506.
Edelman, M. 2013. Messy hectares: Questions about the epistemol -
ogy of land grabbing data. Journal of Peasant Studies 40 (3): 
485–501.
280 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
Edelman, M., and A. León. 2013. Cycles of Land Grabbing in Central 
America: An argument for history and a case study in the Bajo 
Aguán, Honduras. Third World Quarterly 34 (9): 1697–1722.
Fairbairn, M., J. LaChance, K. De Master, and L. Ashwood. 2020. In 
vino veritas, in aqua lucrum: Farmland investment, environmen-
tal uncertainty, and groundwater access in California’s Cuyama 
Valley.Agriculture and Human Values. https ://doi.org/10.1007/
s1046 0-020-10157 -y . (in press).
Fold, N., and B. Pritchard (eds.). 2005. Cross-Continental Agro-food 
Chains: Structures, Actors and Dynamics in the Global Food 
System. London: Routledge.
Gertel, J., and S.R. Sippel (eds.). 2014. Seasonal Workers in Mediter -
ranean Agriculture: The Social Costs of Eating Fresh. London: 
Routledge.
Goldstein, J.E., and J.S. Yates. 2017. Introduction: Rendering land 
investable. Geoforum 82: 209–211.
Gosden, C., and L. Head. 1994. Landscape—A usefully ambiguous 
concept. Archaeology in Oceania 29 (3): 113–116.
Hall, D. 2013. Primitive accumulation, accumulation by disposses-
sion and the global land grab. Third World Quarterly 23 (9): 
1582–1604.
Haraway, D. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women. The Reinvention of 
Nature. New York: Routledge.
Head, L. 2000. Cultural Landscapes and Environmental Change . Lon-
don, New York: Routledge.
Heuts, F., and A. Mol. 2013. What is a good tomato? A case of valuing 
in practice. Valuation Studies 1 (2): 125–146.
Hofman, I. 2018. Soft budgets and elastic debt: Farm liabilities in the 
agrarian political economy of post-Soviet Tajikistan. Journal of 
Peasant Studies 45 (7): 1360–1381.
Holloway, L., C. Bear, C. Morris, and K. Wilkinson. 2014. Animals, 
technologies and people in rural spaces: Introduction to a special 
issue on emerging geographies of animal-technology co-produc -
tions. Journal of Rural Studies 33: 95–98.
Hongslo, E., and T.A. Benjaminsen. 2002. Turning landscapes into 
‘nothing’: A narrative on land reforms in Namibia. Forum for 
Development Studies 29 (2): 321–347.
Hughes, A., and S. Reimer (eds.). 2004. Geographies of Commodity 
Chains. London: Routledge.
Ingold, T. 2012. Introduction. In Imagining Landscapes: Past, Present 
and Future, ed. M. Janowski, and T. Ingold, 1–18. Farnham/
Burlington: Ashgate.
Jaenke, K.A. 2001. Personal dreamscapes as ancestral landscape.  
PhD dissertation California Institute of Integral Studies, San 
Francisco.
Jasanoff, S. 2015. Imagined and invented worlds. In Dreamscapes of 
Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of 
Power , ed. S. Jasanoff and S.-H. Kim, 321–341. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Jasanoff, S., and S.-H. Kim (eds.). 2015. Dreamscapes of Modernity: 
Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Kish, Z., and M. Fairbairn. 2018. Investing for profit, investing for 
impact: Moral performances in agricultural investment pro-
jects. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 50 (3): 
569–588.
Krzywoszynska, A. 2019. Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: The 
role of attentiveness in more-than-human ethics. Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers 44 (4): 661–675.
Kuns, B., O. Visser, and A. Wästfelt. 2016. The stock market and the 
steppe: The challenges faced by stock-market financed, Nordic 
farming ventures in Russia and Ukraine. Journal of Rural Stud-
ies 45: 199–217.
LaDuke, W. 2016. All Our Relations: Native Struggles for Land and 
Life. Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.Latour, B. 1993. We Have Never Been Modern. London: Harvester/
Wheatsheaf.
Layoun, M.N. 2001. Wedded to the Land? Gender, Boundaries, and 
Nationalism in Crisis. Durham/London: Duke University Press.
Le Billon, P., and M. Sommerville. 2017. Landing capital and assem-
bling ‘investable land’in the extractive and agricultural sectors. 
Geoforum 82: 212–224.
Leyshon, A., and N. Thrift. 2007. The capitalization of almost every -
thing: The future of finance and capitalism. Theory, Culture & 
Society 24 (7–8): 97–115.
Li, T.M. 2014. What is land? Assembling a resource for global invest-
ment. Transactions of the institute of British Geographers 39(4): 
589–602.
Li, T.M. 2018. After the land grab: Infrastructural violence and the 
“Mafia System” in Indonesia’s oil palm plantation zones. Geo-
forum 96: 328–337.
Loconto, A., and R. Rajão. 2020. Governing by models: Exploring the 
technopolitics of the (in)visibilities of land. Land Use Policy 96 
(104241): 1–5.
Lorimer, J. 2020 (forthcoming). The Probiotic Planet. Using Life to 
Manage Life. Chicago, IL: University of Minnesota Press.
Magnan, A. 2015. The financialization of agri-food in Canada and 
Australia: Corporate farmland and farm ownership in the grains 
and oilseed sector. Journal of Rural Studies 41: 1–12.
Martin, S.J. 2020. The political economy of distillers’ grains and 
the frictions of consumption. Environmental Politics 29 (2): 
297–316.
McCall Howard, P. 2018. The anthropology of human-environment 
relations. Materialism with and without Marxism. Focaal  82: 
64–79.
McGregor, A. 2004. Sustainable development and ‘warm fuzzy feel -
ings’: Discourse and nature within Australian environmental 
imaginaries. Geoforum 35 (5): 593–606.
McMichael, P. 2013. Land grabbing as security mercantilism in inter -
national relations. Globalizations 10 (1): 47–64.
Mitchell, T. 2011. Are environmental imaginaries culturally con-
structed? In Environmental Imaginaries of the Middle East and 
North Africa, ed. D.K. Davis and E. Burke III, 265–273. Athens, 
OH: Ohio University Press.
Montgomery, D.R. 2007. Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations. Berke-
ley: University of California Press.
Moon, D. 2013. The Plough that Broke the Steppes. Agriculture and 
Environment on Russia’s Grasslands, 1700–1914. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Moon, D. 2020. The American Steppes. The Unexpected Russian 
Roots of Great Plains Agriculture, 1870s–1930s. Oxford: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Moore, D.S. 2005. Suffering for Territory: Race, Place, and Power 
in Zimbabwe. Durham/London: Duke University Press.
Mormont, M. 1990. Who is rural? Or, how to be rural: towards a 
sociology of the rural. In Rural Restructuring. Global pro-
cesses and their responses, ed. T. Marsden, P. Lowe, and S. 
Whatmore, 21–44. London: David Fulton Publishers.
Morris, B. 2014. Protests, Land Rights, and Riots: Postcolo-
nial Struggles in Australia in the 1980s. New York/Oxford: 
Berghahn Books.
Münster, D. 2017. Frontier in ruins: Internal colonization and the 
making of an agricultural landscape in South India. In Soziale 
Ästhetik, Atmosphäre, Medialität: Beiträge aus der Ethnologie, 
ed. P. Zemisch, U. Münster, J. Zickgraf, and C. Lang, 97–107. 
Berlin, Münster, Wien, Zürich, London: Lit.
Münster, D., and J. Poerting. 2016. Land als Ressource, Boden und 
Landschaft: Materialität, Relationalität und neue Agrarfragen 
in der Politischen Ökologie. Geographica Helvetica 71 (4): 
245–257.
281
Introduction to symposium ‘Reimagining land: materiality, affect and the uneven trajectories…
1 3
Nalepa, R.A., A.G.S. Gianotti, and D.M. Bauer. 2017. Marginal land 
and the global land rush: A spatial exploration of contested 
lands and state-directed development in contemporary Ethio-
pia. Geoforum 82: 237–251.
Neilson, J., and B. Pritchard. 2011. Value Chain Struggles: Insti-
tutions and Governance in the Plantation Districts of South 
India. Malden, MA: Wiley.
Nesbitt, J.T., and D. Weiner. 2001. Conflicting environmental imagi-
naries and the politics of nature in Central Appalachia. Geo-
forum 32 (3): 333–349.
Ofstehage, A. 2016. ‘Farming is easy, becoming Brazilian is hard’: 
North American soy farmers’ social values of production, 
work and land in Soylandia. Journal of Peasant Studies  43 
(2): 442–460.
Oliveira, G.L.T. 2018. Chinese land grabs in Brazil? Sinophobia and 
foreign investments in Brazilian soybean agribusiness. Glo -
balizations 15 (1): 114–133.
Ouma, S. 2014. Situating global finance in the land rush debate: A 
critical review. Geoforum 57: 162–166.
Ouma, S. 2016. From financialization to operations of capital: Histori-
cizing and disentangling the finance-farmland-nexus. Geoforum  
72: 82–93.
Ouma, S. 2020. This can(’t) be an asset class: The world of money 
management, “society”, and the contested morality of farmland 
investments. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  
52 (1): 66–87.
Oya, C. 2013. The Land Rush and Classic Agrarian Questions of Capi-
tal and Labour: a systematic scoping review of the socioeco-
nomic impact of land grabs in Africa. Third World Quarterly 34 
(9): 1532–1557.
Panikkar, B., and J. Tollefson. 2018. Land as material, knowledge and 
relationships: Resource extraction and subsistence imaginaries in 
Bristol Bay, Alaska. Social Studies of Science 48 (5): 715–739.
Patel, R., and J.W. Moore. 2017. A History of the World in Seven Cheap 
Things. Oakland: University of California Press.
Peace, A. 2005. A sense of place, a place of senses: Land and landscape 
in the West of Ireland. Journal of Anthropological Research 61 
(4): 495–512.
Pedersen, R., and L. Buur. 2016. Beyond land grabbing: Old morals 
and new perspectives on contemporary investments. Geoforum  
72: 77–81.
Peet, R., and M. Watts. 1996. Liberation Ecologies: Environment, 
Development, Social Movements. London: Routledge.
Pegler, L.J. 2015. Peasant inclusion in global value chains: Economic 
upgrading but social downgrading in labour processes? Journal 
of Peasant Studies 42 (5): 929–956.
Peluso, N.L. 2012. What’s nature got to do with it? A situated histori-
cal perspective on socio-natural commodities. Development and 
Change 43 (1): 79–104.
Peters, P. 2001. Maps, metaphors and meanings: Boundary struggles 
and village forest use on private and state land in Malawi. Society 
and Natural Resources 14 (5): 411–424.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific 
futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 
691–716.
Richardson, T. 2016. Where the water sheds: Disputed deposits at the 
ends of the Danube. In Watersheds: The Poetics and the Politics 
of the Danube River, ed. M. Bozovic and M.D. Miller, 307–336. 
Brighton, MA: Academic Studies Press.
Richardson, T. 2018. The terrestrialization of amphibious life in a Dan -
ube Delta ‘Town on Water’. Suomen Antropologi: Journal of the 
Finish Anthropological Society 43 (2): 3–29.
Richardson, T., and G. Weszkalnys. 2014. Introduction: Resource mate-
rialities. Anthropological Quarterly 87 (1): 5–30.Saltzman, K., L. Head, and M. Stenseke. 2011. Do cows belong in 
nature? The cultural basis of agriculture in Sweden and Australia. 
Journal of Rural Studies 27 (1): 54–62.
Schama, S. 1995. Landscape and Memory. New York: A. Knopf.
Schoenberger, L., and A. Beban. 2020. Rupturing violent land imagi-
naries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cam-
bodia. Agriculture and Human Values. https ://doi.org/10.1007/
s1046 0-020-10156 -z.
Schoenberger, L., D. Hall, and P. Vandergeest. 2017. What happened 
when the land grab came to Southeast Asia? Journal of Peasant 
Studies 44 (4): 697–725.
Scott, J.C. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve 
the Human Condition Have Failed. Yale: Yale University Press.
Shetler, J.B. 2007. Imagining Serengeti: A History of Landscape Mem-
ory in Tanzania from Earliest Times to the Present. Athens, Ohio: 
Ohio University Press.
Sippel, S.R. 2018. Financialising farming as a moral imperative? Rene-
gotiating the legitimacy of land investments in Australia. Envi-
ronment and Planning A 50 (3): 549–568.
Sippel, S.R., and T. Weldon. (2020). Redefining land’s investability: 
Towards a neo-nationalization of resources in Australia? Terri -
tory, Politics, Governance. 1–18.
Sodikoff, G. 2007. Land and languor: Ethical imaginations of work 
and forests in northeast Madagascar. History and Anthropology  
15 (4): 367–398.
Sud, Nikita. 2019. The unfixed state of unfixed land. Development and 
Change 0 (0): 1–24.
Swearingen, W.D. 1987. Moroccan Mirages. Agrarian Dreams and 
Deceptions, 1912–1986. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Tomlinson, M. 2002. Sacred soil in Kadavu, Fiji. Oceania 72 (4): 
237–257.
Tsing, A. 2018. The Mushroom at the End of the World. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Visser, O. 2020. Persistent land imaginaries. Celebration of fertile soil 
and the recurrent ignorance of climate. Agriculture and Human 
Values. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1046 0-020-10154 -1.
Visser, O. 2006. Property, labour relations and social obligations in 
Russia’s privatised farm enterprises. In Changing Properties of 
Property, ed. F. von Benda-Beckmann, K. von Benda-Beckmann, 
and M.G. Wiber, 126–146. London, New York: Berghahn Books.
Visser, O. 2017. Running out of farmland? Investment discourses, 
unstable land values and the sluggishness of asset making. Agri -
culture and Human Values 34 (1): 185–198.
Visser, O., and M. Spoor. 2011. Land grabbing in post-Soviet Eurasia: 
The world’s largest agricultural land reserves at stake. Journal 
of Peasant studies 38 (2): 299–323.
Watkins, J. 2015. Spatial imaginaries research in geography: Syner -
gies, tensions, and new directions. Geography Compass 9 (9): 
508–522.
Weis, T. 2010. The accelerating biophysical contradictions of indus-
trial capitalist agriculture. Journal of Agrarian Change 10 (3): 
315–341.
Whatmore, S. 2002. Hybrid Geographies: Natures Cultures Spaces. 
London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: Sage.
White, B., S.M. Borras Jr., R. Hall, I. Scoones, and W. Wolford. 2012. 
The new enclosures: Critical perspectives on corporate land 
deals. The Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3–4): 619–647.
Williams, J.W. 2014. Feeding finance: A critical account of the shifting 
relationships between finance, food and farming. Economy and 
Society 43 (3): 401–431.
Wolford, W. 2004. This land is ours now: Spatial imaginaries and the 
struggle for land in Brazil. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 94 (2): 409–424.
282 S. R. Sippel, O. Visser 
1 3
Wolford, W. 2010. This Land is Ours Now: Social Mobilization and the 
Meanings of Land in Brazil. Durham/London: Duke University 
Press.
Wolford, W., S.M. Borras, R. Hall, I. Scoones, and B. White. 2013. 
Governing global land deals: The role of the state in the rush for 
land. Development and Change 44 (2): 189–210.
Woods, M. 2006. Redefining the ‘rural question’: The new ‘politics 
of the rural’ and social policy. Social Policy and Administration  
40 (6): 579–595.
Worster, D. 1979 [2004]. Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930s.  
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Sarah Ruth Sippel is a Senior Researcher and Lecturer at the Univer -
sity of Leipzig, Germany, and an Honorary Senior Research Fellow at 
the School of Social Science, University of Queensland. Her research 
explores the nexus between global food security, financialization of natural resources, and emerging forms of solidarities within global 
agri-food systems. She is the Principal Investigator of an 8-year 
research project on imaginations of land (C04, SFB 1199) funded by 
the German Research Foundation. She is the author and co-editor of 
three books and her work has been published in journals such as Agri -
culture and Human Values, Journal of Peasant Studies, Journal of 
Rural Studies and Environment and Planning A.
Oane Visser is an Associate Professor at the International Institute of 
Social Studies (ISS) in The Hague, the Netherlands. He has been visit-
ing scholar at University of Oxford, City University New York, Cornell 
University and University of Toronto. His research focuses on farmland 
investment, large-scale farms, digital farming, interactions between 
small and large farms, and rural cooperation, particularly in Russia, 
Ukraine and Romania. European Research Council (ERC) laureate 
Visser is the coordinator of the Eurasian Agrofood and Land initia-
tive (EURAL). Visser (co-)edited five special issues including two on 
financialisation of agriculture (in Agriculture and Human Values and 
Journal of Agrarian Change) and published articles in, amongst others, 
Journal of Rural Studies, Journal of Peasant Studies, Globalizations, 
Focaal and European Journal of Sociology.
