Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology     Vol. 32, 2025                 
 
 
Knowing soils – Perspectives beyond growth in carbon farming  
 
Susanna Barrineau1 
 
University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia  
 
Abstract  
This article works with the idea that radical solutions in agri -food systems require 
multiple ways of knowing soils beyond the dominant scientific practices. Using a 
relational lens that invites us to think with soils,  this article lifts our gaze to human -
soil relationships in creating post -growth food systems. In the context of a grassroots 
initiative in Sweden that advances regenerative carbon farming as a transformational 
pathway to food systems within planetary boundaries, poetic inquiry is used to  bring 
the often -unheard perspectives of "knowing soils " to the fore; h ow we know about 
soils matters.  
 Keywords  
soils, temporalities, 
diverse economies, 
poetic inquiry  
 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Universal norms  
Everyone is looking at carbon sequestration.  
The good thing about the thinking behind this is –  
how do we make the earth better?  
It will be a little liberating,  
that you don't have to discuss this or that,  
but what should you do then?  
People are so damn unmotivated to try new things.  
Many farmers are like that, probably because  
they are so pushed to the margins.  
They can't.  
It is a very big risk. And that is tragic.  
It doesn 't match up – the idea of growth from the economic context,  
it doesn't work!  
It is kilos that sell.  
It is kilos that sell.  
It is the norm.  
It is problematic.  
 
1 PhD student, Environmental Communication, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia , Email: 
Kirsti.Barrineau@research.usc.edu.au . This work has been supported by Mistra, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic 
Environmental Research, through the research program Mistra Environmental Communication, the Swedish Research 
Council Formas [number 2016 -20030 and 2019 -01147] . 
 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    2 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Soil carbon sequestration (SCS) through regenerative carbon farming is an emerging context of agri -
food systems transition. The voices in the opening poem above are those of Swedish "carbon farmers " freely 
reflecting on the current situation in agriculture as they see it. They point to hope – it's liberating to think about 
how we can make the earth better, rather than having to focus on other more trivial topics. But this hope prompts 
an open question – what should you do then? If it 's kilos that sell, this  transition is a huge risk for farmers who 
are already pushed to the margins. The farmers and landowners represented in this article, however, are 
working with a non -profit organization to pilot regenerative carbon farming practices on their land, trying 
together to work out viable models that pay farmers for building healthier soils to grow food. It is a project 
context where many (though not all, or not explicitly) refer to this kind of work as "regenerative agriculture " 
and see it as contributing to stay ing within planetary boundaries.  
This project adopts a long -term, holistic perspective, and its participants inform the exploration 
undertaken in this article to inquire into the possibilities of this movement, contributing to transitions to post -
growth food systems where socio -ecological  needs are foregrounded. Post -growth systems are characterized 
in this article by three core elements, inspired by feminist, post -development, and feminist political ecology 
scholars. First , post -growth systems reveal and overcome dualist conceptualizations (e.g. humans/nature) that 
perpetuate hierarchies of knowing and erase diverse interconnectedness (Haraway, 1988; Plumwood, 1993). 
Second , the modes of knowledge production that are legitimate and valued extend to many ways of knowing 
(e.g. "thinking -with", which can open up for including more -than-human others (Staffa et al ., 2022 ) and 
thinking -feeling, which includes telling stories about how places evolve and how we sense those changes 
(Escobar, 2018; Gómez et al., 2023). Finally , in valuing interconnectedness and diverse ways of knowing, 
post-growth systems center care that "encompasses diverse activities including the values that support our 
mental and political health for social development and the responsibility we have to care for human and more -
than-human others so that we may stop thinking of the planet merely as a conta iner of resources " (Gómez et 
al., 2023, p. 156). A focus on care centers the relational, where care is "recognizing and learning from one 's 
place in a diverse web of relationships and being drawn by the responsibilities that are embedded in such 
relationships " (Whyte & Cuomo, 2016, p. 240). In this way, post -growth food systems move beyond the 
prevailing society -nature dualism in capitalist society , embracing relationality, complexity, and a responsibility 
that means care is always a work in progress and never completed.  
Currently, agriculture is framed as an important part of the solution to global concerns on feeding 
growing populations, mitigating climate change through negative emissions, and reversing the trend of 
overshooting planetary boundaries (e.g. EP et al. , 2021). Yet there is little incentive or means for farmers and 
landowners to respond. Proposed as a new business model, emerging carbon farming schemes offer financial 
reward s to farmers and landowners through a carbon market for sequestering carbon in soils ( Lal et al., 2021; 
Newton et al ., 2020), which the EU identifies as a strategy to shift agriculture to contributing to negative 
emissions and creating food security (EC, n.d. -a, 2021; IPCC, 2023). However, the global and European agri -
food and carbon removal policy context is demonstrab ly propping up the status -quo (Newell & Taylor, 2018), 
depoliticized (Carton et al. , 2020; Karlsson et al., 2018), and based on reductionist framings that hide injustices 
and diversity (Bumpus, 2011).  
Taking inspiration from Gibson -Graham 's (2008) performative project of diverse economies, this article 
aims to make visible the experiences of grassroots actors doing the work to contribute to social well -being and 
environmental regeneration in the agri -food context. The visibility of these ac tivities is crucial for elaborating 
and enacting different economies that work with diverse temporalities beyond the linear and productionist 
temporalities of climate goals. The visibility of grassroots experiences mus t be raised in the deluge of market 
capitalist language (Newell & Taylor, 2018; Omar & Thorsøe, 2023) that gives the impression of futures 
determined by these dominant existing logics (Hulme, 2011)  that struggle to work for long -term sustainability 
and justice (Gottschlich & Bellina, 2017; Stoddard et al., 2021).  
The story of carbon farming is also a story about soils. As such, this article employs "thinking with 
soils" (Salazar et al., 2020) as a lens to not only make sense of existing human -soil relations in carbon farming 
contexts, but also as speculative engagement and critical attention to difference: how we know about soils, how 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    3 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 we care about soils, and how care shapes how we know about soils; where soils in their intrinsic heterogeneity 
are made think -able and soil -centered action is made possible in many ways.  
To this end, I use poetic inquiry (Faulkner, 2019 ) to offer a re -reading of carbon farming that is open -
ended and non -linear, and can take us to liminal spaces. Poems can account for the "culture, agency, and lived 
experience of those dependent upon within natural resource systems [sic]" (Fernández -Giménez et al., 2019, 
p. 1081). I see these experiences and agencies extending beyond humans and following Puig de la Bellacasa 
(2015, 2017) engage with soil as a mul tispecies world, in which humans participate in "maintain[ing], 
repair[ing] and foster[ing] soil 's liveliness " (2015, p. 703). Thus, in exploring human -soil relations through 
poetic inquiry, I am interested in connections between scie ntific and non -scientific ways of knowing soils 
through situated stories (Haraway, 1988), and examining how centralizing the practices of "human attention to 
soil relationality " can help forge diverse economies (Green, 2020) by disrupting the familiar representations of 
SCS in carbon farming (Gibson -Graham, 2008). It is not the intent of this article to engage in research in soil 
sciences, but to observe the perceptions of and re lations to soils and discourses of soil science.2 In this way, it 
focuses on farmers ' experiences where discourses of soil science influence human -soil relations, including how 
farmers come to know their soils, where knowing encompasses more than just a scientific relationship to 
another subject. As such, by working with a theoretical lens  and methodology that aim s to engage with the core 
elements of post -growth systems outlined above, this article sheds light on what gets overlooked with the 
prioritization of urgent climate and agri -food discourses. With this, the aim is to demonstrate "a condition of 
possibility of new economic becomings, rather than a condition of their impossibility " (Gibson -Graham, 2008, 
p. 7). The objective of my analysis is therefore to investigate what conditions of possibility poetic inquiry helps 
us notice for post -growth food systems and how it helps us to think -with soils.  
This article is structured as follows: I first give some background to the climate and agri -food policy 
context in which carbon farming is situated. This is followed by a conceptualization of "thinking with soils " as 
a theoretical lens to explore relationality. Poetic inquiry is then elaborated on as a research method, after which 
is an explanation of the farm visits and interviews that make up the empirical context for this article. Six poetic 
vignettes are then p resented in the results section and provide  the context for relational exploration. A 
discussion o f the experiences brought forth in the poetic vignettes draws attention to the diversity of 
temporalities present in this regenerative carbon farming work. Thus, time is an organizing principle where 
pace/rhythm and past/present/futures feature strongly in the poetic vignettes, calling attention to the 
incompatibility of dominant market logics and regenerative soil practices. The article concludes with 
speculation on op enings: what can this re -reading t hrough poetic inquiry offer the imaginings and enactments 
of post -growth food systems?  
 
2. Soils on the global agenda  
Agri-food systems are a major contributor to intersecting ecological crises including climate change and 
biodiversity loss. At the same time, they are highly vulnerable to the effects of these crises (Clapp et al., 2018). 
The incentive to transform these systems is high and has led to policy undertakings that link climate and agri -
food systems with terms such as "climate smart agriculture " (Newell & Taylor, 2018). On the European Union 
level, this call for change is framed by a complex policy cocktail (see,  for example, EC Directorate -General 
for Communication, 2021) where sustainable soil management for climate mitigation and adaptation, and as a 
core part of sustainable agri -food systems, is currently included in multiple European Green Deal strategies, 
such as the EU Soil Strategy for 2030, Sustainable Carbon Cycles, and the Farm to Fork Strategy. We hear the 
EU communicating "caring for soils is caring for life " (EC D.-G. R. I. et al., 2020) as a soil deal for Europe 
takes shape to monitor soils and make sustainable soil management "the norm " (EC, n.d.c ). Soils and their 
management are key components in a Green Deal that aims to overcome the "existential threat " of climate 
change and environmental degradation and "transform the EU into a modern, resource -efficient and 
competitive economy " (EC, 2021b).  The Green Deal is currently the highest climate -protection program at the 
 
2 For perspectives on soil sciences, see e.g. Engel -Di Mauro (2014), Friedirchsen et al. (2021), Granjou & Phillips (2019), 
Janzen (2016), Lyons (2014), Richter (2020),  and Wadoux & McBratney  (2021).  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    4 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 EU level and is framed explicitly in terms of economic growth (Selwyn, 2021, p. 10). This is a key arena where 
the crucial role soils have in mitigating and adapting to climate change is taking shape (Bossio et al., 2020; 
Bradford et al., 2019; EC, n.d .,b; Lal, 2010; Lal et al., 2021; Panagos et al., 2022; Paustian et al., 1997, 2019). 
Furthermore, framed as a carbon dioxide removal method by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), where soils act as a valuable carbon sink, SCS is framed as a part of sustainable soil management, 
which can enhance biodiversity, ecosystem functions, employment, and local livelihoods (IPCC, 2023). Soils 
are made a priority in creating sustainable carbon cycles, where carbon farming plays a key role (EC, 2021a). 
In these ways, soils are becoming part of the global agenda (Hartemink, 2008) and are seen as the nexus 
between many life -sustaining spheres (Gu et al., 2021; Lal et al., 2017), connecting climate and ecological 
systems in green policies.  
This policy context creates an arena in which soils are called upon in different ways – whether to 
sequester carbon or provide a healthy environment in which to produce food – and which creates conditions 
for member states to organize strategies to transit ion agri -food systems. Much critical work has already gone 
into unpacking the broader implications of these strategies. For example, in the EU 's Farm to Fork Strategy 
(F2F), which is at the heart of the European Green Deal  (EC, 2020) , we see that the EU re mains committed to 
a growth strategy that is antithetical to realizing food sovereignty and other interconnected sustainability goals 
wherein the F2F perpetuates entrenched inequalities in the food system (Alberdi et al., 2020; Duncan et al., 
2020). F2F thus falls short of rebalancing power in the food system and strengthening farmers ' positions in the 
food value chain, and instead foregrounds technocratic solutions and economic competitiveness (Omar & 
Thorsøe, 2023). Newell and Taylor (2018) examine the in stitutional and material power at work in shaping the 
global climate and agriculture policy context where business -as-usual agribusiness is made compatible with 
addressing the challenges of climate change. Here, policy also draws on language that is techno cratic and 
market -oriented. Addressing negative emissions and carbon sinks, Carton and colleagues shine light on how 
the discourses on negative emissions and carbon sinks shape and legitimize a space where carbon removal is a 
"tool to reproduce the status -quo" (2020, p. 6).  
Policy helps shape our material engagement with soils by shaping what we think soils should do/be, and 
the strategies of care needed to materialize this. The effect of this policy context is the delegitimization and 
appropriation of alternatives  (Newell & Taylor, 2018) that have the possibility to advance different agri -food 
systems and knowledge that go beyond quantifiably measuring "success ." The focus on soils is on their 
productive and carbon sequestering capacities, creating a set of temporal assumptio ns that foreground linear 
timings around climate goals, yearly accounting, and soil data that tells us about the past. These motives for 
caring for soils subsequently shape the kinds of knowledge seen as relevant for reaching climate and 
environmental goal s, such as ascertaining the carbon content of soil. It shapes how soils are made think -able 
and the kinds of soil -centered action made possible. With policies that reinforce inequalities, deny food 
sovereignty, and foreground profit, the kinds of action ma de possible are pre -set to hinder the emergence of 
alternatives – particularly alternative human -soil relations. Green (2020, p. 285) argues: "For reclaiming 
terra—soil and earthly relations —requires struggles over forms of science that have been captured by 
economic, political, and legal practices that have situated in the web of soil life, the logics of private property, 
ownership, and control ." This focus provokes the question of how we move from a relation of mastery and 
control toward "a science of par tnerships in processes " (Green, 2020). How can we come to know soils beyond 
the dominant narrative of growth?  
 
3. Knowing Soils – an invitation to new economies  
An emerging scholarly movement to address the cultural, political, and ethical significance of soils in 
shaping climate and food futures invites a more critical engagement with the collaborations of humans and 
soils in agriculture (Granjou & Phillips, 2019; Granjou & Salazar, 2019; Holmstedt, 2022; Krzywoszynska, 
2019, 2019; Krzywosz ynska & Marchesi, 2020; Lyons, 2020; O 'Brien, 2020; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015, 2017). 
These perspectives conceptualize the relationality of soils, where things are mutually constituted through 
multispecies communities. This relational shift opens a space for alternative stories about living well in an era 
of climate change and relating differently to soils. "Thinking with soils " emerges from the work of Salazar and 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    5 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 colleagues (2020, p. 7) where they see this as "critically examining the current framings, discourses, and 
practices that make soils think -able for individuals and organizations, and making time and space for alternative 
ways of thinking soils and for soil -related action to emerge ."  
As was also evident in the policy context, interest in soil liveliness and soils as allies in tackling climate 
change and food security is moving out of the margins and stretching into soil science and agricultural 
development agendas and communities (Gran jou & Phillips, 2019). Yet research that engages with farmers ' 
experiences in this rising call to attend to soil health raises concerns that "as long as soil care is configured 
primarily as farmers ' concern, the potential of attentiveness in generating eth ical regard to the needs of soil 
biota will be limited " (Krzywoszynska, 2019, p. 661). Additionally, alternative ways of thinking about soils, 
as well as who has the mandate to think or know about soils,  are limited by the dominance of discourses and 
practices that prioritize soils ' productive / profit -generating capacities. One example – which is relevant for the 
practice of carbon farming in that it is based on a standardized way of viewing soils – is the orientation towards 
the productivity of soils . Thi s perspective promoted the idea that soils are commensurable across geographies 
based on their chemical components, and which has historical roots in the chemical model of soil fertility 
(Marchesi, 2020). These soil conceptualizations supported the redistribution of exp ertise about soils from farms 
to labs (Marchesi, 2020). This transition normalized scientific tools, consultants, and advisors, shifting 
knowledge -building in farming to the realm of scientific expertise rather than in terms of farmers ' own e xpertise 
normalizing the mantra "you can 't manage what you can 't measure " (Krzywoszynska, 2021). Puig de la 
Bellacasa (2015) further provides another historical account of how the linear orientations of economics and 
soil sciences converge in a productionist logic for innovative soil solutions that is gaining momentum in the 
anxiety accompanying overl apping ecological crises. This temporal alignment, she argues, shapes human -soil 
relationships around the extraction of economic value – a perspective also pro moted by other 
scholars/researchers (Kearnes & Rickards, 2020; Kon Kam King & Granjou, 2020; Salazar et al., 2020; Tironi 
et al., 2020).  
As Krzywoszynska and Marchesi (2020, p. 197) argue, if soils are primarily known through their carbon 
content, local land management strategies may be left unaccounted for, creating tensions between different 
systems of soil knowledge. Human and non -human act ors thus become subjects regulated by, for example, 
carbon governance technologies that render landscapes legible and soils defined through their carbon content 
alone and omitting other valued socio -nature relations (Gupta et al., 2012 in Jackson et al., 2017, p. 870 –871; 
Kearnes & Rickards, 2020; Leach et al., 2012). How we come to know soils and their carbon content plays a 
critical role in the types of relationships formed (human -human -nonhuman) and whether these relationships 
re-establish existing hierarchies and inequalities, which is a key matter in post -growth futures. Thinking with 
soils is a relational approach that can help us in the creation of alternatives. It opens up the performative 
dominance (Gibson -Graham 2008) of scientific knowledge and ec onomic growth and makes it possible to 
imagine how different ways of knowing can help us expand how we care for soils. This article contributes to 
this body of scholarship related to thinking with soils by exploring farmers ' experiences and perceptions in the 
context of a carbon farming project that promotes and focuses on soil health and regenerative farming practices 
– what makes soils think -able for them and what kinds of alternative action are made possible?  
 
4. Methodology – Project context, data production, and poetic inquiry  
The empirical work for this article emerges from eight farm visits around Sweden, where farmers and 
landowners are voluntarily piloting carbon farming methods on their land. I chose to visit farms that have been 
operating as pilot farms in an initiative le d by a Swedish project that aims to support carbon sequestration in 
Swedish agriculture, and has received funding from government agencies. The project is unique in Sweden, 
and small, hosting just a few dozen farms. As such, I do not provide detailed infor mation about each visit as 
this jeopardizes the anonymity of my informants, which was the condition proposed to them and to which they 
consented . This project is a collaboration between two Swedish non -profit organizations that co -own the 
project and whose members have been participating in my research program 's case study on carbon farming 
through focus group meetings and workshops from 2021 -2022. The project was launched with the aim of 
supporting a transition in the agri -food context , where no top -down a ction was happening. The aims of the 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    6 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 non-profit project are: to forge connections between businesses (e.g. food producers) and organizations that 
can finance carbon storage and soil improvement measures on farms; develop and put into practice new 
knowledge together with researchers; and educate on carbon farming and soil health. The project 's motive is 
to contribute to a long -term transition of agriculture that includes agroecological, regenerative and carbon 
storing farming methods to create a food system within planetary boundaries and to become a member -owned 
organization. In this way, the  project exemplifies the ethos of a not -for-profit economy where the key purpose 
is social benefit and resources flow in a circular way ra ther than accumulating in the hands of the few (Hinton, 
2020).  
Consequently, to approach this agri -food transition holistically, the project members , whose 
perspectives inform my research , work to improve soil health, identifying a range of co -benefits that 
accompany that work (including, for example, improved water retention, improved human and animal welfare, 
resilience in food production, and economic profitability for farmers).3 The project creates a space for a 
grassroots movement where no other guiding policies from the Swedish government on complementary 
measures4 to reach the national goal of net -zero by 2045 yet exist.  
Notwithstanding, as the green EU strategies demonstrate a pro -growth agenda, reports from relevant 
governing bodies in Sweden also reveal how firmly situated the climate -agriculture context is in economic 
growth logic. In a report on the role of agricultur e in working towards national climate goals, the Swedish 
Board of Agriculture writes that the amount of food produced in Sweden needs to increase alongside increased 
resource efficiency, the phasing out of fossil fuels, and better care for soils to increas e carbon sequestration 
(Markensten et al ., 2023). A publication on the agricultural sector 's climate transition by the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency discusses the transition in relation to business and the economy, stating that 
key obstacles to decreasing the emissions from the agricultural sector are that the emissions do not have a price, 
that emissions from biological processes are difficult to measure, and that innovation in this sector is often not 
profitable for investors (Naturvårdsverket &  Jordbruksverket, 2022). These agendas and noted obstacles 
arguably increase the challenges of any transition aiming for alternative economic framings.  
The participating farms in the carbon farming project are spread out, mostly in the south of Sweden, 
and are of different sizes, with some farms piloting carbon farming methods on 86 hectares of land while others 
are focusing efforts on 3 hectares. They pa rticipate in this project as individual farms, although the project 
hosts networking opportunities in the form of online and in -person seminars and workshops on relevant topics. 
Farm visits are a key part of the project 's work. The primary purpose of visit s is to conduct  soil health tests and 
talk with participants about their experiences during the project. For this case study work, six of the visits were 
conducted within the project organization, while I conducted two visits. The project members conducting the 
farm visits sent the farmers information about the aims of my research project and an ethics form p rior to the 
visit. They obtained the farmers ' consent for me to accompany them on the visit, assuring them anonymity in 
research outputs.  
The farm visits consisted of semi -structured interviews, conversations, and walks into the fields piloting 
carbon farming. For example, we discussed what had happened since the farmers had shifted practice to try 
something new on their fields . These farmers worked with cover crops, agroforestry, rotational grazing, and 
effective microorganisms. My interest was to find out how these farmers experience caring for soils and what 
ways of knowing they used to understand soil health. During the visits I directed , I posed similar questions, 
including, for example, inquiring how participants knew that things were "going well " on a field (see Appendix 
A for the list of guiding questions). Each visit lasted 2 -4 hours, was recorded with the consent of the 
participants, and then transcribed. Discussions started indoors and then continued while out on the pilot fields 
to undertake soil health tests, where I engaged as a participant observer. Th ese tests were conducted with simple 
 
3 How the not -for-profit ethos of the project interacts with the project 's engagement in creating sustainable carbon markets 
in line with their explicit commitment to the framework of a circular economy, as articulated by Raworth (2018), is a 
pathway of inquiry that could reveal more about the political ecology of the project i tself but is not pursued in this article.  
4 Complementary measures are described as, for example, increased net absorption of greenhouse gases in forests and soil, 
separation, transport and storage of carbon dioxide of biogenic origin and verified emission reductions through investments 
in other countries (Markensten et al., 2023) . 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    7 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 tools including a spade, water bottle, measuring stick, hammer, plastic cylinder, timer, and sometimes a garlic 
press and Brix Meter (which is a simple instrument to gauge how stressed plants are based on nutrient levels 
at that moment).  
My goal is to explore this context in a way that might affectively synthesize and communicate some of 
"the complexity and emotional -psychological dimensions of subjective lived experience " (Fernández -Giménez 
et al., 2019, p. 1084) in a way that would be more open -ended and non -linear (Faulkner, 2017). To this end, I 
work with poetic inquiry by turning these conversations in fields and kitchens into poetic vignettes (Faulkner, 
2019), where poetic inquiry is thus both a method and result of research activity . I use poetic inquiry to resist 
the norms (van Amsterdam & van Eck, 2019) of dominant science communication I see in agri -food contexts, 
and to use a form of analysis that could access the senses in a way that could lead one to "pause, reflect, feel " 
(Glesne, 1997, p. 213) . Poetry brings liminality; a language of creation that goes beyond the strict borders of 
scientific inquiry which "is connected to the rhythmic, chaotic and affective dimensions of participant 's lives 
(and our own) " (van Amsterdam & van E ck, 2019, p. 305).  
I transformed interview -conversation transcripts into poetic vignettes where each vignette consists only 
of the research participant 's own words (albeit translated) engaging in poetic transcription  (Glesne, 1997). 
Using the guidance of Glesne 's poetic transcription example, the words in the poetic vignettes are taken from 
the whole transcription and kept in order, except  for a couple of sentence order changes for clarity. The poetic 
transcription process started with reading and re -reading interview transcriptions and pulling out major themes 
from each transcript. I then coded and sorted the transcriptions by those themes. "How we know about soils " 
and the "challenges of being a carbon farmer " were both prominent themes given that my interview qu estions 
as well as the questions of the project organization during farm visits were specifically around these topics. 
Other topics such as "advice to politicians " and "dreams for the future " contained less data, both because they 
emerged more organically in conversation and because of  a lack of time to develop the conversations further 
on the topic.  
To create the poems, I used parts from each theme that resonated with me or that captured an essence 
of what each participant was saying as I understood it; "I was not only trying to make sense of data but also 
attempting to use [the participants '] words to convey the emotions that the interviews evoked in me " (Glesne, 
1997, p. 206). Following Meier and Wegener (2017, p. 194 in Helin, 2020), I understand resonance as the 
"ability to evoke images, memories and emotions ." The vignettes do not mix voices; each  is from just one 
person. Since the conversations were held in Swedish, I have translated them into English, losing some of the 
original power of the language and rhythms. I have tried to maintain the meanings as I felt them, underscoring 
that this approach "creates a third voice that is neither the interviewee 's nor the researcher 's but it is a 
combination of both " and "imposes particular meaning " (Glesne, 1997, p.215). Poetic inquiry is thus a method 
of re -presenting versions of these farmers ' experiences, filtered through myself, the researcher. It is a method 
that makes explicit that:  
 
When we write social science, we use our authority and privileges to talk about the people we 
study. No matter how we stage the text, we – the authors – are doing the staging. As we speak 
about the people we study, we also speak for them. (Richardson, 1992 , p. 131 in Glesne, 1997, 
p. 214)  
 
In using poetic vignettes, my aim is to make the staging more transparent because, even though all the 
words from the vignettes are the participants ' own words, I have re -presented them. Thus, the vignettes created 
through this experimental form of writing tell small parts of the different participants ' stories in this carbon 
farming context, saying something about how human -soil relations are shaped.   
These vignettes aim to show, rather than tell (Faulkner, 2019, p.11), something of participants ' lived 
experiences. Using poetic inquiry, I aim to explore ways of worlding creatively – including thinking about 
what keeps dominating ontologies in place and how we can begin to undo and rework the centrality of particular 
dualisms (e.g. nature/culture) that have been culturally harnessed with such catastrophic consequences 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    8 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 (Escobar, 2018, p. 65). Through this third voice, poetry helps us notice the relational rather than the 
instrumental, drawing attention to the diverse knowledge and wisdom that emerges in this context and resisting 
the discursive erasure of global climate policies.  
 
5. Poetic vignettes on regenerative carbon farming  
These vignettes are an attempt to tell situated stories in chorus. I now invite the reader on a journey 
through these farmers ' stories.  
 
The long -term  
This whole thing about building flexibility and  
resilience in all systems…  
we've still burned ourselves out pretty badly once or twice already.  
But we have to have a broader perspective on what we are doing for it to be sustainable in the long -term.  
It is such an incredibly  
long-term perspective.  
That is what is so tricky –  
how can you get a harvest that is acceptable for the investments in work and time?  
There is no perfect solution  
because we are fighting a system  
structured in a completely different way.  
It is kilos that sell.  
It is kilos that sell.  
It is the norm.  
It is problematic.  
So where do you start then?  
How can you compete with the conventional?  
Store carbon; think about your body!  
Responsibility  
Everyone must take responsibility for the climate.  
And we have the advantage that we can do this.  
We can sequester carbon  
while waiting for better technology.  
But when you think of an ordinary farmer,  
if this is going to spread, there must be money in doing so.  
Otherwise, you won't survive.  
It means bankruptcy.  
We must sequester carbon.  
In the long run, then, yield loss.  
And something has to make up for that.  
That's how it is.  
We think long -term better soil health, but, at the same time,  
our ancestors have fought:  
they have moved stones, they have dug by hand, removed weeds.  
And we do not till  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    9 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 then it will be full of weeds,  
which we have fought for so many years to get rid of  
to grow as much grain as possible.  
There are two important things:  
we have to have food,  
we have to sequester carbon.  
We have to find levels where we can do both.  
We have now invested a little too much in  
carbon sequestration.  
How do we know?  
I think everybody is different.  
I feel a bit of stress,  
underlying stress, that is pushing also.  
You know this stress  
about knowing that things cannot continue as they do.  
Having enough knowledge to know  
that you cannot continue to take nourishment out of the soil  
because you are depleting it.  
Knowing if you take a shovel and you go down into the soil  
open and see that there 's no humus left,  
that you can see with your eyes,  
that's a fact, you can 't go against it…  
Nature speaks for itself if you look at it.  
Many people need to have the evidence written;  
I am not one of them.  
Nature responds  
Conventional agriculture says  
that we run much more economically because we can fertilize –  
the computer says to fertilize here  
and fertilize there.  
While we say  
 why fertilize at all  
when we can make it work anyway?  
– This has to do with how did we know we were doing the right thing.  
What do we in agriculture need to do?  
The organic certifier 's rules were an A5 page when we started.  
Now it 's a book.  
Just because.  
But at that time, people thought: nature first!   
And then came the rules.  
But who says that will be good?  
What about free thought and will and vision?  
After all, that is what moves us forward.  
Farms are bought up, shut down, and children no longer take over their parents' farms.  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    10 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Some build up bigger and bigger units.  
That's how you do it because you have to make a profit.  
But of course, nature does respond.  
Partridges  
Easy.  
I want partridges.  
If partridges come,  
then the ecosystem works.  
Then there are insects.  
Then there is protection for them.  
And that is ONE indicator.  
It's not the only one.  
It's easy to register.  
But there is not a statistic for them.  
"Are we on the right track? " 
Getting the biology going,  
fungal life...it's sometimes close to zero.  
It's absolutely crazy.  
You begin to understand  
that quite a lot has happened for a long time  
in the wrong direction.  
How do we make the soil better?  
Getting the cows out, trampling, grazing, and fertilizing  
– simply –  
is seriously underestimated.  
That's a farmer – we test, then we try, we try some more.  
But to quantify,  
precisely box in  
exactly how it should be done,  
exactly how it should be communicated,  
how it should be received,  
it becomes damn difficult all of a sudden.  
How do we take this further?  
I don't necessarily see the point of greenwashing  
but the effect here in the soil of what one does –  
yes,  
we would like to be able to quantify, measure, for our part.  
If there is someone who wants to pay for it because it will improve the system,  
then that is great.  
But I'm not that interested in selling  
someone else's right  
to do something over there instead.  
We get better soil health and so on  
we make money from it.  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    11 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 What you want when you're out in the field are quick methods,  
it doesn't have to be exact numbers  
between the thumb and forefinger – getting better, getting worse...  
Measure.  
Simple,  
quick methods to be able to quantify  
"are we on the right track? " 
I can go out and smell, feel, taste – those are the methods we use  
and dig,  
simply,  
feel.  
But a small app, or instrument...  
There are so many variables.  
The problem is when I go out and dig and feel here and there  
there are a lot of opinions – the perception that  
"now it feels a little better "  
because you are in a better mood or...  
but to go from feeling, tasting, smelling  
to sticking a probe into the soil.  
It would be hot stuff if you could find exact parameters –  
call it soil health,  
– is the soil doing better?  
And what, then, is better?  
You can do everything from counting worms to infiltration  
to lots of ways to do it,  
but ideally you could do it in the same way  
in Skåne as in Jämtland as Australia  
or whatever you want.  
Universally.  
 
 
6. Discussion  
The poetic vignettes presented here illustrate grassroots experiences in carbon farming. Read against 
the backdrop of global and EU climate and agri -food policy discourse, as well as the personal choice of these 
actors to be part of piloting carbon farming  in Sweden, I ask: in weaving through these poetic vignettes, what 
conditions of possibility do they help us notice for post -growth food systems and how do they help us to think 
with soils?  
To start, the vignettes together give nuance to different ways that soil health is visible or becomes 
knowable to these farmers and landowners – tasting, feeling, digging, seeing the humus, smelling, water 
infiltration, structure, insects, worms, birds. "Store carbon; think about your body! " ("lagra kol, tänk på din 
bål!") was one farmer 's way of express ing the connection of bodily health to the health of the soil; even the 
experiences of burn -out connects the body to the work of healing soils in this farme r's story. Throughout the 
vignettes , there is a sensorial and embodied involvement in understanding soil health, and these practices were 
familiar to most of the participants. Farmers, together with the non -profit organization, make time to walk out 
into the fields with a garlic press (to sq ueeze liquid from plant leaves), hammer, and old bits of cylinder to 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    12 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 assess soil health. Tasting, feeling, smelling, digging. I see these practices as "commoning practices " as they 
are not about efficiency or a perspective on management "where the future is organized towards a specific, 
technically defined goal of biological sustainability " (Bresnihan, 2015 in Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015). Farmers 
make time  to engage in this way, which has a pace of its own.  
In other ways too, the vignettes call attention to a variety of timescales and temporalities in these 
contexts that bring forth the richness of relationality in these farms. Fungi, cows grazing and trampling fields, 
a time when folks thought "nature first ", partridges returning, ancestors working by hand, building long -term 
resilience – these are rhythms that the farmers are part of, sense, and help create – and which illustrate a 
thickness to the present (Haraway, 2016). This thickness refers to the knot o f multiple simultaneously living 
lives – such as reinvigorating fungi, grazing cows, and the taste of soil at that moment – that contrasts the 
flattened and linear time frames of climate urgency and productionist achievements (Puig de la Bellacasa, 
2015). Indeed, most of the vignettes express an indication that we have been doing the wrong thing for a long 
time – "depleting the soil ", growing "as much grain as possible ", "fungal life " being  "close to zero ", fertilizing 
for profit. The first three vignettes further convey the experience of an ethical burden related to these wrongs 
– a fight, a responsibility, a knowing . Their involvement in and attention to these timescales that go beyond 
their own human lives comes forth as stressful and risky in "How do we know? " and "The long -term." 
While the sensorial practices in a thick present are well -established – "that's the farmer " – they are made 
inadequate and irrelevant because "It's kilos that sell ", "there 's not a statistic for [partridges] " and "you have 
to make a profit ." Particularly in "Are we on the right track? " a desire for quantifiable methods that make what 
they do comparable and universal is explicit. The farmer in "Responsibility " also states their belief that 
technology will be developed to help with the task of carbon sequestr ation, but until then, we wait and do what 
we can. Thus, the questions posed of "is the soil doing better? And what, then, is better? ", "Who says it will be 
good? ", and what is "acceptable " illustrate a spectrum of insecurities that these actors operate within. Soil is 
still connected to the value that might be extracted from it by sequestering carbon and producing yield, which 
sits in contradiction to the "long-term" temporalities of soil and ecosystem health that farmers are also thinking 
along. Two farmers hint at mistrust in their own capacities to tell if they are going in the "right direction " and 
lament the loss of "free thought and will and vision " – poor conditions for creative exper imentation in building 
alternative farms and developing and building trust in their soil sense -abilities (Krzywoszynska, 2019, p. 664).  
The demands of remaining profitable, producing yields, showing statistics, make visible the tension 
between the long -term repair of soils and the demands of food production in a "clash of temporalities " (Puig 
de la Bellacasa, 2015, p. 699). The "easy" metrics of partridges and what "you can see with your eyes " are 
"local systems of soil knowledge and valuation " (Krzywoszynska & Marchesi, 2020, p. 197) that do not directly 
contribute to the accounting logics of SCS. The rhythms that shape the relationships i n this thick present and 
how farmers know about their soils are thus "excluded from knowledge and made invisible " (Kallio & LaFleur, 
2023, p. 10; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2014). In their ethnographic work with regenerative farmers, Kallio and 
LaFleur (2023, p. 10) reflect that turning farmers ' practices into data effectively erases the relationships that 
gave rise to them, as well as making invisible other practices that are consequently counted as data. This is a 
trend that is emerging in the push to carbon f arming.  
"Are we on the right track? " illustrates this trend and takes us more deeply into a story of data where 
the practicality and intuition of a farmer – "we test, then we try, we try some more " – also longs for exact 
parameters for information on soil health. The incentive to "make money " works jointly with a logic of attentive 
experimentation for making the soil better. This vignette shows that engaging in regenerative carbon farming 
makes it important to "know how carbon [is] becoming sensible in their soils " (Kallio & LaFleur, 2023, p.10), 
and is apparently influencing how farmers relate to and know their soils. This farmer sees the need to translate 
the many variables of this work into quantifiable language – making it communicable.  Reading this together 
with "Nature responds ", which sp eaks to the influence of the organics sector, we can imagine how even the as -
of-yet-non-existent rule book of carbon farming may  leave little room for "free thought and will and vision ." 
Soils respond with a huge diversity of communicative expressions, as these vignettes show. Responding in 
kind may mean that sciences have a different kind of supporting role (Krzywoszynska et al., 2020, p. 102); that 
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    13 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 rather than being in the service of a global carbon or agri -food economy, "free thought " and experimentation 
participate in a "science of partnerships in processes " (Green, 2020).  
 
7. Openings  
This article has been motivated by the hope of making visible experiences and relationships in the 
context of a grassroots agri -food movement where the aim is to contribute to social well -being and 
environmental regeneration. In this sense, my interest is in openings, rather than conclusions. By making 
different relationships visible and imaginable, the thick present that emerges through these poetic vignettes via 
multiple overlapping temporalities invites pause – what gets overlooked with the prioritizatio n of urgent 
climate and agri -food discourses? Poetic inquiry shows conditions of possibility for new economic becomings 
by bringing what is usually in the background – multiple co -existing temporalities, relationalities, and 
emotional engagement – to the f oreground (Gibson -Graham, 2008). It is a way to rework how we talk about 
agri-food transitions that resists the discursive erasure of global climate politics.  
Together with Holmstedt (2022) and Green (2020), I suggest that the matter of soils and SCS told 
through poetic inquiry supports a creative reworking of ways of knowing, being, and doing that "attends to the 
vital continuum of relations between humans and humus " (Green, 2020, p. 286). These processes of reworking 
"urge[ s] us to stay with these troubles, with these fierce and ordinary realities " (Holmstedt, 2022 , p.62 ) in ways 
that reclaim attention to human -soil relationality and that do not attempt to univ ersalize around dominant 
economic growth principles. In this way, poetic inquiry also helps us to think with soils. Re -reading carbon 
farming through this relational lens surfaces the political struggle of what "normal " ways of knowing are in 
agri-food systems and how diversifying these ways of knowing is crucial for the emergence of post -growth 
food systems that value care and diverse modes of knowledge. Finally, by presenting these stories as poetic 
vignettes, I hope t o evoke for readers why the experienc es of these participants matter politically (Burford, 
2018) in imagining and enacting alternative agri -food systems.  
 
Acknowledgements  
I would like to thank Dr Naomi Smith for her support in reading early drafts of this essay and Dr Marcus 
Bussey for listening and responding to the poetic vignettes in their early stages. I am grateful for two 
anonymous reviewers for their constructive input in this process. I am especially grateful to the farmers for 
sharing their experiences and the project facilitators for inviting me to experience their work.  
 
References  
Alberdi, G., Begiristain Zubillaga, M., Brent, Z., Choplin, G., Claeys, P., Conti, M., Corrado, A., Duncan, J., 
Ferrando, T., McKeon, N., de Marinis, P., Milgroom, J., Moeller, N., Nicol, P., Onorati, A., Plank, C., 
van der Ploeg, J. D., Rivera -Ferre, M. G ., Sharma, D., … Van Dyck, B. (2020). A collective response 
from food sovereignty scholars on the EU 's Farm to Fork Strategy  (https://edepot.wur.nl/524949 ). 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.19433.11365  
Bossio, D. A., Cook -Patton, S. C., Ellis, P. W., Fargione, J., Sanderman, J., Smith, P., Wood, S., Zomer, R. J., 
von Unger, M., Emmer, I. M., & Griscom, B. W. (2020). The role of soil carbon in natural climate 
solutions. Nature Sustainability , 3(5), 5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893 -020-0491 -z  
Bradford, M. A., Carey, C. J., Atwood, L., Bossio, D., Fenichel, E. P., Gennet, S., Fargione, J., Fisher, J. R. B., 
Fuller, E., Kane, D. A., Lehmann, J., Oldfield, E. E., Ordway, E. M., Rudek, J., Sanderman, J., & Wood, 
S. A. (2019). Soil carbon science fo r policy and practice. Nature Sustainability , 2(12), 12. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893 -019-0431 -y  
Bresnihan , P. (2015). The more -than-human commons: From commons to commoning. In L. Dawney, S. 
Kirwan, & J. Brigstoke (Eds.), Space, power and the commo ns: The struggle for alternative futures  (pp. 
93–112). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315731995  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    14 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Bumpus, A. G. (2011). The matter of carbon : Understanding the materiality of tco2e in carbon offsets . 
Antipode , 43(3), 612 –638. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467 -8330.2011.00879.x   
Burford, J. (2018). Sketching possibilities: Poetry and politically -engaged academic practice . Art/Research 
International: A Transdisciplinary Journal , 3(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.18432/ari29261   
Carton, W., Asiyanbi, A., Beck, S., Buck, H. J., & Lund, J. F. (2020). Negative emissions and the long history 
of carbon removal. WIREs Climate Change , 11(6), e671. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.671   
Clapp, J., Newell, P., & Brent, Z. W. (2018). The global political economy of climate change, agriculture and 
food systems. The Journal of Peasant Studies , 45(1), 80 –88. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2017.1381602   
Duncan, J., Claeys, P., & Rivera -Ferre, M. (2020). The importance of food sovereignty for the Farm to Fo rk 
strategy and the New Green De al. Insights and limits of the SAM and SAPEA reports 1 . 
(https://edepot.wur.nl/524951 ) https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.18384.53761   
EC, (European Commission) Directorate -General for Research and Innovation (Veerman, C., Pinto Correia, 
T., Bastioli, C., Biro, B., Bouma, J., Cienciala, E., Emmett, B., Frison, E. A., Grand, A., Hristov, L., 
Kriaučiūnienė, Z., Pogrzeba, M., Soussana, J. -F., Vela, C. O., & Wittkowski, R. (2020). Caring for soil 
is caring for life: Ensure 75% of soils are healthy by 2030 for food, people, nature and climate: report 
of the Mission Board for soil health and food . Publications Office of the European Union. Retri eved 
February 7, 2023 from https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/821504   
EC, (European Commission) Directorate -General for Communication . (2021). European green deal: 
Delivering on our targets . Publications Office of the European Union. Retrieved January 12, 2024 from, 
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2775/595210   
EC, (European Commission). (n.d. -a). Carbon farming . Retrieved April 21, 2022 from, 
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu -action/forests -and-agriculture/sustainable -carbon -cycles/carbon -
farming_en   
EC, (European Commission). (2020). A farm to fork strategy for a fair, healthy and environmentally -friendly 
food system  [Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the 
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions COM/2020/381 final]. 
Retrieved January 12, 2024 from, https://ec.europa.eu/food/system/files/2020 -05/f2f_action -
plan_2020_strategy -info_en.pdf   
EC, (European Commission). (2021a). Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and 
the Council —Sustainable Carbon Cycles . Retrieved January 12, 2024 from, 
https://eur.lex.europa.eu/legal -content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021DC0800   
EC, (European Commission). (2021b). The European green deal —European Commission . Retrieved June 5, 
2024 from, https://commission.europa.eu/strategy -and-policy/priorities -2019 -2024/european -green -
deal_en   
EC, (European Commission). (n.d.b). Sustainable use of key natural resources . Retrieved June 5, 2024 from, 
https://commission.europa.eu/strategy -and-policy/priorities -2019 -2024/european -green -
deal/sustainable -use-key-natural -resources_en   
Engel -Di Mauro, S. (2014). Ecology, soils, and the left : An ecosocial approach . Springer. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137350138   
EP, Directorate -General for Parliamentary Research Services (European Parliament, Müller, K., Vettorazzi, S., 
Zamfir, I., Pape, M., Erbach, G., Scholaert, F., Halleux, V., McEldowney, J., Lomba, N., Heflich, A., 
Karamfilova, E., Titievskaia, J., Simões, H., Je nsen, L., & D 'Alfonso, A. (2021). EU climate action 
policy: Responding to the global emergency . Publications Office of the European Union. Retrieved 
October 3, 2023 from, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2861/009509   
Escobar, A. (2018). Designs for the pluriverse : Radical interdependence, autonomy, and the making of world s. 
Duke University Press.  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    15 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Faulkner, S. L. (2017). Poetic inquiry: Poetry as/in/ for social research . In P. Leavy (Ed.), The handbook of arts -
based res earch  (pp. 208 –230). Guilford Press.  
Faulkner, S. L. (2019). Poetic inquiry: Craft , method and practice . Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351044233   
Fernández -Giménez, M. E., Jennings, L. B., & Wilmer, H. (2019). Poetic inquiry as a research and engagement 
method in natural resource science . Society & Natural Resources , 32(10), 1080 –1091. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920.2018.1486493   
Friedrichsen, C. N., Hagen -Zakarison, S., Friesen, M. L., McFarland, C. R., Tao, H., & Wulfhorst, J. D. (2021). 
Soil health and well -being: Redefining soil health based upon a plurality of values. Soil Security , 2, 
100004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soisec.2021.100004  
Gibson -Graham, J. (2008). Diverse economies: Performative practices for 'other worlds '. Progress in Human 
Geography , 32(5), 613 –632. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132508090821   
Glesne, C. (1997). That rare feeling : Re-presenting research through poetic transcription . Qualitative Inquiry , 
3(2), 202 –221. https://doi.org/10.1177/107780049700300204   
Gómez, M., Voss, A. K., & Farrelly, E. (2023). Meanings and practices of care in feminist political ecology : 
An intergenerational conversation with Khayaat Fakier and Wendy Harcourt. In W. Harcourt, A. 
Agostino, R. Elmhirst, M. Gómez, & P. Kotsila (Eds.), Contours of Feminist Political Ecology  (pp. 
155–176). Springer . https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031-20928 -4_7  
Gottschlich, D., & Bellina, L. (2017). Environmental justice and care: Critical emancipatory contributions to 
sustainability discourse. Agriculture and Human Values , 34(4), 941 –953. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460 -016-9761 -9  
Granjou, C., & Phillips, C. (2019). Living and labouring soils: Metagenomic ecology and a new agricultural 
revolution? BioSocieties , 14(3), 393 –415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/s41292 -018-0133 -0  
Granjou, C., & Salazar, J. (2019). The stuff of soil : Belowground agency in the making of future climates. 
Nature and Culture , 14, 39–60. https://doi.org/10.3167/nc.2019.140103   
Green, L. (2020). Unmaking soil mastery . Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 285 –287. 
https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919 -8142352   
Gu, B., Chen, D., Yang, Y., Vitousek, P., & Zhu, Y. -G. (2021). Soil -food-environment -health nexus for 
sustainable development . Research , 2021 . https://doi.org/10.34133/2021/9804807   
Gupta, A., Lövbrand, E., Turnhout, E., & Vijge, M. J. (2012). In pursuit of carbon accountability: The politics 
of REDD+ measuring, reporting and verification systems. Current Opinion in Environmental 
Sustainability , 4(6), 726 –731. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2012.10.004   
Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial 
perspective . Feminist Studies , 14(3), 575. https://doi.org/10.2307/3178066   
Haraway, D. (2016). Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene . Duke University Press Books.  
Hartemink, A. E. (2008). Soils are back on the global agenda. Soil Use and Management , 24(4), 327 –330. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475 -2743.2008.00187.x   
Helin, J. (2020). Temporality lost: A feminist invitation to vertical writing that shakes the ground. 
Organization , 30(2), 380 –395. https://doi.org/10.1177/1350508420956322   
Hinton, J. B. (2020). Fit for purpose? Clarifying the critical role of profit for sustainability. Journal of Political 
Ecology , 27(1), 236-262.  https://doi.org/10.2458/v27i1.23502   
Holmstedt, J. (2022). Humus Economicus. In R. Braidotti, E. Jones, & G. Klumbyte (Eds.), Posthuman 
Glossary 2 . (pp.62 -64). Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Hulme, M. (2011). Reducing the future to climate : A story of climate determinism and reductionism . Osiris , 
26(1), 245 –266. https://doi.org/10.1086/661274   
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    16 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 IPCC. (2023). Climate change 2023 : Synthesis report. contribution of working groups I, II and III to the sixth 
assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Chan ge. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth -assessment -report -cycle/   
Jackson, S., Palmer, L., McDonald, F., & Bumpus, A. (2017). Cultures of carbon and the logic of care : The 
possibilities for carbon enrichment and its cultural signature . Annals of the American Association of 
Geographers , 107(4), 867 –882. https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2016.1270187   
Janzen, H. H. (2016). The soil remembers. Soil Science Society of America Journal , 80(6), 1429 –1432. 
https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj2016.05.0143   
Kallio, G., & LaFleur, W. (2023). Ways of (un)knowing landscapes: Tracing more -than-human relations in 
regenerative agriculture. Journal of Rural Studies , 101, 103059. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2023.103059   
Karlsson, L., Naess, L. O., Nightingale, A., & Thompson, J. (2018). ‘Triple wins ' or ‘triple faults '? Analysing 
the equity implications of policy discourses on climate -smart agriculture (CSA). The Journal of Peasant 
Studies , 45(1), 150 –174. https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2017.1351433   
Kearnes, M., & Rickards, L. (2020). Knowing earth, knowing soil: Epistemological work and the political 
aesthetics of regenerative agriculture . In J. F. Salazar, C. Granjou, M. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, & 
M. Tironi (Eds.), Thinking with soils: Material politics and social theory  (pp. 71 –88). Bloomsbury 
Publishing.  
Kon Kam King, J., & Granjou, C. (2020). Mapping soil, losing ground?  Politics of soil mapping . In J. F. 
Salazar, C. Granjou, M. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (Eds.), Thinking with soils: Material 
politics and social theory  (pp. 39 –54). Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Krzywoszynska, A. (2019). Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: The role of attentiveness in more‐than‐
human ethics. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers , 44(4), 661 –675. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12293   
Krzywoszynska, A. (2021, April 28). Lecture: Towards a Gaian agriculture . 
Krzywoszynska, A., Banwart, S., & Blacker, D. (2020). To know, to dwell, to care : Towards an actionable, 
place -based knowledge of soils . In J. Salazar, C. Granjou, M. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi 
(Eds.), Thinking with soils : Material politics and social theory  (pp. 89 –106). Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Krzywoszynska, A., & Marchesi, G. (2020). Toward a relational materiality of soils : Introduction. 
Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 190 –204. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919 -8142297   
Lal, R. (2010). Beyond Copenhagen: Mitigating climate change and achieving food security through soil 
carbon sequestration. Food Security , 2(2), 169 –177. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571 -010-0060 -9  
Lal, R., Mohtar, R. H., Assi, A. T., Ray, R., Baybil, H., & Jahn, M. (2017). Soil as a basic nexus tool: Soils at 
the center of the food –energy –water nexus.  Current Sustainable/Renewable Energy Reports , 4(3), 117 –
129. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40518 -017-0082 -4  
Lal, R., Monger, C., Nave, L., & Smith, P. (2021). The role of soil in regulation of climate. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 376(1834), 20210084. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2021.0084   
Leach, M., Fairhead, J., & Fraser, J. (2012). Green grabs and biochar: Revaluing African soils and farming in 
the new carbon economy. Journal of Peasant Studies , 39(2), 285 –307. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2012.658042   
Lyons, K. M. (2014). Soil science, development, and the "elusive nature " of Colombia 's Amazonian Plains. 
The Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology , 19(2), 212 –236. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jlca.12097   
Lyons, K. M. (2020). Vital decomposition: Soil practitioners and life politics . Duke University Press.  
Marchesi, G. (2020). Justus von Liebig makes the world: Soil properties and social change in the nineteenth 
century . Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 205 –226. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919 -8142308   
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    17 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Markensten, T., Bodin, P., Andersson, J., Eskhult, G., & Gotting, M. (2023). Jordbrukets roll i arbetet med det 
nationella klimatmålet  (RA23:12). Retrieved April 15, 2024 from, 
https://webbutiken.jordbruksverket.se/sv/artiklar/ra2312.html   
Meier, N., & Wegener, C. (2017). Writing with resonance. Journal of Management Inquiry , 26(2), 193 –201. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1056492616673911   
Naturvårdsverket, & Jordbruksverket. (2022). Jordbrukssektorns klimatomställning —Underlagsrapport om 
jordbrukssektorn inom regeringsuppdraget om näringslivets klimatomställning  (7060). Retrieved April 
15, 2024 from, https://www.naturvardsverket.se/publikationer/7000/978 -91-620-7060 -1/  
Newell, P., & Taylor, O. (2018). Contested landscapes: The global political economy of climate -smart 
agriculture. The Journal of Peasant Studies , 45(1), 108 –129. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2017.1324426   
Newton, P., Civita, N., Frankel -Goldwater, L., Bartel, K., & Johns, C. (2020). What is regenerative agriculture? 
A review of scholar and practitioner definitions based on processes and outcomes. Frontiers in 
Sustainable Food Systems , 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2020.577723   
O'Brien, A. T. (2020). Ethical acknowledgment of soil ecosystem integrity amid agricultural product ion in 
Australia. Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 267 –284. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919 -8142341   
Omar, A., & Thorsøe, M. H. (2023). Rebalance power and strengthen farmers ' position in the EU food system? 
A CDA of the farm to fork strategy. Agriculture and Human Values  41,  631–646. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460 -023-10508 -5  
Panagos, P., Montanarella, L., Barbero, M., Schneegans, A., Aguglia, L., & Jones, A. (2022). Soil priorities in 
the European Union. Geoderma Regional , 29, e00510.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geodrs.2022.e00510   
Paustian, K., Andrén, O., Janzen, H. H., Lal, R., Smith, P., Tian, G., Tiessen, H., Van Noordwijk, M., & 
Woomer, P. L. (1997). Agricultural soils as a sink to mitigate CO 2 emissions. Soil Use and Management , 
13(s4), 230 –244. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475 -2743.1997.tb00594.x   
Paustian, K., Larson, E., Kent, J., Marx, E., & Swan, A. (2019). Soil C sequestration as a biological negative 
emission strategy . Frontiers in Climate , 1. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fclim.2019.00008   
Plumwood, V. (1993). Feminism and the mastery of nature . Routledge.  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2014). Encountering bioinfrastructure: Ecological struggles and the sciences of soil . 
Social Epistemology , 28(1), 26 –40. https://doi.org/10.1080/02691728.2013.862879   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social 
Studies of Science , 45(5), 691 –716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851   
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017). Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds . University of 
Minnesota Press.  
Raworth, K. (2018). Doughnut economics —Seven ways to think like a 21st -century economist . Random House 
UK.  
Richardson, L. (1992). The consequences of poetic representation. In C. Ellis & M. G. Flaherty (Eds.), 
Investigating subjectivity: Research on lived experience  (pp. 125 –137). Sage.  
Richter, D. D. (2020). Game changer in soil science. The Anthropocene in soil science and pedology . Journal 
of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science , 183(1), 5 –11. https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.201900320   
Salazar, J. F., Granjou, C., Kearnes, M., Krzywoszynska, A., & Tironi, M. (Eds.). (2020). Thinking with soils: 
Material politics and social th eory. Bloomsbury Publishing.  
Selwyn, B. (2021). A green new deal for agriculture:  For, within, or against capitalism? The Journal of Peasant 
Studies , 48(4), 778 –806. https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2020.1854740   
Staffa, R. K., Riechers, M., & Martín -López, B. (2022). A feminist ethos for caring knowledge production in 
transdisciplinary sustainability science. Sustainability Science , 17(1), 45 –63. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625 -021-01064 -0  
S. Barrineau                                                                                                                                     
Grassroots – Journal of Political Ecology      Vol. 32, 2025    18 Post-Growth Food Systems for a Just Social -
Ecological Transition within Planetary Bound-
aries             
 Stoddard, I., Anderson, K., Capstick, S., Carton, W., Depledge, J., Facer, K., Gough, C., Hache, F., Hoolohan, 
C., Hultman, M., Hällström, N., Kartha, S., Klinsky, S., Kuchler, M., Lövbrand, E., Nasiritousi, N., 
Newell, P., Peters, G. P., Sokona, Y., … Wil liams, M. (2021). Three decades of climate mitigation: 
Why haven 't we bent the global emissions curve?  Annual Review of Environment and Resources , 46(1), 
653–689. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -environ -012220 -011104   
Tironi, M., Kearnes, M., Krzywoszynska, A., Granjou, C., & Salazar, J. F. (2020). Soil theories: Relational, 
decolonial, inhuman. In J. F. Salazar, C. Granjou, M. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (Eds.), 
Thinking with soils: Material politics and social theory  (pp. 15 –38). Bloomsbury Publishing.  
van Amsterdam, N., & van Eck, D. (2019). In the flesh: A poetic inquiry into how fat female employees manage 
weight -related stigma. Culture and Organization , 25(4), 300 –316. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2019.1598999   
Wadoux, A. M. J. -C., & McBratney, A. B. (2021). Digital soil science and beyond. Soil Science Society of 
America Journal , 85(5), 1313 –1331. https://doi.org/10.1002/saj2.20296  
 
 
 
Appendix A  
Guiding Interview Questions  
 
1. What did the farm/land/soil look like when you first started farming here? What needs did you 
identify? What did you do / how are you able to respond? How has the soil changed?  
2. Do you have any guiding principles, practices or approaches to your work? What is important 
for you?  
3. How do you know that it is going well? Does the soil teach you about that?  
4. What do you think your farm will look like in the future?  
