Author’s addresses: Jen Liu, Cornell University, USA, jenliu@infosci.cornell.edu; Phoebe J. Sengers, Cornell University, 
USA, phoeobe.sengers@cornell.edu   
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and t hat copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permiss ions from Permissions@acm.org.  
2573-0142/2021/ 10 – Art480 $15.00  
© Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3479867  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021.  Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession  
in Digital Agriculture  
JEN LIU,  Cornell University, USA  
PHOEBE J. SENGERS,  Cornell University, USA  
 
This paper examines the causes and consequences of legibility as an organizing principle in the design of 
digital agricultur e (DA) systems in the United States. Legibility refers to systems of governance that use 
simplified understandings of a situation to control and direct action upon it. Legibility in digital agricultur e 
systems occurs at the conf luence of two traditions of legibility: the data-driven model common in the 
design of digital systems, and tactics for the control of nature and labor that have developed in the  United 
States since the foundation of the colonies. Our argument draws from (1 ) a historical analysis of broader 
patterns of agricultural technology and racialized land dispossession in what is now the United States and 
(2) empirical fieldwork that examines the adoption and maintenance of digital agriculture systems in rural 
New Yor k State. We describe the role that legibility historically has played in the development of 
agricultural systems in the US, and their consequences for who is able to farm and how.  This history 
raises the questions: What is made legible to whom? In that pr ocess, what becomes illegible? While 
legibility promises transparent and environmentally beneficial control, in our fieldwork we find that the 
demands of legibility are also restructuring the physical landscape, creating additional invisible labor, 
produci ng systems that are brittle to real -world conditions on farms, and creating opaque systems that 
block people from adapting to their circumstances. In reading our fieldwork together with the historical 
case, we demonstrate the pressures that are shaping the  stakes, subject, and objects of legibility in 
agricultural technology.  As more data -driven systems are used for environmental contexts, the CSCW 
community  needs to extend its ways to  understand how data -driven systems impact land, labor, and 
resources.   
CCS Concepts: • Human -centered computing  → Collaborative and social computing  → Empirical studies 
in collaborative and social computing  
KEYWORDS : digital agriculture, rural computing, design of data -driven systems, race in agriculture   
ACM Reference format:  
Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers . 2021. Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture . In 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction,  Vol. 5, CSCW2,  Article 480 (October 2021), 26 pages, 
https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3 47986 7 
1 INTRODUCTION  
Increasingly,  networked  systems are designed, developed , and deployed in the agriculture 
industry  to address social, economic, and environmental challenges in food production.  Many  of 
480 

480:2   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. these systems are design ed for on -farm applications  to address issues like rising costs of farm 
labor and equipment, natural resource management, and weather fluctuations a ssociated with 
climate change [50,54,59] . These systems include a broad suite of tools and infrastructures that 
use computing technologies throughout the agricultural process, such as planting, watering, 
weeding, and harvesting. This development follows a recent trend where networked and data -
driven systems are developed for a wide variety of settings and activities  [22]. In recent years , 
the CSCW and HCI community has raised concern s about  how these systems could  affect  
existing work and practices. This critical scholarship in computin g questions the ethics of these 
systems by focusing on issues like increasing governance of labor, privacy concerns, and 
unchecked biases  [22,40,44] . Our paper contributes to this  literature by examining the issues 
emerging from the confluence of digital systems of control  and the histor ical systems of control 
of land, living beings, and labor at work in agriculture  in the United States . 
Our core contention is that  a vision of legibility underlies  many digital  and data -driven  
agriculture  (DA)  systems currently under development  in the Uni ted States . By legibility , we 
mean methods of governance that couple simplified understandings of an environment or 
situation – often produced through quantification – to actions taken to control that system. 
Hopes that digital agriculture will increase the productivity of agriculture while  reduc ing its 
environmental impact are grounded in faith in the capacity of automated digital systems to 
adequately sense, understand , and control land and the living beings dwelling on it . This faith 
draws strength from the paradigms of data-driven systems  in digital desig n, as well as  from  
longer -standing traditions of control of land, plants, animals, and labor within the history of 
agricultural technology and production si nce colonies were established on the continent.  
In this paper, we analyze the historical legacy and present reality of digital agricultural 
technologies  in the US  in order to characterize what is at stake in using legibility as a core 
design frame for cont emporary DA.  While adoption of these systems is nascent, especially in 
our region of study  in the northeast United States , our observations  and analysis  can inform 
current approaches to the development of digital agriculture systems.  We ask: in the contex t of 
digital agriculture, what is made legible to whom? In that process, what becomes illegible?  
We begin by situating our research in current dialogues in digital ag riculture  research , 
building on previous work in scienc e and technology studies (STS) and  anthropology . We define 
legibility as systems of governance t hat bring situations and environments under control by 
coupling processes of simplified understanding , such as through quantification  and modeling , 
with action  intended to optimize outcomes from  that situation .  We analyze the causes and 
consequences of legibility in digital agriculture through two case studies : (1) a historical 
analysis of broader patterns of agricultural technology and racialized land possession in the 
United States and (2) a f ield study analyzing the current adoption of  digital agriculture  
technologies on farms in the northeastern United States . We look at the historical roots of 
legibility in agricultural technology by analyzing  the rise of agricultural technology and 
governance in the US, with a focus on the ways in which agriculture in general and modernized 
agricultural technology in particular have functioned to create a racialized dispossession of 
land. While legibility can frame our understanding of how technologies may unfold in the field, 
our historical analysis undermines any notions of neutrality of the logics that drive legibility, 
such  as extractive data logics and colonial settler logics.  Legibility in digital agricu lture 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:3 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. promises increase d, transparent control over productivity and the environmental impact of 
agriculture . We find in our fieldwork that the demands of legibility are simultaneously  
restructuring the environment, creating new forms of invisible labor of data collection and 
management, producing breakdowns in the face of farm variability, and generating opacity 
which hinders their users’ ability to adapt devices to farm conditions . These issues raise 
questions of who legibility is for and what is rendered legible and illegible.  
Our overall finding  is that t he data-driven  paradigm of digital design reinforces and refracts 
with the systems for control of land and labor  that have arisen through the history of US 
agricultural technology. This situation calls a ttention to the need for contextual analysis and 
historical understanding in the design of such data -driven systems. Our conclusion is the ethics 
and consequences of digital agriculture  systems  and other systems that measure and impact the 
land are not sim ply issues about  or for design  in a narrow sense ; they require attention to  the 
institutions, systems of governance, logics, and histories in which those systems are embedded.   
2 BACKGRO UND  
2.1 Agriculture  and CSCW  
Agriculture and food systems have long been a focus of CSCW and HCI. As Steup et al. has 
surveyed  [58], many of these efforts have been aimed towards small -scale farms, community 
gardens, and urban contexts. Much of this existing research focuses on the role of the farmer, 
grower, or consumer in the food sy stem  [31,33,39,43,48,58] . While these actors play important 
roles in food systems, we examine additional stakeholder s, such as extension agents, federal 
institutions, and land -grant universities , to illuminate  the broader politics of agricultural 
infrastructure . Rather than focus on small -scale growers,  we provide an  account of how 
networked and data -driven systems are used in industrial agriculture  settings. Industrial, or 
conventional , agriculture typically refers to large -scale farming that rel ies on a combination of 
mechanization and chemical interventions, such as synthetic fertilizers, herbicides, and 
pesticides fo r monocultural row cropping and livestock production. While practices like small -
scale  organic farming have seen a steady rise in recent years, industrial agriculture continues to 
be the main form of agriculture in the United States, making up about 9 8% of farm land [67]. 
Given the dominance of this form of agriculture, many recent efforts towards digital agriculture 
systems are designed for industrial contexts .  
Our work is situated in recent technological developments in agriculture that have prompted 
discussion among researchers, policymakers, and people in industry about whether  these 
changes will usher in a new revolution in agriculture. This potential  revolut ion, called 
“Agriculture 4.0” or “the fourth revolution ,” is imagined to be the consequence of  data-driven 
techniques, such as networked technologies, artificial intelligence, and robotics , to radically 
transform farming  [50]. Under this understanding, earlier  agricultural  revolutions were 
characterized  by widespread and large -scale transitions in agricultural methods and practices. 
These revolutions include the prehistoric shift to agricultural settlements from hunting and 
gathering, the increase of mec hanization in conjunction with the British Industrial Revolution, 
and most recently, the Green Revolution, which introduced cultivating and breeding 
technologies like fertilizers, pesticides, and high -yield crops in the mid 20th century. Proponents 
480:4   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. of digi tal agriculture often cite pressing concerns like climate change and rising populations as 
the motivations for this current revolution  [5].  
Despite the revolutionary language  of digital agriculture , the use of technologies within 
industrial agriculture is not new. The Green Revolution played a large role in disseminating 
technologies that bring high crop yields in efforts to increase global food production. 
Additionally, farmers h ave been using ‘precision agriculture,’ i.e. , digital technologies that 
incorporate GPS and other satellite positioning technologies , for tasks such as tractor guidance, 
field mapping, and yield mapping since the 1990’s  [64]. While  such technolog ical development 
has incre ased the productivity and efficiency of  industrial agriculture, players in the industry 
are aware of criticisms that  the historical introduction of new technologies has  exacerbate d 
socioecological issues like biodiversity, fossil fuel consumption, land dis tribution, and 
contamination of soil and water [27,29] . New  digital agriculture  applications are often framed as 
a win -win means to address such  criticisms  because their extensive data collection and analysis 
could be used in efforts to improve sustainability, for example by reducing the indiscriminate 
use of pesticides, while simultaneously increasing crop yield.   
In this paper, we specifically analyze the rise of digital agriculture within the context of 
racialized histories and institutions that are involved in U.S. agricultural production. Race has 
played a significant role in shaping contemporary agricultural landscapes. According to the 
2017 US Census o f Agriculture, more than 95% of farmers and farm  owners in the United States 
are white  [68]. As we will describe, this homogeneity is a result of specific policies and practices 
that affect  factors like land ownership.  We describe how these policies have been built into 
federal institutions that steward the development of scientific ag riculture, and we explore the 
degree to which the aftermath of explicitly racial policies shapes  digital agriculture in the US 
today.  
2.2 Critical data studies, agriculture, and the environment  
While discussions around digital agriculture are nascent in the CS CW community, scholars in 
other areas have called for examin ation of  the impact of these technologies in agriculture and 
high-tech development. In c ritical data studies, Christopher Miles suggest s that digital 
agriculture  is not  a revolution in industrial agriculture,  but a continuation of it, “shorthand for 
efforts to reorganize conventional farming’s epistemological and professional foundations 
around informatics, algorithmic principles” [29: 2]. Other social scientists have raised  similar 
cautions regarding how digital agriculture may transform the industry , such as  how these 
technologies can “re -script” workflows for farmers [50], redefine what best farming practices 
are [65], and change relationships between different actors on the farm [26]. The increasing use 
of automation can invoke tensions between farmers and farmworkers through increasing 
surveillance or automation of certain tasks [54]. These tensions echo  concerns around how 
increasing use of technologies can strain relationships  between workers and managers in other 
workplace environments [22,32] . Additionally, researchers  have addressed how issues from 
critical data studies around privacy, ownership, and access will arise through the increasing use 
of Big Data in agriculture , exacerbat ing existing power differences, such as those between 
farmers and corporations [9,12] .   
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:5 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. Other scholars have connected these concerns to problems and dynamics in environmental 
sensing.   Many digital agriculture systems incorporate extensive sensing and measurements to 
understand environmental conditions on the farm. For example, satellite or drone imagery is 
becoming a more common means to map field health. As critical data studies scholars have 
shown, data needs to be understood within social and cultural contexts. Rath er than accepting 
satellite imagery or any other environmental data as showing an impartial “view from 
nowhere,” the data collected is “endowed with different claims and qualities depending on who 
obtains it, how, and for what purpose”  [3]. How the data is presented also plays a key role. For 
Brynsdottir et al., values and perspectives become embedded in the system that affects what 
data is collected or analyzed. As they show in the design of persuasive sustainable technologies, 
what counts as environmentally sustainable behavior is often left to the designer or researcher ’s 
judgement  [10].  Pine and Liboiron discuss a similar story of decision -making in their historical 
case study on certain measures being excluded from water quality assessments. This exclusion  
leads to  what they call  “ignorance by design,” where harms that have political and scientific 
consequences become obfuscated or omitted [45].  
Digital agriculture systems  thus exis t at the confluence of two technological traditions: the 
development of large -scale data -driven systems on the one hand, and the development of 
technol ogies and related forms of control for agriculture and the environment on the other.  Our 
goal in this work is to elucidate one way these two traditions become knitted together and 
reinforce each other: through creating systems of legibility. Next, we descr ibe what we mean by 
legibility and its role in contemporary DA systems.  
3 LEGIBILITY AS A FEAT URE OF DIGITAL AGRIC ULTURE SYSTEMS  
Legibility is not exclusive to data -driven systems. Our use of legibility draws crucially on 
anthropologist James C. Scott’s ana lysis of forms of state control in  Seeing Like a State  [55]. 
Scott’s overall argument revolves around how modern states h ave sought to use a combination 
of simplified modeling and top -down optimization of social organization in an  attempt to 
improve their citizens’ lives . He documents how this top -down focus has  cause d significant 
harm, particularly under  authoritarian regim es where people are not able to resist these efforts. 
Legibility in this context refers to tactics of governance that reduce unruly situations to formal 
models which drive management action. This work has been influential in other recent work in 
HCI and CS CW, for example to describe how al gorithmic systems incorporate bureaucratic 
tendencies which can lead to absurd outcomes [1].  
A key example Scott uses is  the rise of scientific forestry in 18th century Prussia and Saxony 
as a means to manage resources for state revenue. This management was based on a simplified 
view of forests , where an “actual tree with its vast number of possible uses was replaced by an 
abstract tree representing a volume of lumber or firewood. ” [ibid: 12]  Reflecting this  abstract 
modeling , trees were planted  equidistantly and  in straight rows to allow for eas e of 
management. This form of legibility narrow ed the vision of what a forest is to a set of measures 
that can be quantified, controlled, and optimized. Everything that was not a tree that could be 
commoditized into lumber or firewood was rendered as an ex ternality  in the management 
scheme . This exclusion included not only flora and fauna, but also the “vast, complex, and 
negotiated social uses of the forest for hunting and gathering, pasturage, fishing, charcoal 
480:6   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. making, trapping, and collecting food and va luable minerals as well as the forest’s significance 
for magic, worship, refuge, and so on. ” [ibid.: 13]  While this tactic proved to be effective for the 
first crop of trees, leading to greatly increased forest productivity, it eventually led to 
widespread  “forest death” because simplified forest  management  interrupted the necessary 
symbiotic relationships the trees  needed  to thrive. Through examples like these, Scott 
demonstrates a tendency of modern states to govern through actions shaped and selected 
through simplified models of the world , and the unexpected consequences of leaving other 
aspects of the world outside of focus .  
Inspired by Scott, legibility as we are using it refers to systems of governance that use 
simplified understandings of a situation  to control and direct management action upon it. 
Digital systems in agriculture have introduced their own forms of legibility, based on data-
driven systems.  For example, in the case of smart irrigation systems, a model is developed in 
order to determine o ptimal times and amounts of water to apply to a field [66]. These models 
are built using measurements  through ga thering data about a situation , which is represented in 
simplified form in the digital system. In the case of the irrigation system, this model can include 
data like historic weather patterns, soil moisture, and comparative data from other fields. This 
collection of measurements is seen to be what is needed to achieve optimal watering patterns 
for the plants. Based on these measurements, the model can respond dynamically, based on the 
assumption that the model is homologous to the outside world. Rather than  setting a routine 
watering schedule, a smart irrigation system can use its model to predict when and how much a 
field needs to be watered. Through these measurements, the system can mirror the reality of the 
outside world.  This translation of the world i nto model that drives action is a form of legibility 
that is a core attribute of many computational systems.   
In digital agriculture, legibility is seen as a tool for creating responsive approaches to 
farming that will allow this farming to be sustainable  and productive at scale . Rather than 
simply mechanically applying water, fertilizers, or other interventions, these systems have the 
potential to predict and respond to  environmental conditions and needs that arise dynamically.  
The stakes of legibility ar e clear in how  data-driven farming is promoted by companies in the 
area, as described by  Steup et al. [58]: their advertising and websites project  a “vigilant farmer” 
who is in control of their farm thanks to actionable insights generated through data collection;  
an “efficient farmer” who  uses data to minimize their resource use and maximize profitability, 
and who automates and streamlines farmworkers’ labor; an “enlightened farmer” who uses data 
sensing to understand and respond to what nature is doing; and an “empowered farmer” who 
has access to and can share their data for profit. These visions highlight the imagined role of 
sensed data as providing  reliable  insight into labor, resources, land, plants, and animals, which 
in turn allow for them to be managed and controlled by the farmer.  
In this paper, we explore what is at stake in the centrality of legibilit y as a design frame 
shaping digital agriculture systems. We start by examining the historical legacy of pre -digital 
agricultur e management in the US context , with a focus on its racialized dimensions . We argue 
that legibility is a key organizing principle drawn on in this history, and that th e racialized 
forms of dispossession that characterize this  history raise urgent questions around who or what 
is made legible to whom. Then, drawing on fieldwork examining the adoption of digital 
agriculture technologies  in the northeastern US, we examine the unexpected consequences for 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:7 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. land and labor that arise from the contemporary emphasis on legibility in digital agriculture. 
We use these analyses to reflect on the stakes of legibility, and to suggest design sensibili ties 
that better reflect the complicated historical legacies of these systems.  
4 LEGIBILITY  IN US AGRICULTURAL H ISTORY   
In this section of the paper, we examine the role of legibility within the history of agricultural 
management in the US. Following a recen t trend in CSCW to understand computing systems as 
part of longer historical trajectories  [2,28] , we illuminate reasons why legibility in digital 
systems resonates  within the agricultural context, and  suggest historical issues with legibility 
that contemporary digital agriculture systems may  inadvertently  reproduce.  Our examination 
also reveals the broader constellation of inst itutions that affect the development of digital 
agriculture technology  beyond its designers.  Rather than seeing legibility as a neutral, inevitable 
consequence of data -driven farming systems, our analysis show s that legibility is socially and 
politically situated  within regimes of racialized control . 
4.1 Legibility in  systematic  racialized dispossession  
Legibility has been a feature of agricultural management in North America since the 
establishment of the colonies. Our historical analysis starts with a recogn ition of the broader 
context of Indigenous conflict with the colonies and later United States, beginning with the 
occupation of Indigenous lands by European settlers. Native Americans created the first food 
systems on the land that is now known as the Unit ed States [19]. European settlers used the 
Doctrine of Discovery, which posits that non -Christians are nonhumans, as the ir justification to 
claim land and commit genocide .  The land was considered “terra nullius,” or nobody’s land, 
informed by a European ethic that land should be owned and controlled by those best able to 
put it to good use [16]. The concept of “terra nullius” justified erasing existing ecologies and 
people to form an artificial blank canvas  for cultivation . This mass clearing of  landscapes was 
necessary to support settler methods of farming and food production [19,53] . In this context, 
legibility refers to simplification in terms of stripping land of existing claims and humans, 
plants, and animals living on it , in order to be able to impose new regimes of control.  
In tandem with Indigenous genocide and land dispossession, the United States was built on 
the la bor of Black slaves , who were  enslaved and brought to the United States primarily to 
provide  labor for agriculture. The ability for the agricultural industry to produce surplus, and 
thus generate a profit, was dependent on the use of slave labor for commod ities like cotto n. The 
large -scale plantations that produced these commodities through forced labor required the 
development of new management techniques.  Management systems were developed to 
meticulously collect data on slave labor and output as a means o f extracting profit . For example, 
cotton planters on plantations in the antebellum American South developed methods to track 
labor in the form of keeping detailed accounts for individual slaves, such as clothing allotments 
and the amount of cotton they pic ked day to day [52]. Here, managing a simplified landscape 
required a complex management system to track the precarious balance between inputs and 
outpu ts. Legibility here meant collecting data from a recalcitrant workforce in order to better 
control their labor  and outputs . 
480:8   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. The forms of ag ricultural legibility described so far are clearly racialized, leading to the 
nullification and genocide of Indigenous peoples and asserting violent management control over 
Black persons.  In this context, l egibility was for white people and aligned with their modes of 
control.  The end of the Civil War, and with it the institution of slavery, heralded a moment 
when this understanding could potentially shift. Right before the end of the American Civil 
War, Union general William Tecumseh Sherman issued Special Field Orders  No. 15 to seize 
lands from the Confederacy in the South and redistribute  them  to recently  eman cipated Black 
people . This order include d “40 acres and a mule ,” a reference to the offer of land parcels and 
means to support agricultural work, which has now become a symbolic phrase to reference the 
continued failure of economic justice for Black Americ ans [18]. After the Civil War, the United 
States entered an u neasy period of Reconstruction, where the government sought to  address 
racial inequity after the abolishment of slavery. This included incorporating ideals of settler 
colonialism  via land distribution , where it was “believed that only through such [land] 
ownership could real economic and political independence be achieved” [36]. However, racial 
discrimination and rising white supremacy created hostile conditions for Black Americans to 
purchase and maintain land.  Despite these conditions, Black land ownership  rose significantly 
at the end of the 1 9th century and into the 20th century. At the height of this era, Black 
Americans a ccounted of full or partial ownership of 925,000 farms in 1920  [17]. Over the course 
of the next 50 years, this number dropped to 45,594, a 93% decrease. Farm consolidation and 
industrial ization due to  the Green Revolution accounted for a general decline of farms overall, 
regardless of race. However, during this period, white farm ownership only dropped by 58%. In 
the 201 7 USDA agriculture census, Black farmers accounted for 3 5,407  farm ow ners out of the 
over 2 million farms in the United States , or less than 2%  [69].  
What caused this decrease  in the number of Black farmers?  There were many factors, such 
as discriminatory property laws [46]. But a  major factor related to legibility was the 
development of state -supported scientific agriculture, deployed within the context  of federal 
agencies and legislators who discriminated against Black farmers and farmworkers , as we will 
examine next.  
4.2 Legibility and race in the development of scientific agriculture  
Since the 19th century and the development of the industrial revolution, agriculture has 
undergone a transformation , leveraging new forms of mechanized  legibility to continue 
increasing productivity, efficiency, and control, with the push towards industrial agriculture 
underwritten by both private industry and the state [21]. During this time, there was a focus on 
new manufacturing processes across several industries, including agriculture, with the goal of  
using mechanized processes to increase efficiency and productivity. Within agriculture, these 
mechanized processes inclu ded using tractors, harvesters, and other machinery that replaced 
manual labor done by humans and nonhuman animals.  The goal was to use science and 
technology to make farming more productive and less laborious.  Early agriculture scientists 
include George Washington Carver , who developed methods like organic agriculture to help 
Black farmers in the South achieve economic autonomy [61]. While  scientific agriculture  had a 
positive impact in developing new experimental method s to growing food, this approach 
became systemized when it was adopted by federal institutions. It is here that we  begin to  see 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:9 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. that “the logic of scientific agriculture is…  one of adapting the environment as much as possible 
to its centralizing and standardizing formulas” [55].   
Processes of  industrialization generate new forms of legibility. In “Do Artifacts Have 
Politics?,” Langdon Winner describes the ongoing development of a mechanical tomato 
harvester by researchers at the University of California [63]. To make sure that the tomatoes 
can endure this rougher form of harvesting over handpicking, the tomatoes that are suited for 
this process are bred by scientists to be “hard ier, sturdier, and less tasty. ” [ibid.: 126]  The 
machine is efficient, with, at the time, the “newest model sorting the tomatoes electronically 
into large plastic gondolas that hold up to twenty -five tons of produce headed for canning” 
[ibid.: 126]. To eas e this process of harvesting, the tomato was bred to fit the mechanization 
process. In other words, it was made legible  to the machine . Other examples include the 
hybridization of corn and wheat to be made more easily harvestable by certain machinery or be  
able to be fertilized using chemicals that they could withstand [21]. Under industrial, scientific 
forms of agriculture, then, ag riculture is managed by simplifying land and the living beings that 
grow on it to make them amenable, or legible to, automated machinery.  
Who could be a manager of such mechanized legibility? A simple answer is ‘fewer people.’  
At the start of the  20th cen tury, the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and Black 
land ownership  were growing in tandem . However, Pete Daniel has argued that “the increase in 
programs and the USDA’s swelling bureaucracy had an inverse relationship to the number of 
farmers: the larger the department, the more programs it generated, and the more money it 
spent, the fewer farmers that survived”  [17]. This rise of agricultural experts, which included 
economists, farm managers, employees of agricultural colleges, and extension agents, “dreamed 
of large mechanized operations run on scientific principles by efficient managers who would 
replace small and less businesslike farmers tied to almanacs and labor -intensive work.” For 
historian Deborah Fitzgerald, these experts created an industrial vision  of agriculture , which 
“functioned as a matrix of ideas, practices, and relationships that persuaded  farmers to change 
the way they did things. This set of practices and relationships was explicitly modeled on 
factory and business practices that were familiar to this leadership”  [21].   
The embedding of scientific agriculture within these growing federal agencies in particular 
was fraught , given explicit racial discrimination within those agencies. For example, in the 
Pigford v. Gl ickman (1999) lawsuit, 400 Black farmers filed a class -action lawsuit against then 
Secretary of Agriculture, Dan Glickman, over accounts of the USDA distributing and delaying 
farm loans and assistance to Black farmers. In farming, delayed loans can mean de laying the 
start of the growing season. This can lead to later issues of decreased yield, which can make it 
difficult to repay the loans after harvest. While this case resulted in the largest civil rights 
settlement with a $1 billion payout for the plainti ffs, numerous cases of discrimination persist 
[51].  
This centralization and institutionalization of scientific agriculture within discriminatory 
governance structures led to a racialization of who could be a scientific farmer. Historian 
Carmen Harris shows  how Black Americans we re seen as inferior in learning and disseminating 
scientific agriculture, an attitude that was reflected in the distribution of funding for extension 
services at the federal level  [25]. While race was not explicitly discussed in these policies, white  
Southern legislators  systematically  withh eld funding and su pport for improving agricultural 
480:10   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. conditions for  Black farmers over white farmers. As a result , legislation pushed for investment 
and development of agricultural technology , rather than  investing in and providing material 
support  for Black farm ers. For example, s ociologist Monica White describes a case in Sunflower 
County, Mississippi, in 1967 where James Eastland, a white cotton grower and U.S. senator , 
received a $167,000 subsidy check from the USDA to improve mechanization whil e letting the 
fields lay fallow  [61]. As one of the largest landowners in the county , Eastland’s decision  led to 
the unemployment of Black  farm workers , tenants, and farm managers.  As farms in the county 
and surrounding areas continued to focus more on mechanization, the population of Black 
residents dropped , and many  moved to more urban areas for employment.  
4.3 The legacy of legibility in agr icultural technology  
To review , legibility refers to systems of governance that aim to control otherwise unruly 
situations. This is done by making those situations ‘legible’ to would -be managers, i.e. , 
understandable enough to allow for the imposition of s ystems of control. This is done through 
processes of simplification, often accomplished through quantification and subsequent 
optimization. Legibility involves both ways of knowing or seeing in a limited sense, and acts of 
control and management that deriv e their logic from these ways of knowing.  This historical 
analysis suggests that when considering legibility in agricultural technology, we should be 
asking: who or what is being made legible to whom? What is rendered illegible, or external to 
the system?  
Legibility emerges in various ways under the regimes we have described. Under colonial 
conditions, the land was literally cleared of the claims of human and nonhuman actors in order 
to enable its control. In plantation systems, recalcitrant labor was track ed through ledger 
systems, while new forms of organization of labor were imposed in order to increase the 
system’s profit. Mechanization, industrialization, and the breeding of plants to meet 
industrialized needs create d automated, repetitive forms of acti on, and transform ed the 
landscape to allow those forms of action to be effective despite their inability to be responsive 
to that landscape.  
Legibility in agricultural system s in the US  has historically been undergirded by logics,  i.e. 
ways of reasoning th at justify actions and decisions. One set of logics is  settler colonial logics , a 
notion  developed by geographer Sarah Rotz to understand how racial ized narratives continue to 
shape how white farmers  and institutions  interact with marginalized groups in Canada [53]. 
These logics are rooted in an idea of personal freedom through permanent family -based 
ownership and control of dispossessed land, and through management of the labor of a 
dispossessed working force. Over time , this logic bred centralized private control of large farms 
and an orientation of extraction rather than care towards the land. These logics shape racial 
formations in agricultural through the elimination of Indigenous people and exploitation of 
workers o f color. Settler colonial logics ultimately produces a justification for maintaining 
control of land and property by white  farmers in North America. Legibility provides one 
mechanism for enacting these forms of control.  
A related logic that underwrites leg ibility in agricultural system is extractive logic, which 
underwrites the  process of removal and disconnection of  resources, land, and labor for the 
purposes of capital accumulation .  Lourdes Vera et al. describe extractive  logic as “the logic of 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:11 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. pulling r elations out from bodies and lands ” in order to use them for other purposes  [60]. This 
logic transforms certain entities, such as minerals and coal , into  commodities awaiting 
extraction. Extractive logics occlude the context in order to narrow the focus on th e target of 
extraction. For example, in industrial agriculture, certain monocropping practices are designed 
to extract the nutrients in soil in order to maximize crop yield. Eventually this can lead to soil 
exhaustion, since the soil ecosystem is unable to  keep up with the rate of extraction  [47]. 
Legibility, through creating simplified understandings of situations, sharpens certain entities 
into focus to ready  them  for extraction.   
Rather than seeing digital agriculture technologies as apart from this histor y and these 
logics , we see a need  to consider how and to what degree digital agriculture continues these 
legacies. Data systems of modeling and control that couple sensing, modeling, and actuation 
allow for more differentiated, responsive forms of action t han purely mechanical forms of 
legibility. Nevertheless, they are still  based on simplified models and aim to eliminate human 
action and natural variability as sources of unpredictability in the management of land and 
labor.  
Legibility in digital systems may further develop the logics inherent in agricultural history. 
In discussing environmental data collection, Lourdes Vera et al. describe an extractive data logic  
that “ignores the situatedness of data , regarding it as a resource to be pulled out for free , 
without relations or responsibilities .”  [60] They  point out that harm -centered data collection 
can perpetuate forms of violence against marginalized communities. While environmental data 
collection is  often done through good intentions to document environmental violence, when it 
is pursued in an extractive mode, the data’s situatedness within a particular community and 
their concerns and needs can be lost, further marginalizing them.  
The issue of extr active data logics underscores the necessity of understanding how historical 
legacies of marginalization  can be  inadvertently  reproduced  through design logics  in 
contemporary digital systems.  In the next section of the paper, we explore some of the 
conseq uences of legibility as a defining characteristic of contemporary DA systems. Through 
fieldwork with farms and the extension agents working with them in the northeastern United 
States, we will examine how the pressures of legibility within these systems ar e reshaping farm 
practices and natural environments.  
5 METHODOLOGY  
Our empirical research is drawn from fieldwork conducted over 2019 in the upstate New York 
region of the northeastern United States.  The upstate region typically refers to areas of the 
state outside of metropolitan New York City. Based on the 2017 USDA Census of Agriculture , 
New York State has over 33,438 farms in the region that span almost 7 million acres [70]. While 
the dairy industry makes up the largest portion of the state’s agricultural income, this region is 
also known for other crops and commodities like apples, onions, and grapes.  
This research included interviews with agricultural stakeholders, primarily farm man agers 
and extension agents , and participant -observation  at farms . Over the course of our study, we 
interviewed 15 participants. Our intervie w protocol addressed digital technology and sensors 
used in agriculture, including challenges with adoption, use, and maintenance. Since digital 
agriculture systems are currently not in widespread use in this region, we expanded our 
480:12   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. interview protocol to a ddress tools beyond data-driven systems . The research also included 
visits to  9 farms in the upstate New York region and attending farm events associated with local 
farming organizations. These farm s were centered around  the production of  agricultural 
commodities, such as fruit, grains, and vegetables (as opposed to livestock). We employed a 
thematic analysis on our  interview and field notes  data, in addition to creating memos as a 
strategy to elaborate on emerging themes.   
By including e xtension agents in our study,  we see them as one link between research 
institutions and the agriculture industry. As discussed in our historical analysis, U.S. federal 
institutions have been invested in scientific agriculture since the 19th century. Extens ion agents 
are part of this investment as employees  of cooperative extensions, agenc ies associated with 
land-grant universities in the United States. These institutions, funded by the sales of federal 
land taken from Indigenous peoples  via the Mor rill Acts  of 1862 and 1890 , were aimed at 
advancing curriculums centered on agriculture, engineering, and science. Additionally, in 1914, 
the Smith -Lever Act was passed that created the cooperative extension services, programs that 
were attached to these land -grant  universities to serve as outreach for institutional research. For 
example, extension agents would host demonstrations that would showcase new agricultural 
techniques, a practice that continues to this day. In incorporating  the role of extension agents, 
we see them having a key role in connecting institutional knowledge to farm operators and 
managers.  
Our research design was shaped by our original intention to understand factors that 
influence technology adoption. This lens led us to focus in data collecti on on farm  owners and 
managers who were making technology decisions, as well as the extension agents who were 
actively working to promote new technologies in practice , as opposed to farmworkers or other 
stakeholders . But our perspective chang ed in response  to experiences in the field  through 
subsequent memoing and reflection . The stakeholders we spoke with were overwhelmingly 
white . The lead author, who executed the fieldwork, is not . This led to awkward moments in the 
fieldwork that highlighted the racial identities of both the researcher and the participants. For 
example, interviewees appeared uncomfortable in discussing issues around migrant labor, often 
offering extra reassurance that they were okay with certain forms of immigration. The lead 
author’s ra cial identity placed them as an outsider in a predominantly white rural landscape. In 
one case, when they had the wrong address for a meeting, this led to a moment of fear of 
personal safety. These moments sensitized us to the unspoken role of race in agri culture .  
Indeed, while the northeast region of the US does not share the same histor y of plantation 
systems as the American South  (while slavery was legal  in New York State  until 1827, the 
number of enslaved persons was small) , its agricultural system nevertheless is shaped by 
legacies of settler colonialism and racism in agriculture. Our study takes place on the lands of 
the Haudenosaunee Confederacy, a territorial alliance among the Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, 
Cayuga, Seneca, and Tuscarora nations. In 1779, as part of American Revolutionary War efforts, 
George Washington ordered Generals Sullivan and Clinton to systematically destroy 
Haudenosaunee villages and farmlands in the region  because of a Haudenosaunee alliance with 
the British . The result was t he decimation of  the Indigenous  population, with many of those 
surviving the genocide either fleeing  north to  the then  British -controlled Canada  or west to 
regions that were eventually incorporated into the United States.   European -American settlers 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:13 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. quickl y moved in to claim the forcibly cleared land, breaking the former Confederacy into 
pockets of isolated settlements. As part of their legal strategy to justify occupation , white 
settlers continued to use claims of Indigenous inferiority to make land claims  in forming  what is 
currently upstate New York  [41].  
The dominance of white landownership continues, especially in the agricultural sector, 
where 99% of farmers are white and also own 99% of available farmland  [70]. In examining the 
state’s agricultural workforce more broadly, we see a racially stratifi ed industry . While 
demographics of farmworkers can be difficult to collect due to the often temporary and 
precarious status of farmworkers, several studies point to  the majority of these workers  
identifying as  people of color, with varying levels of citiz enship statuses  [23,42] . For example, 
migrant farmworkers  include  those on H -2A visas, a temporary visa for  seasonal labor, or 
undocumented workers . Despite increasing requests of H -2A positions in the agriculture 
industry, undocumented farmworkers are estimated to  make up at least half of farmworkers in 
New York state  [20]. This percentage  can be attributed to the often bureaucratic and time 
intensive nature of the visa application for both farmer and farmworker, in addition to 
restrictions such as the limitation on seasonal work.   
These legacies of dispossession and displaced labor form the often silent backdrop for 
contemporary farm practices. In what follows, we trace the impact of legibility on farmers’ use 
of digital tools. In the next section, we see how the consequences of leg ibility are experienced 
from contemporary farmers’ perspectives and, where possible, trace where issues related to 
racial dispossession can be seen to emerge. In the discussion section, we will juxtapose these 
perspectives with those from our historical an alysis, to develop a more wholistic perspective on 
how colonialism , racialized dispossession, and digital agriculture intertwine.  
6 FINDINGS: LEGIBLE YI ELDS, LEGIBLE FIELDS   
In th e following section s, we analyze consequences of legibility on farm practices, landscape, 
and labor.  Our understanding draws on Scott’s argument that forms of legibility are often based 
on narrow views and  on our historical analysis that examines how  consequences of these 
systems draw  attention to what’s out of view.  Our empirical s tudy shows the aftermath of 
racialized policies and institutions that privilege d practices and practitioners legible to scientific 
agriculture. Together, these cases  will demonstrate how legibility in data -driven systems 
restructures the landscapes , create s new and more work, creates systems that are brittle in the 
face of the variable conditions that exist on farms, and creates opacity in systems  that limit 
people’s ability to tinker with and adjust them .   
6.1 Restructuring the Fields  
The first consequence o f legibility we identified  in our fieldwork  is a need to simplify the 
landscape itself  in order to render it legible to  digital systems . Visions of farmland can evoke 
images of fields with evenly spaced rows that stretch into the distance. In the rugged te rrain of 
upstate NY, these parallel rows seem to undulate in tandem with the uneven topography. Row 
spacing is largely dependent upon the equipment that is available to a farm operator. Prior to 
agricultural mechanization, row spacing was often determined based on the width of the horse 
or other draft animal used to work the field [37]. As more farmers adopted tractors, this width 
480:14   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. became less fixed. Narrowing the rows means that more plant s can fit into a field, which leads 
to a higher yield and potential profit increase. In the case of corn, in the mid 20th century , when 
mass mechanization was adopted across many farms in the United States, row spacing shifted 
from an average of 40 inches to 30 inches. While mechanized equipment can allow for this 
decrease in row spacing, the evenness of the rows is still dependent on the skill of the tractor 
operator. In recent years, laser -guided and GPS -systems have been incorporated into the 
planting pr ocess to ensure uniform rows.  
The decision around initial row spacing directs what tools are used, since these tools now 
need to be able to fit beween  the rows without disturbing  them . At a farm that grows organic 
vegetables at industrial levels of produc tion, the operators rely on row -crop cultivators to 
remove weeds. These cultivators trail behind the tractor with a span that is about twice the 
width of the tractor. Jutting out perpendicular from this frame are shanks, pieces of metal that 
are shaped to stir the soil in order to pick up and remove unwanted vegetation growing 
between the rows.  Without proper spacing or placement of the tractor, the tines would lift and 
pull up the plants, rather than the weeds.  
We see the importance of straight rows tric kling down to how DA tools are used in the field. 
For example, o ne type of sensor that is currently incorporated into these systems are cameras 
that calculate Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) for vegetation health.  NDVI can 
be recorded in several  ways, such as on the ground through a sensor that is carried or attached 
to a tractor, or through remote sensing, where the sensor is mounted on an aerial device, like a 
drone. These sensors measure the difference between near -infrared light, which  vegetation 
strongly reflects, and red light, which vegetation absorbs. This difference results in a score 
between 0, meaning unhealthy or dead, and 1, meaning optimal plant health. The number can 
then be placed on a map with GPS coordinates to create a ch oropleth map, a visualization where 
certain sections are colored to represent a statistical measurement. This map can then be used 
by the farm operator or grower to see the overall crop health of their fields.   
This plant health information is also factor ed into the variable rate application (VRA) 
process. VRA is the automated application of certain materials such as fertilizers or pesticides. 
While NDVI sensors and GPS systems have been around since the 1970’s and are used for 
agricultural applications, t he integrated use of the tools in the form of VRA is relatively new. 
VRA relies on a host of computers and networked systems to process this information and 
control the application rate for mechanization. This application controls the amount of chemical 
that is applied based on the crop health and GPS location. For example, areas of a field that are 
closer to the score of 1 are automatically sprayed with less fertilizer. For areas that are closer to 
0, more fertilizer might be applied to these low -scoring a reas. This method is considered to be 
cost-effective and a benefit for the environment because of the reduced use of costly fertilizers 
or pesticides.   
By using automation, VRA enforces the need to make the crops legible through uniformity. 
In the case of  using on the ground NDVI sensors, crops generally need to be grown in straighter 
rows to ensure a consistent reading. This works for crops that are replanted every year with the 
aid of GPS units or laser guidance systems. However, this might be more diffi cult for orchards 
or vineyards that are not replanted annually. In the case of vineyards in some parts of the state, 
some of these vineyards’ rows were established over a century ago by horse and plow. While to 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:15 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. the human eye  the rows look straight, there i s sufficient variation to make it difficult to receive 
fluctuation by the sensor. When the farmer drives through the inconsistent vineyard rows with 
the NDVI sensor mounted on the tractor, the tapering or widening of the rows can complicate 
the use of futu re VRA methods.  
The legibility of the fields determines how easily equipment and tools can be used. In the 
case of row cropping and other planting methods at scale, this spacing allows for tools like 
tractors and other equipment to go through processes li ke seeding, weeding, and harvesting. 
Digital agriculture systems inherit and build on these existing practices of agricultural 
mechanization as a prerequisite for proper data collection. As these systems are developed, how 
will they embody established prac tices of industrial agriculture?  
6.2 The Labor of Legibility  
The second consequence of legibility that we identified is the production of new forms of labor. 
While digital agriculture systems are often designed and marketed as reducing the amount of 
manager a nd workforce labor required to run a farm  [58], in practice we found that the 
demands of legibility also created new forms of labor for those working on farms, including 
growers and planters, as well as those who provide services for farms, such as extension age nts 
and consultants.   
One situation arises because of the ways in which equipment is supplied to farms. There  is 
often reluctance to invest in a new technology if it will not be frequently used:  
 
“We just planted a new vineyard this year and we hired out  somebody to come in 
with this laser planter which is a way that plants the grapevines in perfectly 
straight rows and we paid for that service and we got a really nice, we got the 
vines planted really well and there’s no way it would have made any sense fo r us 
to invest in that piece of equipment. So I think there’s one thing that’s interesting 
to note about agriculture technology, if it’s an irrigation system that’s stuck on 
the farm that can never leave, that’s slightly different than something that has 
value that can be moved around.”  [P4, farm manager ] 
 
This model for renting or loaning out equipment is not uncommon in rural agricultural 
communities for larger or more specialized equipment  [62]. This loaning model is being adapted 
for networked sensors and technologies. One extension agency piloted a sensor loaner program 
that allowed farmers to borrow cameras and soil health sensors as  a means to make the 
technologies more accessible for the farmers. This is a strategic step in encouraging the 
adoption and use of DA tools.  
However, this process may not be as seamless as simply providing the physical sensor. In 
speaking to a specialist on the project, this process entails several steps to get from data 
collection to information that can be of use to the farm manager or grower. In the following, we 
recount how the process of how the NDVI sensor is used in the program:  
 
480:16   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. 1. First the farmer needs to receive the sensor by scheduling an appointment with 
the office. While the program has multiple sensors out for use, there still maybe a 
wait time for a sensor to become available.  
2. The sensor then needs to be installed on a tractor and driven through the field to 
collect data.  
3. The sensor is then returned to the office where the data is retrieved on a memory 
card and given to another specialist.  
4. The specialist will then overlay the sensor data on an existing field block map of 
the farm. If the farm doesn’t already have a map, there is a precursor step here 
where the initial map needs to be made.   
5. The agent then prints out and brings a map of the map to the farm  
6. Based on the printout , the farm manager can make a decision on how to adjust 
their practice. For some growers, this map can validate things that they are 
already aware of, such as a spot on the field that has poor drainage, which 
translates into red spot indicating poor plant health. For others, this can reveal 
potential points that need more attention.  
 
This type of work has been described as “articulation work,” i.e. work (often in the 
background) that is required in order to fit the formally anticipated work (sensing and ma pping 
a field) to the variable and particular aspects of a situation [57]. This invisible work [57] is a 
significant basis for making the system function. In the pursuit of more efficient ways of 
knowing what happens in the field through digital agriculture, new forms  of work are required  
to make this data collection possible. However, the need to collect information on the workflow 
entails yet more work  to be performed, and those who perform this work are becoming 
increasingly ske ptical of its benefit:  
 
“It really makes sense to have one person, maybe two people manage [the 
tracking software] and so that is the downside, it’s that it’s more keeping track of 
things and you know this time of year, we’re really busy, we’re like, we h aven’t 
entered a ton of stuff so at some point we have to sit down and enter it all but 
yeah, so that’s probably the downside, it’s that it’s more work, hopefully you get 
something out of that that’s worth it, but it’s definitely more work keeping track 
of it.” [P4, farm manager ] 
 
Digital systems not only produce labor ; they also provide new means to control labor. In one 
instance, we witnessed a white tractor operator reporting to a farm manager their observations 
that migrant farmworkers were taking a lon ger break than was scheduled. Such racialized and 
hierarchal monitoring  can become embedded through increased data collection.  As Fox et al. 
note in their work on understanding hygiene infrastructures, this kind of networked technology 
is likely to privil ege managerial oversight at the expense of the workers [22].  
Furthermore, infrastructural challenges, such as the connectivity issues which are common 
in rural areas  [11], further complicate the visions of labor -free data collection which animate 
the designers of digital agriculture systems :  
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:17 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021.  
“With a lot of these systems, they need to have a way to take that data out of the 
field, pull it back and get it to whatever device you want so you can see it in real 
time. And of ten times the current system is that you’re out in the field and you 
can’t get your data connectivity, you come back at lunchtime and you upload it  
or then you can look at it and do some analyses on it, but this would be more of a 
real time process, so you’re seeing it in real time, you’re able to transmit that 
information, but yeah, connectivity is a big issue and other farms are taking 
other practi ces.” [P1, extension agent ] 
 
Creating legibility requires a significant amount of labor to track and manag e data. Mateescu 
and Elish describe  how integrating AI technologies into farm contexts requires physical 
reconfigurations that elide a ny notion of a  smooth adoption  [34]. Rather than “real -time” 
sensing, getting data into a form that is useful for decision -making is a multi -step process that 
can span days. Proces sing the data is not merely isolated at the field; it is spread across rural 
agricultural communities, where issues such as rural connectivity present issues for access. This 
increase of labor  points to a contradiction in framings of digital agriculture as  addressing  
economic issues such as  labor shortage s, usually framed around lack of farmworkers  to perform 
tasks such as planting or harvesting . As noted earlier, farmers in this region are finding 
workers, though temporary and in vulnerable undocumented po sitions. The caveat here is that 
increased labor is  also needed at the managerial level.   
6.3 The limits of legibility  
A third consequence of legibility is that digital systems can easily break due to a  myriad of 
factors on a working farm that are outside the scope considered in digital systems design. As 
one extension agent recalled, a sensor that needs to be attached to the tractor was known to fall 
off in the field due to vibrations of the tractor loosening the screw that held the sensor to the 
vehicle. Many  external  factors such as  the weather can cause a digital tool to fail:    
 
“They [companies] don’t really know, they don’t even know how long it will last. 
That’s one of the issues. Even if they want to be honest, with farms, they cannot. 
Because some of these technologies has not been under farm environments for long 
enough to be able to document and guarantee that it will remain functional for a 
certain period of time. And there is farm to farm variation. I mean the environmental 
conditions in NY state w ith swings in temperatures are so extreme and then you go to 
California or any other part of the country with very different climates and technology 
may last a year longer there than here in NY. There’s a lot of moving parts.”  [P2, 
extension agent ] 
 
In our conversations, participants frequently compared agriculture in New York to other 
regions of the United States, such as California or eastern Washington. These areas tend to have 
larger farms on average, in addition to drier climates. If certain mode ls are designed for 
conditions for a specific geographical region, they may not translate to other regions:    
480:18   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021.  
“So you basically, when you start tweaking things, like changing the amount of water 
or something of a small amount [in California], you can get  noticeable differences, 
predictable differences. So move that model over to New York. Well, the weather is 
different everywhere, the soils are highly variable. So you can’t really control 
anything. You can put irrigation in, and try to control the amount of water that the 
plants get, but the reality is that in NY, probably almost every year we get too much 
water.” [P3, extension agent ] 
 
This variability undermines the simplified models that often underly digital agriculture 
systems. While these systems may  work under ideal conditions or ones similar to their testing, 
this is no guarantee that they will work in all environments.  As discussed earlier, the 
development of industrial and scientific agriculture points to a standardizing effect, where 
farms can se em interchangeable in order to accomplish production goals. The focus on 
productivity is tied to settler colonial logics that ranks who and what practices are acceptable 
on occupied land . However, these logics can lead to oversight of other variable factor s that 
result in environmental degradation we see today in agriculture, such as soil exhaustion and 
erosion. When digital agriculture incorporates  these  tenets of agriculture, we see similar values 
of control , and subsequent breakdown , emerge in practice.  
6.4 The opacity of legibility   
A fourth  consequence of legibility is that, as  systems become more legible to machines, th ose 
machines  can become  more opaque  (illegible)  to the people who use the systems. Opacity here 
refers to  the “black -boxed” nature of cert ain computational systems, where the reason for 
particular outputs may be unexplainable because of the complexity of the systems [14,58] . In 
other words, opacity refers to  the inability to understand why something went wrong , or why 
things go right and function as desired . This affects  both hardware and software aspects of 
digital agriculture systems, which in turn affects the ability to perform repair and maintenance 
on the tools  to assure they are working as expected  – a situation which is particularly crucial 
given the just -described  challenges of getting narrowly designed systems to actually function in 
the farm context.  
At one of the farms we visited, a farm operator showed us his tool bag that he keeps in his 
tractor cabin in case he need s to do minor repairs or adjustments while o ut in the field. When 
asked why he carried two versions of the same tools, he responded that one set was metric, 
while the other was Standard American units. The tractor that he drove was built by an 
American company, while cultivator that was currently at tached was from a German company. 
Having both sets of tools allowed him to be prepared to address any minor issues that come up.  
These ad -hoc repairs are part of everyday practice in farm contexts  [30]. However, the ability 
to repair and maintain farm equipment with digital components is a point of conten tion 
between farmers and corporations. John Deere’s repair policy makes it illegal for farmers or 
farmworkers to service their own computerized tractors , a policy that right to repair activists 
contes t [56].  As equipment becomes more specialized, as we see with digital agriculture tools, 
these tensions likely will incr ease. In conversations, farmers , farm man agers, and extension 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:19 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. agents  described how the increase of sensors and other digital equipment can make repair work 
more complex. A few noted how it is easier to throw away broken sensors rather than repair 
them . On top of proprietary concerns, they need to balance whether the skills and time 
necessary to repair a tool outweigh the initial cost .  
The increase of digital tools suggests a changing skill set that is needed for people working 
on farms , aggravating the lab or issues discussed in the last section . For example, it might be 
necessary for a person to also have basic programming and hardware skills to maintain and 
troubleshoot these tools on a farm. This increase in digital skills has farm managers concerned 
that this demand for targeted skills can make farmworkers unaffordable for full time hire, 
especially in small to mid -scale farms:  
 
“I guess you would really have to have incredible knowledge to get into the computer 
on any tractor or car or anything. You rea lly need to be very well trained… If 
somebody is that well trained, then you can’t afford them because you don’t want 
them all the time because they’re too expensive.”  [P1, extension agent ] 
 
In making work legible for digital tools, black boxes create situ ations where a human is 
unable to understand what is happening. These situations can lead to fewer point s of human 
intervention if (or more accurately when) something goes wrong. With digitization of 
mechanization, part of the workflow takes place in digital tools and systems that have become 
increasingly opaque to the people who use these systems in the field. Opacity may seem to run 
counter to legibility given the lack of transparency. However, this opacity points to a 
prioritization in the design of  DA systems that places trust in the system , in addition to those 
who are facilitating the decision making in the first place . Those involved include not only the 
farm operators or managers, but  agricultural experts and technologists who instill 
understand ings of how farming should operate via products and practices. As DA systems are 
developed, it is necessary to examine not only the agendas of government institutions and 
agribusiness corporations, but  also expand to include the tech corporations that are becoming 
increasingly involved.  
6.5 Summary  
Legibility in the case of digital agriculture systems involves using data to create simplified 
models of farms, which are then used to inform management decision -making. Optimizations 
based on these simplified models enable farm managers to boost the efficiency and productivity 
of their farms. Scott warned about the unintended effects of top -down governance based on 
such simplification s [55].  In this section, we identified four clear side effects of this legibility. 
First, it reshapes and simplifies the landscape in order to enable these systems to work. Second, 
while it is intended to reduce labor, it also creates new forms of invisible labor to articulate farm 
practices and situations in the forms required by the system and enables new forms of 
surveillance of its vulnerable workforce. Third, the simplifications neede d in order to make the 
systems work create brittleness in the face of variability and other material resistances provided 
by the natural environment and farm equipment. Finally, systems that make farms legible are 
themselves often opaque to the people usin g them, making it difficult for them to adapt and 
480:20   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. repair them in the face of their brittleness in the farm context. In the next section, we will 
juxtapose the results of this fieldwork with our historical analysis to lay out the stakes involved 
in legibili ty in digital agriculture.  
7 DISCUSSION  
In this paper, we have developed the concept of legibility and show ed how it refigures practices 
and spaces in farms through digital agriculture systems. Our work was guided by questions 
about  how legibility becomes re alized in the context of digital agriculture systems and why 
certain practices are more susceptible to legibility. We demonstrated how legibility is not 
neutral , link ing the history of agricultural technology development  to a legacy of  racialized  
disposses sion of  land and labor . Our fieldwork examine d four consequences of legibility , 
demonstrating how the demands of legibility are re shaping the landscape , creating new forms 
of labor and new surveillance of existing labor, producing brittleness in the face o f farm 
variability, and rendering systems opaque to tinkering and repair.  
In this section , we consider what these findings and relations , taken together,  mean for our 
understanding of legibility in digital agriculture systems. If legibility is not neutral , we need to 
examine  power dynamics at play . Here we examine three key questions that result  from this 
understanding : who gets to decide what becomes legible, what is made legible, and what 
becomes  illegible in the process .  
7.1 Who sets the agenda for legibility?  
Identifying who determines what is made legible in digital agriculture systems is a complex 
question relating to power dynamics in agriculture. Farmers play an important, but often 
overstated , role in food production. A s our fieldwork shows, the deployment and adoption of 
digital agriculture systems relies upon other  actors and institutions  outside of the individual 
farm er. Our fieldwork highlights  the efforts of extension agents who dedicate time and 
resources to bring these technologies to local farming communities. This  fact is in line with the 
original goals of cooperative extensions and their respective land -grant universities in 
supporting rural and agricultural communities through developing and disseminating 
advan cements  in science and technology .  
As we s aw in our historical analysis, the establishment of these institutions was also tied to 
settler colonial logics , which empowered the United States government to occupy Indigenous 
lands  and underwrote an orientatio n to control the land and a dispossessed workforce . 
Subsequently, the research agendas of these institutions  has been  tied to  imaginations of who is 
capable of being a scientific farmer and funding policies set by institutions that have actively 
undermin ed Black agricultural and rural communities since the Reconstruction period. Tracing 
this work has shown how scientific agriculture  has come at the expense of Black farmers, 
contributing to the predominantly white agricultural landscape that we see today. In our 
present -day fieldwork in New York, we see a landscape where predominantly white farmers 
manage farmworkers in precarious positions. These racialized and exploitative relationships 
still exist, albeit  in different forms.  
In addition to the factors thi s history identified, agribusiness, and more recently, tech 
corporations also have  invested in the development of digital agriculture systems. This 
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:21 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. investment include s partnerships with universities and federal agencies , where these private 
companies play a significant role in shaping digital agriculture  [9]. Understanding who sets the 
agenda for legibility leads to mapping out a web of other actors involved in agriculture. In line 
with recent calls to articulate rural infrastructures in HCI [24], our research develops a more 
complex understanding of the institutions, actors, and historical underpinnings of the 
agricultural industry in the United States. While we see certain practices play out on the farm, 
these practices are shaped by  broader institutional  and governance histories that  shape  rural  
technologies, practices,  landscapes,  and actors . Our research suggests that focus on agriculture 
work in CHI and CSCW need to expand beyond  attention at the level of  individual farms and 
farmers to ask how institutions are shaping what technologies are available, what practices are 
possible, and who is able to farm.  
7.2 What is made legible?  
While the question of who is at the helm of legibility has a complicated answer, the question of 
what is being  made  legible is more straightforward. Landscapes must  be altered radically to be 
made legible. As we saw in our fieldwork, orientation and spacing of crops plays a crucial role 
in how these fields are read by digital agriculture systems. This precise placement o f the crops 
makes it easier to manage  farm s at scale,  such as applying fertilizers or determining plant health 
via sensing. We place legibility within a history  of “terra nullius,” the settler colonial 
justification for seeing Indigenous land as prime for occupation  and available for clearing and 
control . This concept was foundational to the beginnings of North American states like the 
United States and Canada and has lasting resonances in contemporary agriculture  [53]. Through 
land grabs, the United States go vernment acquired land on a large scale and distributed the land 
via homesteading acts to white settlers. In order for land to become farmland, the landscape 
usually required clear cutting and razing of the existing ecology in order to be split and shaped 
as different fields. With these lands cleared, the land bec ame a blank canvas upon which  
structure  could be imposed , such as the rows of monocrop s that we see in industrial forms of 
farming. While developments in scientific agriculture sought to develop be st practices for food 
production , maximizing yield and productivity in order to ensure food security, it 
simultaneously played a role in maintaining land ownership for white farmers.  
The spatial configuration of farms and farmland in the United States is not neutral. These 
spaces exist because of  specific ways of thinking about the environment and how the world 
should be oriented [15]. In the case of industrial agriculture in the United States, this is 
inseparable from Indigenous land dispossession and the subsequent expropriation of Black -
owned farmland. Our fieldwork was conducted in a landscape long altered by the consequences 
of these processes, where the distorted demographics of farms has become seemingly 
normalized. The tools and technologies that are developed to support these practices continue 
to maintai n the underlying colonial logics, however subtl y. We see this through line  between 
digital agriculture and terra nullius through the lens of legibility. Much like how scholars are 
revealing how raci alized  values become embedded in digital systems, s uch as search engines 
and recidivism risk algorithms [7,38] , a critical eye needs to be cast upon the values embedded 
in technologies that envision legibility as an outcome, such as digital agriculture systems.  
480:22   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. We are not claiming  that legibility is inherently a racist or colonial tactic when u sed in  
digital systems . Rather, we are calling for  a more nuanced understanding of how digital systems 
transform the environment. Given growing concerns to mitigate and adapt to the impact of 
climate change, an increasing  number of technological systems are being  developed to address 
these concerns, including in agriculture [6,49] . Often,  the design of these systems is framed as 
extracting more data in order to lead to better insights  [8]. As we see the development of these 
tools that address environmental concerns, we need to understand how they may reproduce 
historical harm s as a result of the limited ways these may frame  the environment , how human 
relationship s to it are envisioned as ‘controllers’ or ‘managers ,’ and who is licensed to be in 
control .  
7.3 What is left/made illegible?  
To make something measurable requires simplifying a situation to make it amenable to 
supervision  and management. Within the design of digital systems, this is accomplished 
through a process of measurement and quantification across a defined, limited  set of variables. 
Inevitably through this process, other aspects  are left out of scope; they become illegible within  
digital agric ulture systems. In our fieldwork, we saw tw o form s of such illegibility.  
The first form of illegibility related to how the narrow view of digital systems made it 
difficult for them to function effectively across the true variability of material farm landscapes. 
Models that are developed to automate decision -making may not fit l ocal conditions. While the 
landscape is being standardized to fit the requirements of digital agriculture systems, factors 
such as weather and regional conditions are not amenable to the same forms of control and  
vary enough to make it hard to create gener alizable models. The challenges to these systems are 
exacerbated by the unevenness of rural infrastructure, since the design of these systems often 
rest on assumptions of available power and connectivity which reflect urban, rather than rural, 
realities.  
The second form of illegibility has to do with the question of to whom or what the farming 
situation is being made legible. While the landscape is becoming more legible to digital systems, 
the functioning of the systems themselves and the reasons behind  their decision -making are 
becoming less legible to the people who operate them. This makes it difficult for those in the 
field to repair, tinker with, or adapt the systems to work with local conditions that were outside 
of scope of the systems’ design , a diff iculty exacerbated by new property regimes embodied in 
warranties and proprietary contracts.  The opacity of these system to those who best 
understand the local circumstances aggravate the challenges of breakdown caused by the first 
form of illegibility.  
These insights suggest direct design implications, including a need for more transparent 
interface s and modular , repairable  hardware design s. It also suggests a need for participatory 
design efforts aimed towards those who are marginalized or left out of t he design of these  
systems .  But understanding this problem in its historical and institutional  context suggests this 
issue extend s beyond the socio technical requirements of a particular system. Efforts to move to 
more mechanized and automated forms of far ming  have been  done intentionally at the expense 
of workers under the banner of making  larger -scale, white -owned farms technologically 
advanced. With the systematic erasure of Black farmers over the course of more than a century  
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:23 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. and the systemic eliminatio n of Native American farmers , methods such as those from 
participatory design may not be sufficient in addressing or repairing these issues , since the 
relevant stakeholders are no longer on the land . These skewed demographics point to the need 
to discus s and include  factors of race in digital agriculture research, especially in North 
American contexts.  
Certainly,  the inclusion of marginalized farmers in the design of DA systems  is valuable and  
could  address some inequities . But the framing of legibility in DA systems, where a limited 
frame of measurements is used to optimize a system for the purposes of its owner/manager, is 
still based on a settler colonial logic of land as property . Given the trajectory of technologies 
that increasing ly put workers and marginalized communities at risk  for harm [7,13] , it is 
important to reflect on the  logics that are being built into digital agriculture systems, to ident ify 
places where systems built on those logics perpetuate harm, and to develop design orientations 
for these systems based on alternative logics.  
CONCLUSION  
While recent data -driven systems in agriculture may seem new, the logics built into  these 
systems are not. Our work uses legibility to understand underlying logic s of digital agriculture 
by pairing historical case analysis with contemporary fieldwork. Legibility  as instantiated in 
digital agriculture builds on a longer tradition in scientific agricultu re which  is implicated in the 
racialized  legacies  which have shaped the history of a gricultur al production in the U.S. These 
histories are embedded in the ways  contemporary  technologies are being developed ; our 
fieldwork demonstrates the ongoing consequences of a reliance on legibility as a frame for 
agricultural technology. Without closer examination, we will continue to build systems that 
reproduce these ways of thinking. This will ultimately run counter to the goals that digital 
agriculture has in addressing social, economic, or environmental issues in agriculture. These 
issues cannot be thought of as separate points that can be addressed in isolation.  
Digital agriculture has been framed in the literatur e as a revolution. Undoubtedly, it is 
generating  new agricultural practices , fostering new business models , and putting pressure on 
farms that resist technological adoption . But through its reliance on legibility as a design frame, 
digital  agriculture  is simultaneously  continuing a  racialized  legacy of industrial farming and 
scientific agriculture. Legibility is not merely a design trope for digital agriculture systems, it is 
also part of  a longer trajectory of settler colonialism. Historical analysis sensi tizes us to the way 
that scientific developments in agriculture have been intimately tied to questions of land access  
and who has the standing and access to be a scientific farmer.  When building on these 
traditions in agriculture, digital developments for  industrial farming extend the legacies of 
settler colonial occupation. Ultimately , we offer in this paper is a way of examining how digital 
systems can inadvertently uphold legacies of oppression. As work in CSCW begins to work 
towards liberatory practice s [4] in the work to move beyo nd structural legacies of oppression, 
we must chart out new pathways for technology based on a sharpen ed understanding of how 
these systems came to be.  
480:24   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We wish to thank Steve Jackson, Jenny Goldstein, Steven Wolf, Sarah Sachs, members of the 
Race and Technology media studies working group, and our anonymous reviewers for feedback 
throughout the writing process. This research was funded by National Science Foundation 
Grant s 1955125  and 1908327 , and by a  Cornell Institute for Digi tal Agriculture Research 
Innovation Fund Summer Stipend.   
REFERENCES  
[1] Ali Alkhatib. 2021. To Live in Their Utopia: Why Algorithmic Systems Create Absurd Outcomes. Proceedings o f 
the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Article 95. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445740  
[2] Ali Alkhatib, Michael S. Bernstein, and Margaret Levi. 2017. Examining Crowd Work and Gig Work Through 
The Historical Le ns of Piecework. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems , 4599 –4616. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025974  
[3] Luis F. Alvarez León and Colin J. Gleason. 2017. Production, property, and the construction  of remotely sensed 
data. Annals of the American Association of Geographers  107, 5 (2017), 1075 –1089.  
[4] Mariam Asad. 2019. Prefigurative design as a method for research justice. Proceedings of the ACM on Human -
Computer Interaction  3, CSCW (2019), 1 –18. 
[5] Athanasios Balafoutis, Bert Beck, Spyros Fountas, Jurgen Vangeyte, Tamme Van der Wal, Iria Soto, Manuel 
Gómez -Barbero, Andrew Barnes, and Vera Eory. 2017. Precision agriculture technologies positively contributing 
to GHG emissions mitigation, farm produ ctivity and economics. Sustainability  9, 8 (2017), 1339.  
[6] Bruno Basso and John Antle. 2020. Digital agriculture to design sustainable agricultural systems. Nature 
Sustainability  3, 4 (April 2020), 254 –256. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893 -020-0510-0 
[7] Ruha Benjamin. 2019. Race after technology: Abolitionist tools for the new jim code. Social Forces  (2019).  
[8] Kelly Bronson. Immaculate conception of Data: Agribusiness, Activists, and their Shared Politics of the Future .  
[9] Kelly Bronson and Irena K nezevic. 2016. Big Data in food and agriculture. Big Data & Society  3, 1 (2016), 
2053951716648174.  
[10] Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Håkansson, James Pierce, Eric Baumer, Carl DiSalvo, and Phoebe Sengers. 2012. 
Sustainably unpersuaded: how persuasion narrow s our vision of sustainability. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM 
annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 , ACM Press, Austin, Texas, USA, 947. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208539  
[11] Jenna Burrell. 2018. Thinking relationall y about digital inequality in rural regions of the US. First Monday  (2018).  
[12] Isabelle Carbonell. 2016. The ethics of big data in big agriculture. Internet Policy Review  5, 1 (2016).  
[13] Sasha Costanza -Chock. 2018. Design Justice: Towards an Intersecti onal Feminist Framework for Design Theory 
and Practice. Proceedings of the Design Research Society 2018  (June 2018). Retrieved from 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3189696  
[14] Kathleen A. Creel. 2020. Transparency in complex computational systems. Philosophy of  Science  87, 4 (2020), 
568–589. 
[15] William Cronon. 1996. The trouble with wilderness: or, getting back to the wrong nature. Environmental history  
1, 1 (1996), 7 –28. 
[16] William Cronon. 2011. Changes in the land: Indians, colonists, and the ecology of Ne w England . Hill and Wang.  
[17] Pete Daniel. 2013. Dispossession: Discrimination against African American farmers in the age of civil rights . UNC 
Press Books.  
[18] William Darity Jr. 2008. Forty Acres and a Mule in the 21st Century. Social Science Quarterly  89, 3 (2008), 656 –
664. 
[19] Roxanne Dunbar -Ortiz. 2014. An indigenous peoples’ history of the United States . Beacon Press.  
[20] Marnie Eisenstadt. 2019. ICE crackdown meets reality: Half of NY’s farm labor is here illegally, official says - 
syracuse.com. Retrieved July 12, 2021 from 
https://www.syracuse.com/news/2018/05/half_of_new_yorks_farm_labor_force_is_here_illegally_what_happen
s_as_ice_cracks.html  
[21] Deborah Kay Fitzgerald. 2008. Every farm a factory: The industrial ideal in American agriculture . Yale University 
Press.  
[22] Sarah E. Fox, Kiley Sobel, and Daniela K. Rosner. 2019. Managerial Visions: Stories of Upgrading and 
Maintaining the Public Restroom with IoT. Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems , Paper 49 3. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300723  
[23] Margaret Gray and Emma Kreyche. 2007. The Hudson Valley Farmworker Report. Bard College Migrant Labor 
Project  (2007).  
[24] Jean Hardy, Dharma Dailey, Susan Wyche, and Norman Makoto Su. 2018. Ru ral Computing: Beyond Access and 
Infrastructure. Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social 
Computing , 463–470. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/3272973.3273008  
Legibility and the Legacy of Racialized Dispossession in Digital Agriculture   480:25 
 
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. [25] Carmen V. Harris. 2008. “ The Extension Service Is Not an Integration Agency”: The Idea of Race in the 
Cooperative Extension Service. Agricultural history  (2008), 193 –219. 
[26] Lewis Holloway, Christopher Bear, and Katy Wilkinson. 2014. Re -capturing bovine  life: Robot –cow 
relationships, freedom and control in dairy farming. Journal of Rural Studies  33, (January 2014), 131 –140. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2013.01.006  
[27] Leo Horrigan, Robert S. Lawrence, and Polly Walker. 2002. How sustainable ag riculture can address the 
environmental and human health harms of industrial agriculture. Environmental health perspectives  110, 5 (2002), 
445–456. 
[28] Vera Khovanskaya and Phoebe Sengers. 2019. Data Rhetoric and Uneasy Alliances: Data Advocacy in US Labo r 
History. Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1391 –1403. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3322276.3323691  
[29] Andrew Kimbrell. 2002. The fatal harvest reader: The tragedy of industrial agriculture . Island Press.  
[30] Ronald R Kline. 2000. Consumers in the country : technology and social change in rural America . Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore.  
[31] Gilly Leshed, Maria Håkansson, and Joseph’Jofish’ Kaye. 2014. “ Our life is the farm and farming is our life” 
home -work coordination in organic farm families. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer 
supported cooperative work & social computing , 487–498. 
[32] Karen Levy and Solon Barocas. 2018. Privacy at the Margins| refractive surveillance: Monitor ing customers to 
manage workers. International Journal of Communication  12, (2018), 23.  
[33] Szu-Yu Liu, Shaowen Bardzell, and Jeffrey Bardzell. 2019. Symbiotic encounters: HCI and sustainable agriculture. 
In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human  Factors in Computing Systems , 1–13. 
[34] Alexandra Mateescu and Madeleine Clare Elish. AI in Context: The Labor of Integrating New Technologies . 
Data&Society.  
[35] Christopher Miles. 2019. The combine will tell the truth: On precision agriculture and algo rithmic rationality. 
Big Data & Society  6, 1 (2019), 2053951719849444.  
[36] Thomas W. Mitchell. 2000. From reconstruction to deconstruction: Undermining black landownership, political 
independence, and community through partition sales of tenancies in comm on. Nw. UL Rev.  95, (2000), 505.  
[37] R. L. Nielsen. 1996. Perspectives on narrow row spacings for corn (less than 30 inches). (1996).  
[38] Safiya Umoja Noble. 2018. Algorithms of oppression: How search engines reinforce racism . nyu Press.  
[39] Erick Oduor , Peninah Waweru, Jonathan Lenchner, and Carman Neustaedter. 2018. Practices and technology 
needs of a network of farmers in Tharaka Nithi, Kenya. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems , 1–11. 
[40] Ihudiya Finda Ogb onnaya -Ogburu, Angela D. R. Smith, Alexandra To, and Kentaro Toyama. 2020. Critical Race 
Theory for HCI. Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1–16. Retrieved 
from https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376392  
[41] Meredit h Alberta Palmer. 2020. Rendering settler sovereign landscapes: Race and property in the Empire State. 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space  38, 5 (2020), 793 –810. 
[42] Daniel Parra. 2020. Split Opinion Over Federal Bill to Legalize Farmworkers as NY’s New Law Takes Effect. 
Retrieved July 12, 2021 from https://citylimits.org/2020/01/29/split -opinion -over-federal -bill-to-legalize -
farmworkers -as-nys-new-law-takes -effect/  
[43] Neil Patel, Deepti Chittamuru, Anupam Jain, Paresh Dave, and Tapan S. Parikh . 2010. Avaaj otalo: a field study 
of an interactive voice forum for small farmers in rural india. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems , 733–742. 
[44] James Pierce. 2019. Smart Home Security Cameras and Shifting Lin es of Creepiness: A Design -Led Inquiry. 
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Paper 45. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300275  
[45] Kathleen H. Pine and Max Liboiron. 2015. The politics of measurement  and action. In Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 3147 –3156.  
[46] Lizzie Presser. 2019. Their Family Bought Land One Generation After Slavery. The Reel Brothers Spent Eight 
Years in Jail for Refusing to Le ave It. ProPublica . Retrieved from https://features.propublica.org/black -land-
loss/heirs -property -rights -why-black -families -lose-land-south/  
[47] Maria Puig de la Bellacasa. 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social  
Studies of Science  45, 5 (2015), 691 –716. 
[48] Barath Raghavan, Bonnie Nardi, Sarah T. Lovell, Juliet Norton, Bill Tomlinson, and Donald J. Patterson. 2016. 
Computational agroecology: Sustainable food ecosystem design. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Confe rence 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 423–435. 
[49] David Rolnick, Priya L. Donti, Lynn H. Kaack, Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran, Andrew 
Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic -Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman -Brown, Alexandra Luccioni, Tegan 
Maharaj, Evan D. Sherwin, S. Karthik Mukkavilli, Konrad P. Körding, Carla Gomes, Andrew Y. Ng, Demis 
Hassabis, John C. Platt, Felix Creutzig, Jennifer Chayes, and Yoshua Bengio. 2019. Tackling Climate Change with 
Machine Learning.  CoRR  abs/1906.05433, (2019). Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05433  
[50] David Christian Rose and Jason Chilvers. 2018. Agriculture 4.0: Broadening responsible innovation in an era of 
smart farming. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems  2, (2018),  87. 
480:26   Jen Liu & Phoebe J. Sengers  
PACM on Human -Computer Interaction, Vol. 5, No.  CSCW2 , Article 480, Publication date:  October 2021. [51] Nathan Rosenberg and Bryce Stucki. 2019. How USDA distorted data to conceal decades of discrimination 
against black farmers | New Food Economy. The Counter . Retrieved February 2, 2021 from 
https://thecounter.org/usda -black -farmers -discrimination -tom-vilsack -reparations -civil-rights/  
[52] Caitlin Rosenthal. 2019. Accounting for slavery: Masters and management . Harvard University Press.  
[53] Sarah Rotz. 2017. ‘They took our beads, it was a fair trade, get over it’: Settler colonial logics, racial hi erarchies 
and material dominance in Canadian agriculture. Geoforum  82, (2017), 158 –169. 
[54] Sarah Rotz, Evan Gravely, Ian Mosby, Emily Duncan, Elizabeth Finnis, Mervyn Horgan, Joseph LeBlanc, Ralph 
Martin, Hannah Tait Neufeld, and Andrew Nixon. 2019. Automated pastures and the digital divide: How 
agricultural technologies are shaping labour and r ural communities. Journal of Rural Studies  68, (2019), 112 –122. 
[55] James C. Scott. 2020. Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condition have failed . Yale 
University Press.  
[56] Agam Shah. 2018. Can You Repair What You Own? Mechan ical Engineering  140, 09 (2018), 37 –41. 
[57] Susan Leigh Star and Anselm Strauss. 1999. Layers of silence, arenas of voice: The ecology of visible and 
invisible work. Computer supported cooperative work (CSCW)  8, 1 (1999), 9 –30. 
[58] Rosemary Steup, Lynn D ombrowski, and Norman Makoto Su. 2019. Feeding the World with Data: Visions of 
Data -Driven Farming. In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference , 1503 –1515.  
[59] Deepak Vasisht, Zerina Kapetanovic, Jongho Won, Xinxin Jin, Ranveer Chandra, Sudipta Sinha, Ashish Kapoor, 
Madhusudhan Sudarshan, and Sean Stratman. 2017. Farmbeats: An iot platform for data -driven agriculture. In 
14th {USENIX} Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation ({NSDI} 17) , 515–529. 
[60] Lourdes A. Vera, Dawn Walker, Michelle Murphy, Becky Mansfield, Ladan Mohamed Siad, Jessica Ogden, and 
EDGI. 2019. When data justice and environmental justice meet: formulating a response to extractive logic 
through environmental data justice. Information,  Communication & Society  22, 7 (2019), 1012 –1028.  
[61] Monica M. White. 2018. Freedom farmers: agricultural resistance and the Black freedom movement . UNC Press 
Books.  
[62] Jeff Williams and Terry Kastens. 2011. Lease, Custom Hire, Rent or Purchase Farm Ma chinery: Evaluating the 
Options. (October 2011).  
[63] Langdon Winner. 1978. Autonomous technology: Technics -out-of-control as a theme in political thought . Mit Press.  
[64] Steven A. Wolf and Frederick H. Buttel. 1996. The political economy of precision far ming. American Journal of 
Agricultural Economics  78, 5 (1996), 1269 –1274.  
[65] Steven A. Wolf and Spencer D. Wood. 1997. Precision Farming: Environmental Legitimation, Commodification 
of Information, and Industrial Coordination 1. Rural sociology  62, 2 (19 97), 180 –206. 
[66] Kehui Xiao, Deqin Xiao, and Xiwen Luo. 2010. Smart water -saving irrigation system in precision agriculture 
based on wireless sensor network. Transactions of the Chinese society of Agricultural Engineering  26, 11 (2010), 
170–175. 
[67] USDA ERS - Documentation. Retrieved February 2, 2021 from https://www.ers.usda.gov/data -products/organic -
production/documentation/  
[68] USDA - National Agricultural Statistics Service - 2017 Census of Agriculture - Volume 1, Chapter 1: U.S. 
National Level Dat a. Retrieved July 13, 2021 from 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_1_US/  
[69] 2017 Race, Ethnicity and Gender Profiles | 2017 Census of Agriculture | USDA/NASS. Retrieved February 2, 2021 
from 
https://www.nas s.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Online_Resources/Race,_Ethnicity_and_Gender_Profile
s/ 
[70] USDA - National Agricultural Statistics Service - 2017 Census of Agriculture - Volume 1, Chapter 1: State Level 
Data. Retrieved February 2, 2021 from 
https://w ww.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_1_State_Level/New_Y
ork/ 
 
Received April 2021, accepted July 2021 . 
 
