nordia geographical publications51:2
Research article
António Carvalhoa & Mariana Riquitob
 
Abstract 
The Anthropocene brings to the fore the need to foster ontologies that reject the 
modern “one-world world” (Law 2015) model, characterized by extractivism, dualism 
and human exceptionalism, requiring the enactment of pluriverses (de la Cadena & 
Blaser 2018) that recognize the heterogeneous clamor of human and non-human agency. 
As an attempt to listen-with those oppressed and silenced by the modern extractivist 
paradigm, in this paper, we propose the mobilization of relational, dialogic and non-
dualistic methodologies that attend to subaltern and more-than-human worlds. Drawing 
on a variety of sources – such as the Parliament of Things, the Council of All Beings, the 
Pedagogy of the Oppressed, meditative and artistic practices –, our article speculatively 
engages with affective, situated, hybrid and counter-hegemonic methodologies that 
articulate contemplative practices, the arts, more-than-human agency and local 
communities, recognizing that politics, aesthetics and affect are intimately entwined. 
Our experimental endeavour is centred on three case studies that encapsulate some 
of the socio-political and technological tensions of our current zeitgeist – wildfires, 
geoengineering, and lithium mining –, speculating on how pluriversal methodologies can 
bring to the fore the many worlds silenced by the modern “one-world world”.
Keywords:  Anthropocene; Pluriverse; Subaltern; Speculative Methodologies; More-
than-human agency; Affect Listening-with the subaltern:  
Anthropocene, Pluriverse and  
more-than-human agency
a Centre for Social Studies, University of Coimbra, Portugal, amcarvalho@ces.uc.pt   
b Centre for Social Studies, University of Coimbra, Portugal and Amsterdam Institute for Social Science 
Research, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands, mariana.riquito@gmail.com
38
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Introduction
In her seminal book Silent Spring , Rachel Carson warned us about the “sudden silencing of  
the song of  birds” (Carson 1962: 103), drawing our attention to the grim environmental 
consequences of  the chemical industry. The silencing of  the subaltern is one of  the 
main tenets of  modernity, as nature and non-dominant humans have been silenced in 
the name of  progress, profit, growth and empire. As Maria Mies and Vandana Shiva 
(2014) would say, nature has been turned into a mine, rendered passive, lifeless and 
disenchanted. Modernity and its obsession with control and domination are fuelled 
by the silencing of  the world, and this has backfired – climate change, pandemics, and 
industrial disasters have shown that we can no longer ignore the plethora of  human and 
non-human voices silenced by modernity. In this sense, the Anthropocene should be 
seen as more than simply a geologic epoch or a geopolitical event: it is a reflection of  
the dominant ontological model – the modern “one-world world” (OWW) model (Law 
2015). Therefore, as Morgan argues (2019: 252), the Anthropocene “is an opportunity 
to embrace a new ontology”. 
This article speculatively engages with a set of  methodologies that disrupt the 
dominant ontological model of  the Anthropocene – the modern OWW –, thus 
attempting to bring to the fore the pluriverses of  human and non-human voices that 
have been systematically silenced by modern dualist and extractivist ontologies. Inspired 
by Spivak’s (1998) earlier interrogation – Can the subaltern speak? – we now ask, in times 
of  profound ecological, climate and social crises: how to  listen-with the subaltern?  Listening 
is fundamentally relational: it is “listening-with” — with each other, with other species, 
with other worlds. Listening-with attends to more-than-human entanglements and pays 
tribute to Haraway’s idea of  “sym”, “together with”. We must be-with, make-with the 
subaltern. 
As the literature around the “Anthropocene” is inherently interdisciplinary, we are 
inspired by authors stemming from the environmental humanities, decolonial studies 
and science and technology studies alike. Building on this literature, the aim of  this 
article is twofold: on the one hand, we aim to contribute to current debates around 
the ontological politics of  the Anthropocene; on the other hand, we propose a set of  
speculative methodologies capable of  listening-with the  subaltern oppressed by the OWW , 
i.e., capable of  engaging with those who have been silenced and rendered invisible by 
modern ontologies and the contradictions of  contemporary capitalism. In other words, 
this article’s contribution is to merge existing conceptual debates on the controversial 
nature of  the “Anthropocene” with methodologies capable of  considering those 
theoretical postulates. 
The methodologies explored in our paper include a vast array of  examples that 
support us in the disruption of  the OWW , such as the Parliament of  Things, the 
Council of  All Beings, the Theatre and Pedagogy of  the Oppressed, contemplative 
practices, and the arts. In addition, we engage with three case studies that display some 
of  the socio-political and technological tensions of  the dominant ontological model of  
the Anthropocene – wildfires, geoengineering and lithium mining. These case studies 
do not stem from empirical-based research; instead, they are introduced to assist us in 
speculatively imagining how pluriversal methodologies could bring to the fore human 
and non-human actors systematically silenced by modern ontologies – such as local 
communities, elemental forces, forests, oceans, the stratosphere and algae –, combining 
and recognizing the interdependency between politics, aesthetics and affect. 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:239 A pluriversal critique of the “Anthropocene”
The term “Anthropocene” was coined at the beginning of  the century by the Dutch 
chemist Paul Crutzen and the American biologist Eugene Stoermer to designate our 
current geological epoch, characterized by climate change and extreme weather events, 
calling our attention to the inseparability between human activities, earth systems and 
biophysical and geological processes. In doing so, this concept announces a new “socio-
geo-physical era”, one where ‘humans’ have acquired bio-geophysical agency, placing 
the ‘human’ species as a planetary deep-time geophysical agent in geo-history (Latour 
2014; Swyngedouw & Ernstson 2018) and elevating it to a biospheric supremacy (Malm 
& Hornborg 2014). 
Nonetheless, while the Anthropocene puts the ‘Anthropos’ at the centre of  geological 
narratives, it also sheds light on the life-threatening consequences of  human actions 
to human and non-human actors alike, highlighting the vulnerability of  the human 
species in the face of  a plethora of  risks (Chaplin 2017). As such, the Anthropocene 
puts a dent on long-standing illusions of  human exceptionalism, a key pillar of  the 
modern political project. Western Modernity’s ontological architecture is based upon a 
set of  “visible and invisible divisions” (Santos 2017: 71), which structure social reality in 
hierarchical dualisms – human/nature, man/woman, civilized/savage, reason/emotion. 
Historically, this dualist ontology has served to justify oppressive relations with those 
who are deemed as “inferior” because they are (constructed as) “close(r) to nature”, 
“feminine”, “savage” and/or “emotional/irrational” – namely, women, indigenous and 
traditional communities, racialized populations, the proletariat, the Global South, nature 
and non-humans. 
The ontological politics (Mol 1999) of  modernity, thus, are fundamentally rooted 
in a particularly violent relationship with subaltern subjects – those who have been 
systematically silenced, dominated, not accounted for . Our current socioeconomic system 
is fundamentally ingrained in this violent-exploitative ethos. Capitalism depends on the 
endless exploitation of  “natural resources” and has historically relied on the exploitation 
of  the subaltern who performs the unpaid – or precariously paid – labour needed to 
pursue capitalist’s goals of  infinite growth (Mies & Shiva 2014; Moore 2016; Barca 2020). 
Analysed through this perspective, the current ecological crisis is a grim illustration of  
the consequences of  pursuing infinite growth in a limited world at the expense of  
“othered labour” (Salleh 2017). That is why critical authors have been denouncing the 
depoliticizing character of  the concept “Anthropocene” (Bonneuil & Fressoz 2016; 
Swyngedouw & Ernstson 2019) because it ignores that not all humans – nor countries 
– have been equally responsible for the current socioecological degradation nor do they 
suffer its consequences evenly (Malm & Hornborg 2014; Moore 2016). 
Consequently, alternative concepts have emerged: Moore (2016) proposes the term 
“Capitalocene”, drawing our attention to how capital accumulation is a way of  organising 
nature and the fundamental driver of  environmental degradation. Similarly, Malm 
(2016) exposes the historical links between carbon emissions and capital accumulation, 
showing how the ‘development’ of  industrial capitalist modernity was only possible by 
burning fossil fuels. Armiero (2021) introduces the term “Wasteocene”, stressing the 
contaminating nature of  capitalism’s inherent drive for profit and accumulation, leaving 
behind indelible traces of  toxicity. Hornborg (2015) advances the term “Technocene”, 
highlighting how modern technological devices have been the backbone of  industrial 
capitalism. Raworth (2014), taking as an example the dominantly male composition of  
the Anthropocene Working Group, suggested “Man-thropocene” as a more appropriate 
40
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56concept, reflecting the gender imbalances in positions of  power. Similarly, Solón (2019) 
proposes the term “Plutocene”, pointing out the uneven distribution of  power in the 
hands of  a global economic, financial and political elite as the main culprit of  the climate 
crisis. These concepts emphasize the destructive logic of  industrial extractivist techno-
scientific capitalism, highlighting its unequal consequences. In terms of  class, gender, 
race, ethnicity, etc. –, and showing how the “Anthropocene”, understood as a geologic 
epoch, is also a geopolitical one, as its causes and consequences are inextricably linked 
to the power relations underpinning social, economic and political systems (Riquito 
2021). 
However, as Haraway points out, it is important to recognize that “no species acts 
alone” (2015: 159). Industrial capitalism relied on the discipline of  plants and humans 
alike to ‘develop’ and ‘prosper’. The capitalist way of  growing food – the plantation 
– has historically entertained an intense relation with exterminism , both of  human and 
non-humans, namely plants, animals and microbes (Haraway & Tsing 2019). This 
was – Haraway and Tsing (2019: 5) argue – a “system of  multispecies forced labour”. 
Thus they propose the term “Plantationocene”, drawing our attention to the interspecies  
entanglements  that compose (compost) life on earth. In Haraway’s words, “all earthlings 
are kin in the deepest sense” (2015: 162), and this is why it is about time that “we all 
started thinking about our situation in a way that includes plants, animals, microbes, and 
more before we destroy them all” (Haraway & Tsing 2019: 14). 
Following this line of  reasoning – which takes issue with human exceptionalism 
–, Haraway announces another concept: the “Chthulucene”. This term is composed 
of  two Greek roots: khthôn  (meaning ‘beneath the earth’) and kainos  (meaning ‘now’). 
For Haraway, their combination names “a kind of  timeplace for learning to stay 
with the trouble of  living and dying in response-ability on a damaged earth” (2016: 
2). The “Chthulucene” rescues the multiple “earth-wide tentacular powers and 
forces and collected things” and is an invitation to make together sym-chthonic, i.e., 
to “make-with—become-with—compose-with—the earth-bound” (Haraway 2015: 
160–161), becoming a framework to think-with  the more-than-human.
These conceptual proposals, thus, indicate that the “Anthropocene” is a controversial 
concept because the term itself  overshadows the dominant political, economic and 
ontological narratives and structures that have generated unprecedented levels of  
ecological and climate destruction. These many alternative “scenes” denounce that it 
was the universalizing march of  capitalist modernity – based on its “technopolitical 
fixes” (de Castro 2019), “market-based solutionisms” (Morozov 2014), human 
exceptionalism and patriarchal norms (Riquito 2021) – that has generated the climate 
and ecological crises. In other words, we are witnessing a crisis of  a particular way-of-
doing-world  (Escobar 2018; Krenak 2019), i.e., the OWW model. Or, as put by Santos 
(2002: 13), we are currently “facing modern problems for which there are no longer 
modern solutions”. The OWW metaphysics reduces difference, devours the Other (i.e., 
the colonized subaltern subjects, both human and non-human) and assumes there is 
only one single reality (Law 2015), silencing non-dominant and subaltern ontologies. 
This ontological “master model of  humanity” (Barca 2020) is at the roots of  the 
planetary crisis we face. To dismantle the master’s house, we need to bring alternative 
ontologies to the modern, extractivist and speciesist project – i.e., pluriversal ontologies,  
which recognize the multiplicity of  realities and the interconnectedness of  all life on 
earth. 
Pluriversal ontologies draw inspiration from the Zapatistas’ struggle and their 
practices of  democracy, aiming to construct “ un mundo donde quepan muchos mundos ”1. This 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:241motto, argues Salleh (2020), is the very definition of  pluriverse. In opposition to the 
globalizing civilizational aim of  the OWW , pluriversal ontologies recognize a “World of  
Many Worlds” (de la Cadena & Blaser 2018). The pluriverse is both an “epistemological 
stance and a dialogic method to enhance appreciation of  the multiple ways of  knowing 
and being in the world” (Paulson 2018: 85) and a useful tool to conceive “ecologies of  
practices across heterogeneous(ly) entangled worlds” (de la Cadena & Blaser 2018: 4). 
The “pluriverse” entails an active commitment to getting involved with and thinking 
from ongoing territorial struggles (Kothari et al. 2018; Escobar 2018). According to 
Escobar, socio-environmental resistances are “ontological struggles” because they 
“interrupt the globalizing project of  fitting many worlds into one” (2017: 239). By 
inaugurating non-dualistic relational political ecologies and ontologies, pluriversal 
epistemic-ontologies are entwined with the ontological turn in social sciences. According 
to Escobar (2017: 241):
What defines this turn is the attention to a host of  actors that deeply shape what we come to know 
as ‘reality’ but which the academy rarely tackled — things like objects and ‘things’, non-humans, 
matter and materiality (soil, energy, infrastructures, weather, bytes), emotions, spirituality, feelings, 
and so forth. What brings together these very disparate list of  items is the attempt to break away 
from the normative divides, central to the modern regime of  truth, between subject and object, 
mind and body, reason and emotion, living and inanimate, human and non-human, organic and 
inorganic, and so forth. This is why this set of  perspectives can be properly called post-dualist. 
[…] What we are witnessing with post-dualist, neo-materialist critical theories is the return of  the 
repressed side of  the dualisms — the forceful emergence of  the subordinated and often feminized 
and racialized side of  all the above binaries. 
The ontological turn recognizes the need to pay attention to and value the knowledge 
of the subaltern. Marisol de la Cadena refers to them as the “Anthropo-not-seen”. This 
concept highlights their historical invisibility: “they simply cannot be — therefore 
they are not-seen, not-heard, not-felt, not-known” (2019: 482). The subaltern – those 
who are “less than humanized” (Salleh 2020), not accounted for in the “master model 
of  humanity” (Barca 2020) and removed from official representation in hegemonic 
narratives (Swyngedouw & Ernstson 2018) – although irretrievably heterogeneous, carry 
the possibility of  re-politicizing the dominant version of  the Anthropocene through 
alternative ontologies departing from human-centred productivist-oriented hegemonic 
narratives. Pluriversal conceptualizations emphasize the importance of  thinking within 
those configurations of  life that escape the ontological occupation of  the OWW (de 
la Cadena 2015). In making visible the subjects which were once invisible, in listening 
to those who have been silenced, the pluriverse defies Western Modernity’s epistemic 
violence2 (Spivak 2010; Dotson 2011; Brunner 2021) and its “practices of  silencing” 
(Dotson 2011), proposing  alternatives to its OWW model. 
While this body of  literature has put forward various theoretical frameworks to make 
sense of  the “Anthropocene event” (Blok & Jensen 2019), very few scholars have focused 
on how to listen-with the subaltern oppressed by the OWW , i.e., how to engage with the clamour 
of  human and more-than-human voices that the modern hubris has systematically 
silenced. Based on this literature review, in the following section we will speculate on 
pluriversal methodologies, exploring nonmodern (Pickering 2010) and hybrid devices 
that couple more-than-human agency, affect, politics and the arts to listen-with those 
historically subordinated by the dominant ontological logos. 
42
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Pluriversal methodologies: a tentative sketch 
In this section, we explore methodologies that could be characterized as pluriversal. 
They attempt to bring more-than-human and non-dominant voices to the fore, 
putting forward alternatives to modern dualisms. We assume that methodologies are 
performative, as they enact particular forms of  reality as well as specific invisibilities 
– “method assemblage does politics, and it is not innocent” (Law 2004: 149). Indeed, 
their effects can range from the reinforcement of  the OWW model to the enactment of  
pluriversal entanglements between a wide range of  heterogeneous actors and voices. The 
various examples unpacked in this section include Latour’s Parliament of  Things; the 
“Council of  All beings”; the articulations of  meditation, affect and environmentalism; 
couplings of  art, more-than-human agency and the Anthropocene; as well as Paulo 
Freire’s “Pedagogy of  the Oppressed” and Augusto Boal’s “Theater of  the Oppressed”. 
The Parliament of Things
In his book, We have never been modern , Latour (1993) outlined the idea of  a “Parliament 
of  Things”, an alternative to the Modern Constitution, bringing non-humans into 
the sphere of  political deliberation by resorting to human representatives/mediators. 
The traditional mechanism of  political deliberation - the Parliament - opens up to the 
plethora of  pluriversal voices:
Let one of  the representatives talk, for instance, about the ozone hole, another represents the 
Monsanto chemical industry, a third the workers of  the same chemical industry, another the voters 
of  New Hampshire, a fifth the meteorology of  the polar regions; let still another speak in the name 
of  the State […]. The imbroglios and networks that had no place now have the whole place to 
themselves. They are the ones that have to be represented; it is around them that the Parliament of  
Things gathers henceforth (Latour 1993: 144).
Later, he developed this project in greater detail, identifying a series of  roles for human 
representatives of  “things”, such as politicians, managers, scientists, economists and 
moralists (Latour 2004). The presence of  these experts would allow for the construction 
of  a quasi-object  (we could call it a pluriversal object) where, through deliberative processes, 
a specific sociotechnical conflict would be unfolded through the continuous production 
of  propositions. The presence of  different “sides”/“actors”/“parties” would allow for 
the continuous re-constitution of  the pluriversal collective. 
Latour’s proposal was put in place in May 2015 at the Théâtre des Amadiers in 
Paris. Attempting to create a more-than-human/pluriversal alternative to the COP 21, 
Science Po students and foreign delegations were invited to dramatize a “Parliament 
of  Things” to deliberate on the climate crisis (Latour 2017). The different delegations 
represented entities such as state and non-state actors, transnational actors, issues, 
territories and non-humans to negotiate a common world (Latour 2017). According 
to Latour (2015), this experimental theatre had four main goals: pedagogical (training 
students in negotiations of  controversies); social science research (experimenting with 
ways of  representing non-humans); natural science research (developing an alternative 
epistemology for matters of  concern); and artistic (art and culture as scientifically and 
aesthetically relevant). For the French sociologist and philosopher, the theatre is a 
beneficial model to operationalize the Parliament of  Things, highlighting the role of  
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:243culture, arts and imagination in the enactment of  a common world, suggesting that 
the performance of  pluriversal politics inevitably requires particular methodological 
arrangements combining politics, affect and more-than-human agency (Latour 2017). 
It could be argued that the Parliament of  Things espouses a “flat ontology” that does 
not sufficiently attend to the differences between heterogenous non-human entities. 
Another limitation concerns the fact that Latour’s proposal still depends on the role of  
“human experts” and may also reproduce dominant versions of  “language” assenting 
on the hegemony of  the “rational argument”. Moreover, the role of  affect seems to be 
ignored by Latour’s proposal. As we will see in the following section, it is key to engage 
with more-than-human agency, as representation and subjectification are inevitably 
entwined. 
The Council of All Beings
The Council of  All Beings is a communal ritual developed by Joanna Macy and John Seed, 
two deep ecologists. It consists of  a set of  practices to overcome anthropocentrism, 
contributing towards a symmetrical relationship between humans and non-humans: 
The name “Council of  All Beings” has come to be used in two ways. In the narrower sense, it refers 
to a ritual form, a council circle of  one-and a-half  or two or three hours, where people gather to 
speak on behalf  of  other species. The term is also used more inclusively to refer to a longer process, 
one that runs from one to several days and includes exercises and activities leading up to and flowing 
from the ritual proper. (Macy & Fleming 1988a: 97)
Their proposal couples contemplative and shamanic practices, more-than-human 
agency and environmentalism. The workshops aim to allow participants to abandon 
their skin-encapsulated ego, i.e., the modern self, ideally assisting participants in 
reshaping their engagement with non-humans and developing resilience in the face of  
environmental degradation. It draws on the reconfiguration of  human subjectivity to 
better respond to the environmental and climate crisis.
The Council includes three phases: mourning, remembering, and speaking from the 
perspective of  other life-forms (Seed 1988: 14). Initially, one should be able to hear 
the earth’s cry – mourning usually involves displaying sorrow and compassion towards 
the destruction of  the environment. The second stage involves remembering, as 
participants should realize that they are deeply entangled with non-humans, becoming 
aware of  interconnectedness. Various methods are mobilized, including a process 
called “evolutionary remembering”, where participants lie down or sit in a comfortable 
position, going through a guided meditation on the origins of  the Universe and the 
evolution of  life (Macy & Fleming 1988a: 106). Finally, the Council includes speaking 
for a non-human entity. Before doing so, one meditates to identify with a non-human. 
After the being has emerged, one practices meditation to “merge” with the non-human. 
When this process is carried out, participants (ideally wearing masks) are assembled, 
and the ritual begins:
Humans! I, Mountain, am speaking. You cannot ignore me! I have been with you since your very 
beginnings and long before. For millennia your ancestors venerated my holy places, found wisdom in 
my heights. I gave you shelter and far vision. Now, in return, you ravage me. You dig and gouge for 
the jewel in the stone, for the ore in my veins. Stripping my forests, you take away my capacity to 
44
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56hold water and to release it slowly. See the silted rivers? See the floods? Can’t you see? In destroying 
me you destroy yourselves. (Macy & Fleming 1988b: 87)
After some rounds of  interventions, the ritual leader thanks the entities for 
expressing themselves and asks them to share their powers with the participants – for 
example, the far-seeing eye of  the condor, the fragrance of  the wildflower, etc. (Macy 
& Fleming 1988b: 88-89). This ritual is not perceived as an end in itself, but as a way to 
form environmental activists, providing them with alternatives to anthropocentric ways 
of  being and thinking. The Council, thus, is expected to trigger real-world impacts, 
providing a “larger context for action” (Seed 1988: 15), becoming an integral dimension 
of  environmental activism and propelling real change. Furthermore, this methodology 
is a potent illustration of  the articulations between affect, more-than-human agency and 
pluriversal ontologies, allowing human participants to feel empowered and supporting 
their environmental actions. 
However, it could be argued that one of  the limitations of  the Council of  All Beings 
is the attempt to “channel” or “represent” non-human entities, translating them into the 
socio-political sphere through humans, thus reproducing anthropocentrism. Another 
criticism concerns its emphasis on emotional and inner aspects, with humans being 
“empowered” by more-than-human agency, which could be understood as an expression 
of  new-age spirituality. However, this approach allows us to reflect on possible ways of  
engaging with more-than-human agency, recognizing the need to reshape the modern 
self  and emphasizing the role of  subjectification devices to listen-with the subaltern.
Meditation, environmentalism and affect 
Although the articulations of  mindfulness, neoliberalism and capitalism are concerning 
(Purser 2019), it has been argued that the ontological politics of  meditation are multiple 
(Carvalho 2021) and that certain practices may offer counter-hegemonic pluriversal 
alternatives to dominant modern forms of  subjectivity, supporting ways of  engaging 
with more-than-human agency. The mindfulness tradition of  the Zen Master Thich 
Nhat Hanh, the leading promoter of  engaged Buddhism, for example, is informed by the 
ontology of  Interbeing (Hanh 2001), illuminating the entanglements between humans 
and non-humans, living and non-living. The mindfulness practices of  Thich Nhat Hanh 
rely on associations between performances, environments and non-humans to foster 
nonmodern forms of  affect (Carvalho 2014). These practices – as well as shamanic 
and indigenous techniques or rituals – foreground ways of  disassembling the modern 
self  (Pickering 2010), allowing humans to embrace ontologies of  interconnectedness, 
generating pluriversal alternatives to dualist forms of  subjectivity, thus offering new 
ways of  engaging with more-than-human agency (Carvalho 2017). 
The emphasis on interdependence and the explicit engagement with specific elements 
(such as water and air) present in these meditation practices may allow humans to merge 
with pluriversal intensities, often neglected by the dominant ontological and political 
narratives. In this sense, they may constitute forms of  ontological theatre (Pickering, 
2007) that disrupt modern separations between people, things and the environment. 
That is why mindfulness has been explored as a potential research method to enhance 
intersubjectivity and to trigger relational forms of  affect (Whitehead et al. 2015). 
Furthermore, some scholars argue that certain forms of  meditation can reinforce 
environmental values (Wamsler & Brink 2018), and Schmid and Taylor-Aiken (2021) 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:245have recently advanced that mindfulness practices play a role in grassroots environmental 
movements by enacting alternatives to the modern self.
The arts and more-than-human agency 
We have witnessed several collaborations between social scientists and artists for the past 
decade, fostering dialogues between science, academia, and the arts (Davis & Turpin 
2015; Engelmann 2015; McCormack 2014). These synergies suggest that the arts are a 
powerful way of  reconfiguring the methodological and expressive repertoire of  social 
sciences, engaging with non-human and elemental forces (Latour 2017; Saraceno et al. 
2015; Wolfe & Whiteman 2016; Jackson & Fannin 2011). Indeed, art can foreground 
the emergence of  “alien agency” (Salter & Pickering 2015), generating instances of  
ontological theatre that provide clues on how to address the challenges of  our current 
zeitgeist, combining politics, affect and aesthetics. For example, Landau and Toland 
(2021) argued that political action is stimulated when the senses are galvanized through 
artistic engagement. Moreover, within non-representational theory (Thrift 2004) there 
has been increased concern with the articulations of  ethics and aesthetics, often turning 
to the arts and the sensate (Harrison 2000) to identify “new modes of  ethical and 
aesthetic inhabitation” (McCormack 2002: 473). 
Two emblematic examples that illustrate performatively engaging with more-than-
human agency are the Museo Aero Solar3 and the Coral Empathy Device4. The Museo 
Aero Solar was developed by Tomás Saraceno and is made of  used plastic bags with 
new sections added each time it flies. The assembled plastic bags become artificial 
clouds engaging in nomadic patterns of  flight. According to the artist, this device can 
be understood as a new way of  inhabiting the earth, where civilization is moved by solar 
power and freed from the earth’s surface. Kat Austen developed the Coral Empathy 
Device, and its goal is to translate the Corals’ “Umwelt” (Von Uexkull 2010) into human 
experience, generating (human) empathy towards these non-human beings that are 
affected by plastic and acoustic pollution. In practice, the Coral Empathy Device, which 
has the form of  a sphere, is worn over the head, allowing humans to hear sounds of  the 
ocean near coral reefs in Norway. With this experience, the artist generates an immersive 
experience that disrupts conventional ways of  engaging with the world, suggesting that 
art forms can support the development of  empathy towards non-humans, allowing us 
to imagine ways of  listening-with those silenced by the dominant narrative.
The Pedagogy and Theatre of the Oppressed
The “Pedagogy of  the Oppressed” is an adult literacy method developed by the Brazilian 
pedagogist Paulo Freire. Freire (1967) calls the hegemonic teaching method “banking 
education” because the student is merely perceived as a “recipient” of  information”, 
reproducing “knowledge” without developing critical thinking. Alternatively, Freire 
proposes a critical method, which allows humans to develop “ conscientização ”5, suggesting 
that education should be coupled with socio-political engagement. Freire advocates 
articulating knowledge and students’ lifeworlds, requiring teaching methodologies that 
adapt to their particular situations, concerns and aspirations. Freire’s method explicitly 
relies on students’ situatedness to guide the learning process, resorting to “generative 
words” stemming from their local contexts with significant social and practical 
46
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56meaning (Freire 1970). The Brazilian pedagogist was a strong apologist of  dismantling 
the teacher/student hierarchy, promoting an “ecology of  knowledge” (Santos 2007). 
Students would share a series of  local practices and experiences, thus decentring 
epistemological authority from teachers. His pedagogical approach is dialogic, explicitly 
integrating local knowledges and practices, geared towards the development of  social 
and political consciousness, allowing students to become aware of  their situatedness as 
“oppressed” (or, put differently, “subaltern”) and to develop epistemological tools to 
overcome oppression well beyond literacy. 
Freire’s methods have been implemented in other disciplinary settings, leading, for 
instance, to developing the “Theater of  the Oppressed” by the Brazilian playwright 
Augusto Boal, mobilizing situated publics in the resolution of  social and political issues. 
The Theatre of  the Oppressed is a political-theatrical method whose aim is to transform  
the actors and the spectators and, more broadly, the socio-political structures they are 
part of. This method is a tool for social emancipation: its main objective is to raise 
“conscientização” about oppression, empowering participants to act against it (Boal 
1979). Boal’s technique blurs the boundaries between actors and spectators – the latter 
being considered “spect-actors” – as a means to engage everyone in the theatrical 
process.
Freire’s and Boal’s proposals are beneficial to bring to the fore “ecologies of  
knowledge” (Santos 2007), especially in intercultural contexts involving local and 
indigenous communities and the Global South, recognizing that all epistemologies are 
politically situated. 
Pluriversal methodologies in practice
In this section, we speculate on how pluriversal methodologies can be mobilized to 
listen-with the subaltern oppressed by the OWW in the Anthropocene. Drawing on 
the assumption that sociotechnical controversies are performatively assembled through 
the mediation of  methodologies, we mobilize the approaches unpacked in the previous 
section, allowing us to imagine ways of  unfolding pluriverses related to wildfires, 
geoengineering and lithium mining. Our situatedness decisively informs these three 
examples as Portuguese academics: wildfires and lithium mining are ongoing national 
controversies, and we have recently conducted public participation exercises with 
geoengineering. We have associated each case study with a specific natural element: fire, 
air, water and earth. This section is highly experimental and couples methodology, art, 
politics and affect, speculatively engaging with heterogeneous pluriverses. 
These methodologies are performative, i.e., they aim to tentatively engage with 
alternative ontologies that may bring to the fore those voices, experiences, entities and 
forms of  affect undermined by the OWW . They attempt to “listen-with” the subaltern, 
thus exploring the possibility of  enacting nonmodern ontologies through methodological 
speculation. This speculative exercise is also deeply entwined with our own personal and 
institutional situatedness. Our research centre has historically attempted to promote 
“ecologies of  knowledge”, engaging with ontologies and voices from the Global South 
to imagine alternatives to modern hegemonic epistemologies. In the past, we have 
engaged with counter-hegemonic methodologies – such as Freire’s Pedagogy of  the 
Oppressed and Boal’s Theater of  the Oppressed – to produce alternatives to dominant 
approaches regarding public engagement with emerging technologies (Carvalho & 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:247Nunes 2018). Moreover, Author 1 is a researcher in the field of  Science and Technology 
Studies and a long-term meditator, with interest in the potential of  contemplative and 
artistic practices to engage with sociotechnical controversies and non-human agency 
more broadly. Author 2 is both a political scientist and a feminist anti-capitalist activist 
who is currently deeply involved in resistance against lithium mining in Portugal. 
Drawing on current debates within speculative design (Broms, Wangel & Andersson 
2017), the various exemplars that are put forward in the following sections can 
be understood as [methodological] prototypes, i.e., speculative attempts to trigger 
nonmodern ways of  engaging and listening-with the subaltern, exploring the possibilities 
- the “what-if ” – emerging from heterogenous articulations of  affect, futures, fiction, 
the arts and non-human agency. These prototypes will be unpacked with case studies 
that reflect our situatedness as Portuguese academics – wildfires, lithium mining and 
geoengineering.
Fire: wildfires 
Fire has been considered the flagship element of  the Anthropocene (Clark 2020), 
reminding us of  the Promethean hubris to dominate and adapt the natural world 
to human will through science and technology, often with negative consequences. 
Wildfires, thus, are frequently pointed out as one of  the extreme weather events that 
best illustrate the disastrous consequences of climate change. 
The 2017 wildfires in Portugal caused 119 human casualties, and 442.000 hectares 
of  forest burned (ICNF 2017). Two significant wildfires occurred: June 17th severely 
affected the Municipality of  Pedrógão Grande, with 66 deaths and 204 injured people, 
and the wildfires of  October 15th affected mainly the centre and northern regions, 
killing more than 50 humans and at least half  a million animals (Simões 2017). The 
2017 wildfires are the most devastating natural disaster in Portugal’s recent history, 
illustrating a tension between elemental forces, forest management, non-humans 
(including introduced invasive species such as eucalyptus) and human collectives with 
different visions, aspirations and interests.   Stakeholders include a plethora of  human 
collectives such as paper companies (with a vested interest in growing eucalyptus, a 
highly profitable – yet flammable – species), environmental associations, landowners, 
politicians, local communities, trees, soils, wild animals and ecosystems. 
This controversy is particularly interesting to speculate on how to develop pluriversal 
politics to attend to this multiplicity of  subaltern human and non-human voices. We 
propose three methodological approaches: an experimental parliament informed by the 
Parliament of  Things and the Council of  All beings, a contemplative practice geared 
towards engaging with wildfires and non-human agency, and an artistic device to engage 
with the forest.
The first methodological endeavour is inspired by the Parliament of  Things and 
the Council of  All Beings. With the provisional title “The Parliament of  Fire”, this 
parliament could take place in Pedrógão Grande to deliberate on tackling wildfires.  
Potential participants could include members of  associations created following the 
2017 wildfires (Associação de Vítimas de Pedrógão Grande; Associação dos Familiares 
das Vítimas do Incêndio de Pedrógão Grande); representatives of  environmental 
groups and grassroots movements involved in reforestation campaigns; representatives 
of  paper companies; local politicians; representatives of  non-humans (such as 
biologists, geologists and geographers). This experimental parliament could lead to a 
48
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56set of  – potentially contradictory – propositions on wildfire governance, illustrating the 
heterogeneity of  wildfire pluriverses and the diversity of  human and more-than-human 
forces. 
The second methodological experiment consists of  a meditative practice centred 
on wildfires, illustrating how this sociotechnical controversy can be articulated with 
nonmodern types of  affect. Within Buddhism, some forms of  meditation involve fire 
in various forms. Still, the experimental practice we propose focuses specifically on 
wildfires, aiming to enhance embodied awareness of  the heterogeneous assemblages 
mobilized by this particular phenomenon. This would involve four different stages: 
first, participants would practice concentration to slow down the flow of  thoughts 
(samadhi ), focusing on the breath to bring their minds and bodies to the present 
moment; the second stage would involve bringing to mind all the suffering caused 
by wildfires, including images of  charred human and non-human bodies, destroyed 
ecosystems, burned down houses, and the human and non-human panic created by 
these events; later on, participants would come back to their bodies, evoking images of  
landscapes and soils regenerating, trees growing back, rivers flowing, and wild animals 
and local populations living symbiotically with the natural world; finally, this practice 
would involve metta or loving-kindness meditation, with participants sending positive 
energies to all humans and non-humans affected by wildfires.
Finally, we propose the development of  artistic and performative practices. Here, we 
draw inspiration on the Coral Empathy Device and on the work of  the Polish-Brazilian 
artist Frans Krajcberg, who created sculptures resorting to burnt tree trunks to give 
voice to Amazonian trees destroyed by fires, logging and monocultures (Vieira 2021). We 
propose the development of  an installation combining immersive environments, virtual 
reality and specific sensations to allow participants to think [and feel] like a forest (Kohn 
2013). With the provisional title “Becoming Forest(s)”, this device could be installed in 
a native hollow tree in the centre region of  Portugal. Participants would enter this tree 
feeling the various sensations caused by their bodies touching wood, breathing deeply 
and embodying the mossy atmospheres of  the forest. Simultaneously, participants 
would wear a VR headset playing a video depicting different aspects of  forest worlds – 
trees, wild animals, wildfires, and regenerative practices – throughout different seasons. 
This would allow for the emergence of  an experience of  impermanence, Interbeing 
and rootedness, with the tree providing, in an embodied way, the natural support to 
overcome the suffering and destruction caused by wildfires. This experiment would 
merge natural and technological worlds, illustrating how human and more-than-human 
agency can be coupled to trigger nonmodern forms of  affect. 
Air and water: geoengineering
Geoengineering refers to the technological manipulation of  earth systems to avoid 
the disastrous consequences of  climate change, and there are two primary forms of  
geoengineering: Solar Radiation Management (SRM) and Carbon Dioxide Removal 
(CDR). SRM involves reflecting solar radiation back to space to counterbalance the 
heat triggered by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (Szerszynski et al. 2013: 2809). 
CDR aims to directly remove CO2 from the atmosphere, resorting to technologies that 
increase the natural capacity of  carbon sinks (plants, oceans and soil). Geoengineering 
is thus entwined with manipulating air, water and the earth alike. Here we focus on 
technologies that manipulate two of  these natural elements: air and water. Geoengineering 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:249– including its definition – is a highly controversial topic (Hamilton 2013, 2014; The 
Breakthrough Institute 2018), and in the Global North numerous public engagement 
exercises have been organized over the past ten years (Bellamy & Lezaun 2015; Buck 
2018; Cox et al. 2020).
In order to bring to the fore the pluriverses of  geoengineering – whose potential 
stakeholders may include the whole planetary populations, both human and non-human 
–, we will speculate on two different experimental methodologies: the creation of  
utopian/dystopian scenarios as a way to foster future-oriented social imagination; and 
exercises inspired by meditative practices. 
 Geoengineering is an emblematic illustration of  the OWW , as it assumes that the 
atmosphere and the ocean can be manipulated to curb the negative consequences of  
extractive capitalism (Carvalho et al. 2021). It has thus been argued that the subaltern 
should be the ones engaged in geoengineering discussions (Whyte 2018). More recently, 
there have been attempts to use fiction as a qualitative research method (Marsh et 
al. 2017), challenging the realist and representational undertones of  social sciences. 
Combining these two concerns, in May 2021 we organized a deliberative event on 
geoengineering with “situated” publics – activists, representatives of  environmental 
groups and science communicators. Participants faced dystopian and utopian scenarios 
involving geoengineering and were asked to deliberate on how to govern specific SRM 
and CDR applications in 2030 and 2050. These exercises involved citizens who are 
often absent from decision making, allowing them to discuss technological applications 
with a potential future impact, drawing on their subaltern situationality to deliberate on 
geoengineering, thus opening the pluriverses of  these applications.
Meditative practices inspire the other proposed methodologies, and they were thought 
of  as a way of  listening-with the potential subalterns of  the two main geoengineering 
applications: SRM and CDR. With the provisional title “the SRM Dance”, the first 
one is inspired by Sufi Whirling, a practice belonging to the mystical branch of  Islam 
where participants attain altered states of  consciousness through dance, articulating 
movement, repetition and spirituality. “The SRM Dance” would mimic the choreography 
of  sulphate particles and their engagement with the atmosphere6 and multiple human 
and non-human beings. It would consist of  an active meditation where humans, 
through movement, rhythm and kinaesthetic awareness, would enter a state of  trance, 
contemplating SRM interactions with air, plants, humans, non-human animals, and the 
oceans throughout time and space. The other speculative methodology we suggest 
is developing a device combining guided meditation and immersive environments, 
with the provisional title “Becoming Algae”, because some CDR proposals may, in 
the future, rely on genetically modified algae to optimize ocean carbon sinks (Singh 
& Dhar 2019). Isolation tanks, which often disrupt normal states of  consciousness 
(Lilly 1972), could be filled with algae to generate an affective atmosphere evocative 
of  CDR ontologies. After entering the tank, human participants would progressively 
attain a state of  Yoga Nidra induced by a guided meditation. The instructions would 
then emphasize the sensory engagement with water and the slimy touch of  algae, 
inviting participants to imagine how these non-human bodies were re-engineered to 
better absorb the CO2 generated by human civilization. “Becoming Algae” would allow 
humans to be embraced and cared for by algae in a safe affective environment, evoking 
how the couplings of  humans and non-humans in a state of  suspended animation can 
illustrate how more-than-human agency is mobilized – and reshaped – to care for the 
human collective in a pluriversal nonmodern way.
50
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Earth: lithium mining 
In the northern mountains of  Portugal lays one of  the world’s most coveted natural 
resources: lithium. This metal is key to supporting the European Union’s (EU) energy 
transition towards carbon neutrality, as lithium batteries can be used for electric vehicles 
and renewable energy storage. The Portuguese government aims to exploit its national 
reserves because lithium mining is imagined as an opportunity to give the country a 
leading position within the EU. 
As we write this article, in September 2021, lithium mining is approaching the 
northern regions of  Portugal by leaps and bounds. The largest lithium exploration 
project in Western Europe has reached the final stage of  approval in July 20217: the 
Barroso Mine project. To be developed by Savannah Resources, a British multinational 
– this project contemplates a concession area of  593 ha. The average lithium 
extraction from the mine is expected to approach 1,450,000 tonnes per annum for 
11 years (Carballo-Cruz & Cerejeira 2020). Covas do Barroso is an agricultural village 
dominated by livestock production and crops typical of  mountainous regions – its 262 
inhabitants preserve traditional ways of  working the land and treating animals. In 2017, 
Covas gained the classification of  World Agricultural Heritage, given by the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of  the UN. This green landscape, where pristine water flows 
in abundance and the air is pure beyond compare, is now threatened by the EU’s first 
and most extensive “green mining” project. 
This controversy perfectly illustrates the paradoxes of  the EU’s Green Deal, 
justifying intensively extractivist practices in the name of  tackling climate change. We 
argue that Barroso – and its human and non-human populations – are being turned 
into a “sacrifice zone” (Lerner 2010; Klein 2014) or, more accurately, into a “green 
sacrifice zone” (Zografos & Robbins 2020). “Sacrifice zones” are geographical areas 
that have been environmentally razed through industrial-technological interventions for 
the sake of  capitalist development, generally in very isolated territories populated by 
already vulnerable communities. In the energy transition context, we argue, along with 
Zografos and Robbins (2020), that these territories were turned into “green sacrifice 
zones” since their plunder is justified in the name of  the ‘green’ transition. 
Lithium mining is particularly interesting to speculate on developing methodologies 
that allow us to listen to subaltern stakeholders. Human stakeholders include the mining 
company, the Portuguese government, mining lobbies, and the EU, on the one hand, 
and local communities, local anti-mining associations (Associação Unidos em Defesa 
do Barroso; Povo e Natureza do Barroso), national environmental associations, and 
climate justice activists, on the other (subaltern) hand8. Soils, water, air, dust, animals 
and ecosystems are the non-human forces at stake. The three examples we propose 
include a poetry workshop; a “Theatre of  the Oppressed” session to listen-with local 
communities; and experimental artistic practices engaging with soil, caring for it, 
contrasting with the “technoscientific timescape” (de la Bellacasa 2015) of the mine.
First, a poetic inquiry could be developed in Barroso, allowing local inhabitants to 
tell stories about their territories, past generations, recalling oral legends and myths. 
In times of  profound ecological sorrow, recalling and paying tribute to our ancestral 
memory is a way to defy the accelerated rhythm of  destruction (Krenak 2019). Then, 
this oral exercise would pay homage to Barroso’s populations’ way of  living, their 
past and present relationship with each other and with non-humans, allowing them 
to reflect on how these dynamics would be disrupted if  the project goes forward. 
Poetry supports geographical research because of  its “affective power, […] which is 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:251helpful to express particularly emotional aspects of  spatial experience and to promote 
empathy across difference” (Paiva 2020: 1). Poetry can generate affective atmospheres 
that couple sensations, insights, emotions, and imagination, supporting the collective 
recognition of  local experiences and narratives. In Barroso, this would be a useful 
method to de-materialize their territory, recognizing the importance of  sensory and 
affective geographies in ongoing territorial struggles and fostering more-than-human 
forms of  affect. 
A Theatre of  the Oppressed exercise could be held at Covas do Barroso. Ideally, 
actors would be local associations members against lithium mining and environmental 
associations/collectives; the “spect-actors” would be the rest of  the local population 
and neighbourhood communities. A first enactment would represent a future reality, 
i.e., the construction of  the mine and its likely impacts: the environmental, climate and 
social damages for Barroso and its populations, on the one hand, and the financial and 
economic prosperity for the mining company, on the other hand. Later on, “spect-
actors” would replace the actors, re-staging the scene until they reached a consensus 
on their desired future. This event would empower the local (subaltern) community, 
exposing them to the factors of  their oppression while giving them the tools to react 
against it.
The third methodological experiment is inspired by Andy Weir’s work: the Pazugoo  
art project, a constellation of  3D-printed figures proposed as a demonic personification 
of  nuclear waste (Weir 2016). Weir’s work navigates between sensory experience and 
more-than-human scales of  deep time, turning art into a means to listen-with more-
than-human agency. Drawing inspiration from Pazugoo , local artists could collaborate 
to create and design artistic pieces engaging with non-human and organic forces, 
such as soil, water, air, dust, etc. The project proposed by Savannah Resources is an 
open-pit mine, which means that lithium extraction would interact with soil and impact 
the quality of  the water and air. On the one hand, artists could also develop a sensory 
experiment that would embody the pain, distress and ache of  these elements; or, as Weir 
does, they could present an art installation in which these non-human forces would turn 
against  humans, or in which these non-human forces would make a surge in a demonic 
figure, rendering humans wary of  the future consequences of  present actions.
On the other hand, artists could engage in caring  practices. As a counterbalance to 
the mining project, which views soil as a “resource” to be commodified and exploited, 
artists could develop projects where the soil is portrayed as a living more-than-human 
community. These practices would make visible what was once invisible, namely the 
timescales of  non-humans, which fundamentally differ from the productivist rhythms 
of  the mine. As Puig de la Bellacasa (2015) suggested, making time for these deeper-earth 
timescales is a form of  “care time” that should be seen as a regenerative practice in 
times of  ecological breakdown. These artistic practices resonate with Haraway’s 
(2015) suggestions of  further extending our kin ties, to make- with and become- with the 
earth-bound.
Conclusion 
This article was a provisional attempt to imagine ways of  disrupting the OWW , 
engaging with pluriversal methodologies to bring to the fore a wide range of  human 
and non-human voices that modern ontologies have systematically silenced in the 
52
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Anthropocene. To listen(-with) the subaltern, we engaged with a set of  practices that 
couple politics, affect, territories, the senses and more-than-human agency. Drawing 
on the case studies of  wildfires, geoengineering and lithium mining, we speculated on 
how to bring to attention human and non-human subaltern, imagining various ways of  
engaging local communities and a wide range of  non-humans, such as elemental forces, 
algae, trees, soils and the stratosphere.
We argued that pluriversal methodologies are ways of  countering modern, hegemonic 
and extractivist versions of  the dominant ontological model of  the Anthropocene. 
They allow us to listen-with  and be performatively affected by the agency of  collectives 
systematically subordinated and silenced by OWW ontologies, paving the way for the 
emergence of  nonmodern, pluriversal politics that disrupt modern narratives and 
structures. These methodologies are ways of  “staying with the trouble” (Haraway 2016), 
triggering forms of  affect that contrast with modern ones – they disrupt and reconfigure 
our senses, allowing our bodies to resonate with more-than-human suffering, eliciting 
ways of  coping with a world falling apart. The different forms of  experience linked to 
these exercises may indicate that to listen-with the subaltern our affective architecture 
should be reassembled, thus decolonizing our bodies and selves from dominant OWW 
devices of  subjectification. The aim of  these methodologies is not to reach some form 
of  closure but to allow the clamour of  pluriversal forces to resonate with human and 
non-human bodies. In doing so, they reshape politics, affect and modern illusions of  
control, enabling more-than-human agency to guide us into a time yet to come , “as if  the 
stranger or foreigner held the keys” (Derrida 2000: 121).
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through 
the COMPETE 2020 Operational Program for Competitiveness and Internationalization 
(POCI) and by Portuguese funds through the FCT (Fundação para a Ciência e a 
Tecnologia), Project TROPO, number 028362 (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-028362).
Endnotes
1. Usually translated as “a world where many worlds fit”.
2. Spivak (1998), in her seminal essay Can the Subaltern speak?, uses the term 
“epistemic violence” to designate the silencing of marginalized groups. This term 
sheds light on colonialism’s long-lasting consequences – not only socio-politically 
but also epistemologically. Indeed, colonialism has dismissed and downgraded, for 
centuries, other, non-western knowledge. For more debates on this matter, see Spivak 
(1998; 2010), Dotson (2011), Brunner (2021).
3. The following website provides some pictures of  Saraceno’s project: https://www.
estherschipper.com/exhibitions/282-anthropocene-monument-with-tomas-saraceno .
4. https://katausten.wordpress.com/the-coral-empathy-device/ . 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:2535. Often translated as “conscientization”.
6. SRM often involves the injection of  aerosols into the stratosphere that would then 
disperse and create a protective shield against solar radiation.
7. Savavannah Ressources has delivered its Environmental Impact Study (EIA) to 
the Portuguese Environment Agency (APA). The APA then placed the EIA in public 
consultation, for about 2 months.   During the public consultation period, APA 
revealed that it received around 170 participations. This period ended in July 2021, and 
the APA’s final decision has since then been awaited.
8. This is an ongoing and recent controversy. As such, aside from the pro-mine 
developers and the mine opponents, there are some stakeholders (namely, political 
parties and climate justice groups) who still haven’t developed a public and clear 
stance on the issue.
References
Armiero M (2021)  Wasteocene: Stories from the Global Dump . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Barca S (2020) Forces of Reproduction . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Bellamy R & Lezaun J (2015) Crafting a public for geoengineering. Public Understanding of Science 
26(4): 402–417.
Blok A & Jensen CB (2019) The Anthropocene event in social theory: On ways of problematizing 
nonhuman materiality differently. The Sociological Review  https://doi.org/10.1177/0038026119845551
Boal A (1979) Theatre of the Oppressed . Pluto Press, London.
Bonneuil C & Fressoz J-B (2016) L’événement Anthropocène. La Terre, l’histoire et nous [The Anthropocene event. 
The Earth, History and us] . Seuil, Paris.
Broms L, Wangel J & Andersson C (2017) Sensing energy: Forming stories through speculative design 
artefacts. Energy Research & Social Science  31: 194–204.
Brunner C (2021) Conceptualizing epistemic violence: an interdisciplinary assemblage for IR. International 
Politics Review  9: 193–212.
Buck HJ (2018) Perspectives on solar geoengineering from Finnish Lapland: Local insights on the 
global imaginary of Arctic geoengineering. Geoforum  91: 78–86.
Carballo-Cruz F & Cerejeira J (2020) O Projeto da Mina do Barroso: Impactos Económicos e Desenvolvimento. 
Relatório Final  [The Mina do Barroso Project: Economic Impacts and Development. Final Report]. Universidade 
do Minho, Braga.
Carson R (1962) Silent Spring . Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Carvalho A (2014) Subjectivity, ecology and meditation - Performing interconnectedness. Subjectivity  
7(2): 131–150.
Carvalho A (2017) Ecologies of the self in practice - meditation, affect and ecosophy. Geografiska Annaler: 
Series B, Human Geography  99(2): 207–222.
Carvalho A (2021) Rethinking the politics of meditation: Practice, affect and ontology. The Sociological 
Review  69(6): 1260–1276.
Carvalho A, Ferreira V & Matos AR (2021) Ontologias do Antropoceno: Crise climática, respostas 
sociopolíticas e tecnologias emergentes [Ontologies of the Anthropocene: Climate crisis, sociopolitical 
responses and emerging technologies].  Forum Sociológico  38 https://journals.openedition.org/
sociologico/9693 . 
Carvalho A & Nunes J A (2018) Assembling upstream engagement: the case of  the Portuguese 
deliberative forum on nanotechnologies. NanoEthics  12(2): 99–113.
Chaplin JE (2017) Can the nonhuman speak? Breaking the chain of  being in the anthropocene. Journal 
of  the History of  Ideas  78(4): 509–529.
Clark N (2020) Vertical fire: For a pyropolitics of  the subsurface. Geoforum  127: 364–372.
Cox E, Spence E & Pidgeon N (2020) Public perceptions of  carbon dioxide removal in the United 
States and the United Kingdom. Nature Climate Change  10(8): 744–749.
54
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Davis H & Turpin E (2015; eds.) Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters among aesthetics, politics, environments 
and epistemologies.  Open Humanities Press, London.
de Castro EV (2019) On models and examples: Engineers and bricoleurs in the anthropocene. Current 
Anthropology  60(S20): 296–308. https://doi.org/10.1086/702787 .
de la Cadena M (2015) Earth Beings: Ecologies of  Practice Across Andean Worlds . Duke University Press, 
Durham.
de la Cadena M & Blaser M (2018) A World of  Many Worlds . Duke University Press, Durham.
de la Cadena M (2019) An Invitation to Live Together. Environmental Humanities  11(2): 477–484. 
Derrida J (2000) Of  Hospitality . Stanford University Press, Stanford.
Dotson K (2011) Tracking Epistemic Violence, Tracking Practices of  Silencing. Hypatia 26(2): 236–257.
Engelmann S (2015) More-than-human affinitive listening. Dialogues in Human Geography  5(1): 76–79.
Escobar A (2017) Sustaining the Pluriverse: The Political Ontology of  Territorial Struggles in Latin 
America. In Brightman M & Lewis J (eds.) The Anthropology of  Sustainability , 237–256. Palgrave 
Macmillan, London.
Escobar A (2018) Designs for the Pluriverse. Radical Interdependence, Autonomy and the Making of  Worlds . Duke 
University Press, Durham.
Freire P (1967) Educação Como Prática da Liberdade [Education as Practice of  Freedom] . Paz e Terra, Rio de 
Janeiro.
Freire P (1970) Pedagogia do Oprimido [Pedagogy of  the Oppressed] . Paz e Terra, Rio de Janeiro.
Hanh TN (2001) Thich Nhat Hanh: Essential writings . Orbis Books, Ossining.
Hamilton C (2013) No, we should not just ‘at least do the research’. Nature News  496(7444): 139.
Hamilton C (2014) Geoengineering and the politics of  science. Bulletin of  the Atomic Scientists  70(3): 17–26.
Haraway D (2015) Chthulucene: Making Kin. Environmental Humanities  6: 159–165.
Haraway D (2016) Staying with the Trouble . Duke University Press, Durham.
Haraway D & Tsing A (2019) Reflections on the Plantationocene. A conversation with Donna Haraway 
and Anna Tsing. Edge Effects . https://edgeeffects.net/haraway-tsing-plantationocene/ (accessed 
20th June 2021).
Harrison P (2000) Making Sense: Embodiment and the Sensibilities of  the Everyday. Environment and 
Planning D: Society and Space  18(4): 497–517.
Hornborg A (2015) The Political Ecology of  the Technocene . Routledge, London.
Instituto de Conservação da Natureza e das Florestas (ICNF) (2017) 10º Relatório Provisório de Incêndios 
Florestais . [10th Provisional Report of  Forest Fires].
Jackson M & Fannin M (2011) Letting geography fall where it may—aerographies address the elemental. 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space  29(3): 435–444.
Klein N (2014) This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. Climate . Simon & Schuster, New York.
Krenak A (2019) Ideias para adiar o fim do mundo [Ideas to postpone the end of  the world] . Companhia das 
Letras, São Paulo.
Kohn E (2013) How forests think . University of  California Press, California.
Kothari A, Salleh A, Escobar A, Demaria F & Acosta A (2018) Pluriverse: A Post-Development Dictionary . 
Tulika Books, India.
Landau F & Toland A (2021) Towards a sensory politics of  the Anthropocene: Exploring activist-
artistic approaches to politicizing air pollution. Environment and Planning C: Politics and Space. https://
doi.org/10.1177%2F2399654420981601
Latour B (1993) We have never been modern . Harvard University Press, Harvard.
Latour B (2004) Politics of  nature . Harvard University Press, Harvard.
Latour B (2014) Agency at the Time of  the Anthropocene New Literary History  45(1): 1–18.
Latour B (2015) Paris Climate 2015: Make it Work ‘theater of  negotiations’ . http://www.bruno-latour.fr/
node/621.html  (Accessed 20th June 2021).
Latour B (2017) Facing Gaia: Eight lectures on the new climatic regime . John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey.
Law J (2004) After method: Mess in social science research . Routledge, London.
Law J (2015) What’s wrong with a one-world world? Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of  Social Theory  
16(1): 126–139.
Lerner S (2010) Sacrifice zones. The front lines of  toxic chemical exposure in the United States . MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Lilly JC (1972) The Center of  the Cyclone: An Autobiography of  Inner Space . Julian Press, New York.
Macy J & Fleming P (1988a) Guidelines for a Council of  All Beings Workshop. In Seed J, Macy J & 
Fleming P (eds.) Thinking Like a Mountain – Towards a Council of  All Beings , 97-116. New Society 
Publishers, Philadelphia.
Macy J & Fleming P (1988b) The Council of  All Beings. In Seed J, Macy J & Fleming P (eds.) Thinking 
Like a Mountain – Towards a Council of  All Beings , 79-90. New Society Publishers, Philadelphia.
Malm A & Hornborg A (2014) The geology of  mankind? A critique of  the anthropocene narrative. 
Anthropocene Review  1(1): 62–69. 
Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56nordia geographical publications51:255Malm A (2017) Fossil Capital: The Rise of  Steam Power and the Roots of  Global Warming. Environmental 
History  22(3): 551–552.
Marsh JS, Dyer MJA, Bubp RL & Myers J (2017) Fiction as method in qualitative research. In Matthes J, 
Davis CS and Potter RF (eds.)  The International Encyclopedia of  Communication Research Methods . https://
doi.org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0104
McCormack DP (2002) A Paper with an Interest in Rhythm. Geoforum  33(4): 469–485. 
McCormack DP (2014) Atmospheric things and circumstantial excursions. Cultural Geographies  21(4): 
605–625.
Mies M & Shiva V (2014) Ecofeminism . Zed Books, London.
Mol A (1999) Ontological politics. A word and some questions. The Sociological Review  47(1): 74–89.
Morgan M (2019) New Materialism: An Ontology for the Anthropocene. Natural Resources Journal 
59(2): 251–280.
Moore J (2016)  Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History and the Crisis of  Capitalism . PM Press, Oakland.
Morozov E (2014) To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of  Technological Solutionism. Journal 
of  Design History  27(1): 111–113. 
Paiva D (2020) Poetry as a resonant method for multi-sensory research. Emotion, Space and Society  34: 
100655.
Paulson S (2018) Pluriversal learning: pathways toward a world of  many worlds. Nordia Geographical 
Publications  47(5): 85–109.
Pickering A (2007) Ontological theatre Gordon Pask, cybernetics, and the arts. Cybernetics & Human 
Knowing  14(4): 43–57.
Pickering A (2010) The cybernetic brain . University of  Chicago Press, Chicago.
Puig De La Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of  care. 
Social Studies of  Science  45(5), 691–716.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2019) Re-animating soils: Transforming human–soil affections through science, 
culture and community. Sociological Review  67(2): 391–407. 
Purser R (2019) McMindfulness: How mindfulness became the new capitalist spirituality . Repeater Books, London.
Raworth K (2014) Must the Anthropocene be a Man-thropocene?  https://www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2014/oct/20/anthropocene-working-group-science-gender-bias . The Guardian , 20th 
October 2014  (Accessed 11th June 2019). 
Riquito M (2021) Antropoceno patriarcal, petro-masculinidades e masculinidades industriais: diálogos 
feministas sobre a crise climática [Patriarchal Anthropocene, petro-masculinities and industrial 
masculinities: feminist dialogues about the climate crisis]. Ex aequo 43: 15–29.
Salleh A (2017) Ecofeminism as Politics. Nature, Marx and the Postmodern.  Zed Books, London.
Salleh A (2020) Re-worlding—With a pluriversal New Deal . https://arena.org.au/re-worlding-with-a-
pluriversal-new-deal (Accessed 15th June 2021).
Salter C & Pickering A (2015) Alien agency: Experimental encounters with art in the making . MIT Press, 
Cambridge. 
Santos BS (2002) Towards a New Legal Common Sense Law, Globalization, and Emancipation . Butterworth, 
Oxford.
Santos BS (2007) Para além do pensamento abissal: das linhas globais a uma ecologia de saberes 
[Beyond abyssal thinking: from global lines to an ecology of  knowledges]. Revista Crítica de Ciências 
Sociais  78(Outubro): 3–46.
Santos BS (2017) The Resilience of  Abyssal Exclusions in Our Societies: Toward a Post-Abyssal Law. 
Tilburg Law Review  22(1–2): 237–258. 
Saraceno T, Engelmann S & Szerszynski B (2015). Becoming aerosolar: From solar sculptures to cloud 
cities.  In Davis H & Turpin E (eds.)  Art in the Anthropocene , 57–62. Open Humanities Press, London. 
Schmid B & Taylor Aiken G (2021) Transformative mindfulness: the role of  mind-body practices in 
community-based activism. Cultural Geographies  28(1): 3–17.
Seed J (1988). Introduction: “To Hear Within Ourselves the Sound of  the Earth Crying”. In Seed J, 
Macy J & Fleming P (eds.) Thinking Like a Mountain – Towards a Council of  All Beings , 7–17. New 
Society Publishers, Philadelphia.
Simões B (2017) Morreram mais de 500 mil animais nos incêndios de outubro. Jornal de negócios, 
13th December 2017. https://www.jornaldenegocios.pt/empresas/agricultura-e-pescas/detalhe/
morreram-mais-de-500-mil-animais-nos-incendios-de-outubro  (Accessed 15th June 2021)
Singh J & Dhar DW (2019) Overview of  carbon capture technology: microalgal biorefinery concept 
and state-of-the-art. Frontiers in Marine Science  6(29): 1–9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00029
Solón P (2019) Introdução. In Solón P (ed.) Alternativas Sistêmicas: Bem Viver, decrescimento, comuns, 
ecofeminismo, direitos da Mãe Terra e desglobalização [Systemic Alternatives: Buen Vivir, degrowth, commons, 
ecofeminism, Rights of  Mother Earth and deglobalization] , 13–17. Editora Elefante, São Paulo.
Spivak GC (1998) Can the Subaltern Speak? In Nelson C & Grossberg L (eds.) Marxism and the 
Interpretation of  Culture , 271–313. Palgrave Macmillan, London.
56
nordia geographical publications51:2 Carvalho & Riquito: Listening-with the subaltern — p. 37–56Spivak GC (2010) Can The Subaltern Speak? Reflections On The History Of  An Idea . Columbia University 
Press, New York.
Szerszynski B, Kearnes M, Macnaghten P , Owen R & Stilgoe J (2013) Why solar radiation management 
geoengineering and democracy won’t mix. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space  45(12): 
2809–2816.
Swyngedouw E & Ernstson H (2018) Interrupting the Anthropo-obScene: Immuno-biopolitics and 
Depoliticizing Ontologies in the Anthropocene. Theory, Culture and Society  35(6): 3–30.
The Breakthrough Institute (2018) Geoengineering Justice . https://thebreakthrough.org/journal/no-8-
winter-2018/geoengineering-justice
Thrift N (2004) Intensities of  feeling: Towards a spatial politics of  affect. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, 
Human Geography  86(1): 57–78.
Vieira P (2021) Plant Art from the Amazon: Vegetal Expression in the Work of  Frans Krajcberg. 
Performance Philosophy  6(2): 82–99.
Von Uexkull J (2010) A Foray Into the Worlds of  Animals and Humans . University of  Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis.
Wamsler C & Brink E (2018) Mindsets for sustainability: Exploring the link between mindfulness and 
sustainable climate adaptation. Ecological Economics  151: 55–61.
Weir A (2016) Pazugoo, 2016 – ongoing https://www.andyweirart.com/pazugoo  (Accessed 28th July 2021).
Whitehead M, Lilley R, Howell R, Jones R & Pykett J (2015) (Re)Inhabiting awareness: Geography and 
mindfulness. Social and Cultural Geography  17(4): 553–573.
Whyte KP (2018) Indigeneity in geoengineering discourses: Some considerations. Ethics, Policy & 
Environment  21(3): 289–307.
Wolfe C & Whiteman M (2016) Landscape and Inscription. Environmental Humanities  8(1): 143–148.
Zografos C & Robbins P (2020) Green Sacrifice Zones, or Why a Green New Deal Cannot Ignore the 
Cost Shifts of Just Transitions. One Earth 3(5): 543–546.
