Microbial Antagonism in the Trentino Alps
Negotiating Spacetimes and Ownership through the Production
of Raw Milk Cheese in Alpine High Mountain Summer Pastures
Roberta Raffaetà
In this paper I analyze fermentation practices in the production of cheese in Alpine high mountain summer pastures and their
connection to politics of space, heritage, and ownership in times of ecological, social, scienti ﬁc, and economic transition. In the
Trentino Alps, fermentation is a technology for enacting different spacetimes in that it is not only a technical act but is alsoconnected to how people practice and give meaning to places. I will focus on how fermentation participates in the composition ofdifferent human, more-than-human, and microbial spacetimes, which I call “utopias, ”“heterotopias, ”and “atopias. ”In these space-
times, fermentation translates space into cheese through different logics: overlap, transduction, or abstraction. Discussing howfermentation is managed and perceived gives us the opportunity to re ﬂect on who owns the Alps and leads to a debate on how to
constitute sustainable and just futures. Fermentation plays a key role in scienti ﬁc innovation as well as in social innovation as to how
the Alps will be assigned value and ownership.
In this paper I analyze fermentation as a technology for en-
acting different spacetimes (Munn 1990) between local and
global demands in the Alps and as a means through which torethink ownership of and entitlements to tradition and inno-
vation. According to Munn ’s pioneering work, there is a con-
juncture between space and time as both dimensions emergeand transform in relation to the practices that social actors
deploy in speci ﬁc places. While Heather Paxson in this issue
(2021) employs the term “timespace ”to analyze how the spe-
ciﬁc temporality of artisanal cheese chain capitalism and its
perishability is also spatial in terms of mobility and environ-
mental conditions, in my paper I focus instead on how peoplelive and take care of a speci ﬁc space and interact with tempo-
rality and how this leads to different ontological con ﬁgurations.
I focus on the fermentation practices that occur when cheese
makers ( casari ; singular, casaro ) make cheese from raw milk
produced by the cows that live with them on malghe (singular,
malga) in Giudicarie, a valley located in Trentino, a region in
the northeast of Italy. The term malga encompasses both the
grazing areas of summer mountain pastures and the buildings
and infrastructures used by humans and animals. A malga istypically made up of a building where workers live (usually a
kitchen and a few sleeping rooms) and one or more rooms for
processing the milk and storing the dairy products. Attached tothat is the shelter for the animals.
I analyze how fermentation participates in the composition
of different human, more-than-human, and microbial space-times, which I call “utopias, ”“heterotopias, ”and “atopias. ”In
utopias, fermentation, cheese, and place are idealized to such
an extent that they become disconnected from the actual so-ciopolitical ecosystem in which they are grounded. In utopias, Iencounter Michele and Rosa, cheese experts and activists, and
two casari, Daniel and Gianluigi Rocca, all believers in the
conservation of traditional food according to a logic of an over-lap between nature and culture. This logic has strong ethical
undertones, guided by the compass of an ideal alignment be-
tween nature and culture.
A heterotopia (Foucault 1986) is a space that is “other ”and
that cultivates difference by enabling the creation of new
meanings from a given and conventional con ﬁguration. This is
the situation for many new-generation casari living in malghe,
such as Enzo, Paolo, and Alessio, as well as for malga-dwelling
cheese experts and researchers such as Francesco Gubert. Thesemalga dwellers recognize the evanescence of a ﬁxed notion of
nature and act according to a logic of transduction by engaging
with nature in an effort to con ﬁgure horizons of sustainable
ecological cohabitation in contemporary times. I adopt the con-
cept of transduction from Helmreich (2009), who derives it from
theﬁeld of acoustics to point out the role of “lateral attention . . .
surroundings, circumstances that allow resonance, reverber-
ation, echo ”in the appreciation of how “subjects, objects, and
ﬁeld emerge from material relations that cannot be modelled in
advance ”(230).
Finally, atopias draw attention to what happens when space
is absent or elided, as is the case for a group of researchers ledby Italo, who selected a single malga strain to produce a bio-
functional cheese. A logic of abstraction guides these research-
ers who, in the rush toward innovation, dismiss the importance
of attributing value to the complex web that entangles their
invention with the malga ecosystem. This article puts their view
into a dialogue with the concerns expressed by university pro-fessor and mountain zootechnology activist Michele Corti, who
Roberta Raffaetà is Associate Professor in the Department of Philosophy and Cultural Heritage of Ca ’Foscari University of Venice (Malcanton
Marcorà, Dorsoduro 3484, D, 30123 Venezia [roberta.raffaeta@unive.it]). This paper was submitted 6 VI 20, accepted 17 II 21, and electronicallypublished 19 VII 21.
Current Anthropology , volume 62, supplement 24, October 2021. q2021 The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. All rights reserved. Published by
The University of Chicago Press for The Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. https//doi.org//10.1086/714348

has strong ideas about local people ’s rights over the ownership
of biodiversity. I will also contrast these researchers ’views with
recent advances in microbiome science, advances that pose
questions that have the potential to recon ﬁgure what innova-
tion and ownership mean.
In the Alps, spacetimes are translated in terms of tipicità
(typicality) and taste. In 2016 the Trento Chamber of Com-
merce introduced the brand Trentino di Malga, linked to aprocedural guideline
1that speci ﬁes the use of either a starter
made of selected microbial strains found in malga cheeses or
oflattoinnesto . The starter, here called Fermountain, was created
by a research institute (AB)2in a project (2011 –2016) that aimed
to map and select the microbial strains of raw milk cheeses
produced in malghe. The project was carried out together withthe Trentino Chamber of Commerce and the casari themselves,
who welcomed the prospect of enhancing the quality of their
cheese. Lattoinnesto, on the other hand, is used by casari whowant to keep a stronger local signature on their cheese by creating
their own starter from former cultures. This is done by heating
up the raw milk to a temperature of about 55 7–657C in order to
kill off pathogens and the microbes that prevent fermentation.
The branding of malga cheese, whether made with starter
or lattoinnesto, makes it a tourist attraction with a distinctivetaste. But taste —like tipicità and place —has been reconcep-
tualized in postgenomic times as something played out at the
molecular level too. My analysis draws inspiration from HannahLandecker ’s (2011, 2016, 2019) work on how science is being
recon ﬁgured by postgenomics and by the work of Cristina
Grasseni (2009, 2017) and Heather Paxson (2008) on the inter-section between fermentation and politics. Grasseni has il-
l u s t r a t e dh o w ,i nI t a l y ,c h e e s ei sa no p e na r e n af o rs t r u g g l e so v e r
heritage and how such struggles have an economic and iden-titary undertone played out in a transnational space that can
redress perceptions of locality. In the North American con-
text, Paxson has analyzed the “microbiopolitics ”of raw milk
cheese in relation to safety and hygiene.
I will illustrate how people use fermentation to different
ends and with different worldviews in an attempt to expressthe multivocality that surrounds fermentation as a technology.
Utopias, heterotopias, and atopias are not sharply de ﬁned, self-
containing categories; one, more often than not, seeps into theother. These stories, therefore, are not juxtaposed in order to
ﬁnd or indicate the “truth ”but rather to invite critical re ﬂec-
tion across difference as well as across similarities to “provoke
encounters across difference that produce new articulations ”
(Fortun 2012:455).
Setting and Methodology
In Trentino, malghe and their pastures are a common good.They are on historically undivided grazing land owned by themunicipality or confederation of villages ( regole ) that govern
the territory.
This legal identi ﬁcation derives from the fact that in the past,
malghe have had a key role in the social and economic life of
the Alps: “A handful of men can herd the animals of the entire
village, milk them, and produce cheese in bulk. The rest of the
population is thereby freed for the vital summer task of haying ”
(Netting 1972:141). As discussed by Viazzo (1989:276 –285), the
“close corporate communities ”in the Alps served to preserve
the delicate balance between animal population and hay pro-
duction. In Giudicarie (Franceschini 2008; Poletti 2009), thecommunity was particularly closed because of special privileges
granted historically by the diocese,
3and these enclosed condi-
tions contributed to the establishment of an egalitarian patternof social strati ﬁcation that has been de ﬁned as a “national-
communism autarchy. ”
4Within this moral economy, the pro-
duction of cheese was very important. I often heard it said thatthe casaro was the most important person in the village after the
priest and the teacher.
In the second half of the twentieth century, the importance
of malghe, casari, and livestock declined because of major socio-
economic changes in the region. After the First World War
Trentino became part of Italy, and after the Second World War,it started its transformation from a mainly agriculture- and
livestock-based subsistence economy to a tourist destination of
worldwide renown thanks to its natural beauty and a thrivingski industry. Many people left the farms and malghe, and many
experienced casari went to work in creameries. Autochthonous
breeds of cattle were hybridized with other species; these newbreeds were no more than 10% –20% pasture fed, their feed sup-
plemented with industrial feedstuff. As a consequence, nowa-
days it is easier for breeders to keep their cattle in barns in thevillage. In 1843 there were more than 500 malghe; in 2000 there
were only 100.
In the same years that the value of malghe was falling for
breeders, it was growing for tourism (Avanzini et al. 2019; Gret-
ter, Goio, and Gios 2 010). Over the last few years, however, young
people have been revitalizing malghe and retransforming them.In this process, cheese has reemerged as a luxury commodity,
and the fermentation processes have withstood the different
ways—illustrated in this paper —of conceiving human and
nonhuman cohabitation, health, and property.
This paper is based on a summer (2019) spent visiting 12 dif-
ferent malghe in Giudicarie and studying the socio-material
assemblages found there. Giudicarie is also where I live, having
moved there from Milan as a child. I could be de ﬁned as a “new
highlander ”(Bender and Kanitscheider 2012; Dematteis 2011).
1. https://www.palazzoroccabruna.it/sites/default/ ﬁles/uploads/docu
ments/Disciplinare_Trentino_Malga_Registrato_Agosto_2018.pdf.
2. AB is an anonymized name; see note 16.3. Given the valley ’s strategic position for viability and military oper-
ations between the German and Latin territories, archbishops historicallyhave been quite benevolent landlords, granting exemptions and facil-itations ( Privilegi ) to the inhabitants and allowing them to establish their
own rules ( Regole ).
4. This de ﬁnition was suggested to me by the historian Aldo Gottardi,
an expert in local history and working at the Centro Studi Judicaria.S324 Current Anthropology Volume 62, Supplement 24, October 2021

My outlook is that of an insider who is also partly an outsider.
The insights derived from the ﬁeldwork in malghe have been
combined with more than ﬁve years of ethnography in meta-
genomics labs (Raffaetà 2020), mainly in Italy, observing how
scientists produce knowledge about the microbiome.
Utopias
One spring evening at sunset I met Michele, a representativeof Slow Food ’s cheese department, and Rosa, coordinator of
an association of casari. Malga cheese, Michele explained, is
unique because “it creates a symphony of ﬂavors that would
never be possible with starters. ”Much of the ﬂavor comes from
the raw milk, but microbes still have the major role: “the multi-
vocality of taste and aroma come from heterofermenting strainsthat are probably not present in starters because they are vir-
tually unmanageable. They ‘eat’a substance, producing dif-
ferent substances according to the speci ﬁc conditions at that
speciﬁc place, day, and time. This is what gives malga cheese its
uniqueness and, consequently, its distinctness. ”
5
Michele warns, however, that in the absence of starters some
precautions are needed: “Microbes are plump and easy-going;
they ’re slow. But you have to take care of them, you have to
point them in the right direction. You can do it if you observethem, get to know them, and enter into a dialogue with them.
You try once, then again . . . it takes time, love, and patience. ”
Teaming up with microbes binds and engages the malga casariin enlarged time frames different from the accelerated time-
scale of industrial production (Grasseni 2005). The fermen-
tation of malga cheese happens because of a combination ofinteractions between “slow ”microbes as they lazily produce
metabolites and break down substances and between all these
processes and constant human care (salting and looking afterthe wheels of cheese).
Caring for microbes and cheese may also mean caring for
cows. Daniel is a 36-year-old casaro who studied art and musicand then took to rearing cattle and working in malghe because
of his deep love for animals. His childhood dream was to have a
farm, but he could never come to terms with the fact of havingto kill the animals at a certain point. And now, despite all the
stereotypes of tough men working on malghe, he confesses to
me that he still has the same problem. He keeps the calves withtheir mothers until they are grown up even though it goes
against his economic interests. He owns 15 cows, and during
the summer on the malga he takes care of his own and themalga manager ’s cattle, a total of about 35 cows.
He proudly tells me that his cows feed entirely on pasture
during the summer and eat only hay in winter, whereas cur-rently most cows on malghe are given feedstuff in order to
increase the milk yield. Despite that, he is convinced that his
cows produce quite a lot of milk “because they are healthy, ”
underlining the interdependence between a cow ’s health andfermentation processes. Daniel explains that the milk from his
cows ferments more easily because “a pasture-only diet makes
the cow ’s rumen bigger. The biodiversity and liveliness of the
enzymes in my cows ’milk is incomparable, compared to milk
from other cows. ”Daniel uses only rennet to make cheese, no
starters, not even lattoinnesto “because it is a selection, how-
ever you look at it. Why should I spoil nature? Why should I
have a cheese worse than something nature already makes?Nature doesn ’t need any help! ”
Being true to nature is, according to Daniel, the recipe for
safety and is more important than hygiene norms. Veteri-narians, he says, “generate a lot of terrorism ”about hygiene but
“if you get your cows to lead a healthy life it ’s difﬁcult they ’ll get
sick, and so their milk will be healthy too. ”The problem, ac-
cording to Daniel, is that feedstuff makes cow ’s bodies very
acidic because corn is acidic. This makes them get ill often, and
it makes their milk and cheese unsafe. He milks his cows byhand and gives them no antibiotics, and only small amounts of
magnesium and thyme oil if they get infections.
He points out to me that his cows are long-lived (two of them
are 17 years old, and the average age is six) and hardy. The year
before, Guendalina (one of his cows) broke her hips. This made
her eligible for the slaughterhouse, according to conventionalpractice, but Daniel treated and cured her. “She ’s a bit ugly to
look at—she still has the sores. But she ’s alive! ”Daniel ’s care for
his cows may be interpreted as a practice similar to forms of
repair and maintenance, as opposed to the modernist appeal to
newness, to the “bright and shiny ”(Jackson 2014:227). Daniel ’s
cows are not just “producers ”of cheese, and Daniel is not there
simply to take advantage of their “services. ”Through his caring
acts—sometimes irrational from a purely economic perspec-
tive—he actually participates in their world. This makes him
aware of the interdependent con ﬁguration of humans, cows,
milk, and cheese. Maria Puig de la Bellacasa (2015) has noted
that “care requires thinking from the perspective of the main-
tenance of a web of relations involved in the very possibility of
ecosystems rather than only from their possible bene ﬁts to
humans ”(701). Daniel decries the ideology of maximum and
intensive production, an ideology that forces not only humans
but also more-than-humans to disengage from mutual care and
to reduce what counts as care “to a manageable ‘conduct ’of
tasks to follow, ”hence cutting out “the possibility of developing
relations of care that fall out of its constricted targets. Pro-
ductionism transforms care from a co-constructed interdepen-
dent relation into mere control of the object of care ”(Puig de la
Bellacasa 2015:700).
Up there, high in the Alps, it seems easier to make utopias
come true. More than one casaro described malghe as “the last
bastion of anarchy. ”I had ample opportunity to grasp what the
beatitude of this idyllic existence is. After milking duties, the
only task before you is to enjoy life. Daniel sits on a bench with
a friend playing jazzlike music. Cows graze quietly around usand calves snuggle up to their mums while Daniel ’s girlfriend,
their dogs, my son, and I look on, surrounded by and drawing
nourishment from the majesty of the Dolomites. 5. All interviews were conducted in Italian and translated into English
by me.Raffaetà Microbial Antagonism S325

But the image of Guendalina, who I had seen that morning,
at dawn, during the hand-milking, did not leave me. Guendalinalooked not only ugly but also quite unhealthy. Her sores were
pus-ﬁlled and her tail looked like it was rotting. The cows in
general looked very skinny. At breakfast, I took a bite of thecheese and it tasted a bit too bitter, as bitter as the tone of
Daniel ’s voice when he was telling me how the local authority
did not care about his malga. There was no guarantee of in-frastructural maintenance and not a single signpost to the malga
down in the valley or anywhere along the road. This made it
more dif ﬁcult for Daniel to sell his cheese to tourists going past
his malga on their way to the more famous attractions farther
up the valley.
Daniel notes, “If it wasn ’t for the European entitlements
the mountain culture would completely disappear. ”In 2001 –
2003, the European Community granted “entitlements ”to farm-
ers that could be used to obtain direct funding.
6The value of
an entitlement in Italy is now about 220 euros per hectare.
Starting in 2005, these entitlements could be sold or bought by
farmers without being tied to any speci ﬁc piece of land and
independently of production.7Because of this, Alpine pastures
became attractive prospects because they cover extensive areas
and give access to large numbers of entitlements, and landcould be rented very cheaply. Also, the European Union (EU)
funding is increased by 50% for “greening ”or, rather, actions
aimed at restoring biodiversity, which is easier to do in moun-tain pastures than in the plain. This has created the conditions
for speculation, with entrepreneurs (often not local) increasing
the bid in the public allocation of pastures and keeping outsmall-scale and local farmers. In Trentino, municipalities allo-
cate malghe for a period of up to ﬁve years in a public selection
process, the outcome of which is based on both the economicproposal and the project content.
8As pastureland is a common
good, municipalities ought to allocate the pastures in such a way
as to bene ﬁt the entire community, but they often attach more
value to quick pro ﬁt than to the quality of a project. In fact,
large-scale intensive livestock concerns have been known to buy
pastures for the sole purpose of demonstrating —on paper—the
minimum ratio between number of cows and hectares. Some-
times no cows were actually put out to pasture, or speculatorsbrought up breeds of cattle unsuitable for pasture feeding that
became ill or died.9
Daniel ’s malga had been allocated to a local entrepreneur,
a large-scale intensive livestock owner. The entrepreneur earns
more than EUR 250,000 in EU entitlements while Daniel onlygets 60 euros per day from his entitlements as a ﬁxed-rate in-
dependent farmer, and his girlfriend, a migrant from Thailand,
earns 40 euros per day for helping him. To make ends meet, hesells cheese. And so it turns out that the preservation of malghe
cheese, linked to free- ﬂoating entitlements that generate huge
proﬁts for their owners, is materially based on underpaid labor.
Guendalina ’s purulent sores and the bitter taste of cheese
are clues that hint at the spatiotemporal disconnections be-
tween Daniel ’s aspirations and the actual economic and po-
litical neglect of the malga ecosystem. They make apparent
the frictions between an ideology of care and an ideology of
proﬁt. In this context, Daniel performs a utopia, a place that
does not exist, because his ideals of care regarding an en-
larged community of humans and more-than-humans ﬁnd no
support in how the malga system is managed at either a local ora global scale at the beginning of the twenty- ﬁrst century. With
his fermentation choices, Daniel composes an ontological con-
ﬁguration in which a ﬁxed idea of nature overlaps with a ﬁxed
idea of culture.
In my further wanderings among the malghe, I met another
casaro who was not using starter: Gianluigi Rocca, working inmalghe for more than 40 summers. A world-renowned artist
teaching at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera in Milan, he
is a poet and writer who has edited inspiring artwork andvolumes (Rocca 2007, 2009) on malga culture. The artist ’s role
is indeed to live in utopia. His cheese is not just food but “a
piece of art ”(Sardo 2003). For other casari, though, living in
utopia may come at a price. Daniel ’s cheese does, after all, have
a bitter aftertaste. Maybe wild microbes are not always the best
ones.
Rosa and Michele ’s utopia seems similarly shaky. Rosa thinks
that the strong emotional attachment to the association of casari
that was so evident 20 years ago, when it was founded, hasgone. The spirit of resistenza casearia (resistance of the casari)
has dwindled. Rosa is the daughter of a cheese maturer who
managed four malghe. She traveled the world, lived for a longtime in California, and, on returning, enthusiastically embraced
the cause of casari emancipation. But when we met, she con-
fessed her doubts as to whether she would do it again. Malghe
were a different thing compared to those of her father ’st i m e ,
and now there is very little motivation for casari to producecheese faithful to the tradition. The casari should have had a
more active role from the very beginning, Rosa says; it should
have been them —not her—leading the push for change.
6. One entitlement corresponds to 1 hectare.
7. For of ﬁcial documents, see https://www.gazzettauf ﬁciale.it/eli/id
/2005/12/15/05A11756/sg; http://www.titolipac.it/; https://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-13-631_it.htm (accessed August 10, 2019).
8. The Trentino provincial authorities issued a document (Guidelines
for the Allocation of Pasture Lands and Related Infrastructures and forthe Contractual Agreement). This document is quite ambiguous becausein the ﬁrst part it clearly states that the evaluation of the offers will be
made on the basis of the economic offer. In the second part it is speci ﬁed
that 70% of points will be awarded for the quality of the project in orderto price the actions with a view to preserve the traditional biosocial land-scape (use of autochthonous breeds, production of cheese with traditionalprocesses, etc.). This ambiguity seems to leave the manager with a con-siderable degree of choice and room for maneuver.9. For a newspaper report on these speculations in Giudicarie, see
https://www.questotrentino.it/articolo/8521/portati_a_morire_in_malga.htm(accessed July 16, 2019).S326 Current Anthropology Volume 62, Supplement 24, October 2021

Heterotopias
Either we ’re in that world, otherwise there ’s not much
meaning to making cheese like in the past! But to be in that
world means a whole series of things, starting from having
low barns10with the ceiling made of wooden beams, and
above that the hayloft, so that when you walked on the hay a
ﬁne dust came down. The milk was hand-milked, outdoors. It
wasﬁltered with dase11to stop cow hairs getting through, and
there were resins and bacterial ferments that gave a kind of
edge to the milk. Then the milk was cooked in the pot and
there was smoke, lots of smoke all day long, sterilizing ev-erything. Now we sterilize the cows ’teats before and after
milking, and there are milking machines that are rubber tubes
passing through steel and ending up in the cooling machin-ery, which is cleaned with detergents.
With these words, Enzo, a casaro since 2003, makes it clear
that it is not possible to make the cheese of the past because it
is not possible to remake the malghe of the past. In the past,
milk had about 3 billion microbes (as against the maximumlimit of 100,000 set by EU hygiene laws introduced in 1993)
and was part of a bacterially balanced ecosystem. Enzo calls
this balance “microbial antagonism ”: a diversity of bacteria
forming an organizational structure that was able to prevent
the development of pathogens. In contrast, “the milk that ar-
rives now in the churn is a white sheet, a no-man ’s-land that
can be colonized easily by dangerous bacteria. ”
Enzo uses Fermountain starter even though he likes ex-
perimenting sometimes with lattoinnesto. He processes themilk of 60 cows, also making cheese for a number of village
markets. According to him, hygiene precautions are important
now because of the “ethnic war ”of hygiene laws that, since the
1960s, have been destroying the microbial balance of milk ac-
quired over the centuries. Hygiene norms —such as the one
that eliminates wood and replaces it with Te ﬂon, steel, and
plastic or the one that sanitizes everything with detergents and
uses fans to eliminate fumes —have created a milk that, ac-
cording to Enzo, is precariously out of balance. The moderni-zation of cheese making (milking machines, starters, etc.) is
unavoidable, he argues, because now we are caught up in a
vicious circle where hygiene calls for yet more hygiene. Andcleaner milk needs help in its fermentation. According to Enzo,
all these things make escaping into past dreams a dangerous
and pointless endeavor; casari have no choice but to live incurrent spacetimes.
Malga spacetime is, however, peculiar, and that is part of
its appeal. Paolo is 30 years old, anarchic, vegan, and paci ﬁst,
and he practices yoga and enjoys drugs. He has been working
on malghe for 11 years, and ﬁve years ago he took over therunning of a malga, moving up with his wife and his two chil-
d r e n .H ef e n c e do f fh i sm a l g ai no r d e rt ob a rt h ee n t r yo ft o u r i s t swho arrive in great numbers because the malga is reachable
by car: “I’m sorry to do this, but they come in and think
everything is on show just to please them. ”He has 15 au-
tochthonous cows, plus some dry cows (non-milk-producing)
belonging to other breeders. These are big cows, not ideal for
malghe, but Paolo has put all cultural purity worries behindhim. “They are poor reincarnated souls, so I give them a bit
of enjoyment. ”And he hand-milks them so as to enjoy “this
luxury, sitting in front of the Brenta with no generator noise tospoil the idyll. ”
12
Despite his utopian vision, Paolo is well aware that his
freedom to live an anarchic life depends precisely on the factthat he can produce a reliable cheese. After trying out many
mixtures, he decided to use Fermountain starter, even if “just a
sprinkling. ”He showed me the bag of Fermountain and with a
wry smile added, “This is all milk powder. Do you think I ’m
going to put 500 milligrams of powdered milk in my cheese?! ”
He thinks Fermountain is a good compromise between thequality it provides and the harsh malga environment. Even
though the cheese made with his own lattoinnesto is higher
quality, he thinks that Fermountain creates the right conditionsfor letting the raw milk bacterial community work better. He
criticizes lattoinnesto advocates “who ’ve never been on a malga!
The conditions on a malga aren ’t right for it: it ’s dirty, there are
lots of things that you need to look out for. To use lattoinnesto
you have to be thorough and careful; you have to check your cows
every morning: if they get a kidney blockage or something theycan all die. Nowadays malghe are full of anarchists, dropouts,
and borderliners and they ’re not that thorough! ”Contem-
porary malghe are often described as a seaport, a refuge foranarchists, or a place where “the last of the last work. ”
As well as being “the last bastion of anarchy, ”malghe are also
places for gourmets. According to Francesco Gubert, a casaroand an Italian Organization of Cheese Tasters (ONAF) master
taster who has also been involved in the ﬁrst stage of the Fer-
mountain project and is now a representative of the Trentinodi Malga brand, a certain degree of standardization is not an
impediment to pleasure but, rather, a trigger. Extreme aromatic
intensity, a characteristic of cheese made with no starter, is notsuited to what he calls the “modern consumer ”(see also Dickau
2019).
What do I expect of a malga cheese, now, in 2020? Intense
aromatic typical notes: it has to taste of grass (vegetal notes),
lactic notes (butter and malga), and perhaps also some ani-mal notes may emerge, some subtle fermented notes, etc. It
doesn ’t have to taste of [ hesitation ] cow shit, it doesn ’t have
to have too intense notes. It doesn ’t have to get descriptors
like “rotten egg ”or“boiled egg. ”Many [cheeses] really taste
of urine. In some orthodox places they sell you exorbitantly
priced cheeses that are very low quality. Essentially, these are
10. In the past, malghe had low roofs so they could be warmed up easily
with the cows ’breath. In this warmth, people would spend the evenings
chatting and gossiping together ( fareﬁlò).
11. A receptacle with a mesh of small wooden sticks at the center. 12. Brenta Dolomites, part of the Italian Dolomites.Raffaetà Microbial Antagonism S327

ﬂawed cheeses. This is because that ’s what they ’re looking
for: tipicità is linked to the presence of these severe aromas. Ifyou want to offer people tastes of your cheese and you want it
narrated—I also do that —it has to be in order: it has to have
many aromatic sparks, it has to have diversity, biodiversity, itcannot be ﬂawed. For example, it cannot have too bitter a
taste: a bit is ﬁne but not like in the cheeses of the past, when
it covered everything.
Fermountain, according to Gubert, makes it possible to avoid
“occasional variability ”in which “you do not govern the var-
iables, so you can have peaks of excellence but also ﬂawed
cheeses ”and hence to promote a “typical variability, which
means a cheese that trims off the fringes of defectiveness orextreme aromatic expression but remains identi ﬁable with its
malga and between malghe. ”Fermountain comes in six dif-
ferent microbial mixtures (corresponding to six areas), to max-imize biodiversity.
Elderly people have told Gubert that cheese often “tasted of
everything but not cheese ”and that it was eaten because of
hunger and poverty.
13Fermountain, according to Gubert, allows
the expression of typical notes but cleansed of harsh tones. He
knows from personal experience how harsh malga life can be:in an autobiographical novel he described how his desire to
“escape from responsibilities and obligations ”(by moving to a
malga) became a nightmare, from which he escaped with greatrelief: “Driving back in the night, all of a sudden, the city lights
appear before me: my return to civilization, I thought. I feel an
abyss between the mountain world that I am leaving behind meand the city, which greets me with its powerful lights. Two
worlds so close and yet so different at the same time ”(Gubert
2019:114). Gubert will go back to malghe many times. That ﬁrst
experience was formative, triggering him to bring productive
transformations to malga spacetime through his involvement in
the development of the Fermountain starter that, according toGubert, provides an experience of otherness without being out
of time and space.
And this feeling of spatiotemporal dislocation, while being
in the present and here, was exactly the kind of experience I
had when I visited Alessio ’s malga. Alessio, together with his
wife, three children, and in-laws runs a malga where touristscan also get meals made with local produce ( agriturismo ).
When I arrive I am welcomed by the scene of a calf drinking
milk from its mum. They look well fed and clean, and the barnsmells good. Pigs, donkeys, and horses populate a lively edu-
cational farm. Alessio ’s cows (all autochthonous breeds) “eat
wild herbs, hypericum, and Achillea and climb 300 metersevery day. ”Alessio keeps the use of feedstock —rigorously non-
GMO—to a minimum and is happy to have a moderate pro-
duction of milk “because if you look at quantity alone, the
quality is lowered. For me and my wife it ’s very important to
care about this because at least it gives us a ‘why ’to tell to ourchildren, otherwise how could we justify it when they see us
being busy all day long? ”
Alessio ’s love for malga life started in 2004, when he was
21 years old with a steady job and went to a malga in the
summer because of a “fantasized dream, ”but “the malga is
like a lightning bolt: it gets you and it never leaves you. . . . I
found myself in the middle of the grass with a stick in my
hand looking at the cows and I understood that, until then, Ihadn ’t understood anything about life. ”He likes everything
about living in the malga: “the forest, the water, the grass,
the smell of the barn, the dogs working, the [cow] bells, thepastures, the rhythms. It ’s not that you ﬁnish your work and
then go home to relax. You are here and here you remain.
You don ’t need a watch, you follow the rhythm of the cows:
when they ’re tired and it ’s too hot, they sit in the shade, then
they stand up and go to pasture and you follow them. ”It was
several years before he realized that malga life could be notjust a whim but a job. Initially, his family was against his life
choice and he “had no model. I didn
’t know anyone before
me who ’d transformed malga life into a sustainable life in
modern times. ”As for the tourism aspect, his malga manager
used to say to him “if some tourist asks for a glass of water,
kick him out. ”When he and his wife ﬁrst tried providing meals
to tourists, his contract was not renewed by the manager who
said that he wanted to employ “a shepherd that ’s just a shep-
herd. ”In the village there were rumors that Daniel and his wife
were earning money using other people ’s property, pasture-
land being a common good. Once they were able to get their
own malga, they opened it up to tourists, transforming it. Beingin the Inversion Project
14helped him “give a conceptual shape
to what I was doing. ”This project helped mountain farms to
become resilient and sustainable while also generating valuewith the improvement and narration of traditional mountain
activities. Alessio learned about animal well-being, which is
“crucial to the quality of the cheese. It ’s not enough to give an
antibiotic when an animal is sick. You have to understand
what ’s going wrong in her environment. ”
For the cheese making, Alessio usually produces his own
lattoinnesto “because this is the trademark of our malga. We
believe in what we are doing. I would like to open each wheel
of cheese to see how it ’s turned out. ”The hectic rhythm of
managing the malga and running an agriturismo, however,
makes it sometimes impossible to look after the lattoinnesto.
On these occasions, he sees Fermountain as a good substitute.
The agriturismo gives the day a more rigid structure than on
a conventional malga. Caring for tourists may be a distractionfrom caring for cheese and animals but is seen as a good
compromise. As Grasseni (2017) has noted, reinventing tra-
ditional activities is a process of “calibration . . . rede ﬁning
and interpreting tradition in the face of multiple pressures
and encroachments ”(1).
13. For historical accounts of the value of cheese in former times, see
Gobbetti, Neviani, and Fox (2018) and Viazzo and Woolf (2002).14. http://www.progettoinversion.it/, funded by the Province of Trento
with European funds.S328 Current Anthropology Volume 62, Supplement 24, October 2021

The calibration done by Enzo, Paolo, and Alessio in their
fermentation techniques has not only cultural and economiceffects but also biological ones. Unlike industrial starters, Fer-
mountain starter, rather than killing the biodiverse micro-
biome of raw milk, engages with it, allowing the expression ofits features in variable ways, and this is in ﬂuenced by a variety
of factors such as climate, the relative abundance or ripeness of
speciﬁc herbs, the techniques used, and the mood of the casaro
and the cows. Paolo ’s irreverent use of Fermountain is based on
the conviction that the quality of cheese is given not so much by
the starter as by the quality of the milk, and by his experience asa casaro: “I will tell my secrets only to my daughter and only
when she is old enough to know not to spread them around. ”
Enzo confesses to using Fermountain not only because ofconvenience but also because it produces good cheese, which
“maintains its variability, allowing the mountain microbes
in the raw milk to be expressed. ”He showed me how Fer-
mountain cheese has small holes in it, explaining that these
holes “arrive from the mountain ”and are a typical sign of
heterolactic fermenters, which do not help the acidi ﬁcation but
give aroma. Enzo studied the art of dairy craft at a historical
school in the Veneto region for three years, because to make
good cheeses “you have to know what is inside it [curd] and
what you extract from it. You add your sensibility, which has an
impact, and knowledge is important too. ”
Technique, knowledge, and the unpredictability of the raw
milk microbial community are transduced by Fermountain
into cheese. The logic of transduction (Helmreich 2009) is
different from a logic of reinvention or translation: it is notadherence to contemporary demands. It is entering into di-
alogue with them and provoking, at the same time, a phase
shift or a displacement (Agamben 2008). These heterotopiasnot only bring an experience of otherness but they also pre-
ﬁgure an ethical model of how humans and nonhumans could
live and ﬂourish together by careful acts of reciprocal atten-
tiveness and obligation. In this, nature and culture do not over-
lap but engage with each other. A logic of transduction is
open to the opportunity of difference within contemporaryspacetimes, so producing heterotopia, while avoiding getting
lost in utopia. What happens, tho ugh, when space is edited out?
Atopias
In 2012,15Michele Corti, a university professor of mountain
zootechnics and in ﬂuential supporter of ruralist positions,
declared that Fermountain appeared to be a project mainly in
the interest of researchers, neglecting the role of casari :
Who owns the 500 isolated “wild ”strains? . . . This is not an
unimportant question, considering that in the future some-
one might be tempted to sell this “biodiversity ”to multi-
national companies. They will say (in scandalized tones) that
this insinuation of mine is malevolent, that they are acting inthe public interest and bla, bla. But I insist on saying that
what we have here is an ethical problem . This biodiversity
that belonged to the malghe (to its owners, to the casari who
generated and conserved it). Did anyone make them aware of
the fact that they were selling a good linked to their patri-mony? Are we aware of the fact that this is what has taken
place in the Lagorai and other “traditional ”malghe, just like
those pharmaceutical companies stole the biodiversity ofindigenous people? (Emphasis in the original.)
While Corti ’s concern points to a relevant issue, the spirit and
aim of Fermountain was to help the casari who were in dif-
ﬁculty with their cheese production and to support the malga
lifestyle. The project, led by AB research institute, was ini-tially conceived in its research translation department. Staff
in that department had been in daily contact with breeders
and casari, and the project followed in the wake of years ofdialogue and exchange. AB had the ownership of the strains
collected. This was secured by a contract signed by the casari.
The casari were told that their strains were to be used only forproducing malga cheese.
In recent years, researchers in AB ’s research innovation
department looked again at the Fermountain microbial sam-ples. They found that one of the microbial strains in a malga
cheese highly enhances the production of gamma aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), with very positive health effects. They pub-lished a paper mentioning the possibility of producing a bio-
active cheese made from raw alpine milk, hence contributing
to the promotion of malga cheese. But they also hinted at thepossibility of producing it with non-malga pasteurized milk to
facilitate the optimization of GABA production, referring to the
standardization and reproducibility of the results.
16
Fermenting cheese with selected strains that have nutra-
ceutical properties is fully within the contemporary: it ad-
dresses northern global demand for the health of decayingbodies within decaying environments. And yet, it creates a
spacetime in which space-material attachments and mutual
obligations are edited out. This is atopia, a term that under-scores the absence or negation of space. In this context, atopia is
a spacetime produced by practi cing biotechnology with no
awareness of the connections that link one strain to an entireecosystem and a spacetime.
According to Italo, a researcher involved in the paper and
“wild ”an expert in Italian dairy production, the attachment of
15. http://www.ruralpini.it/Inforegioni18.07.12-Fermalga.htm (ac-
cessed May 20, 2019); my own translation from Italian.16. I do not cite the original paper in order to reduce to a minimum
the chance of identifying the research group. The ﬁnal version of this
paper has been reviewed and discussed with one of the researchers wholed the cited study. He felt uncomfortable about some of the questionsraised. Therefore, to protect my informants, I have opted for the maxi-mum degree of anonymization. The paper has been cited not to create ascandal or apportion blame but, by analyzing a situated case study, toillustrate the complexities of technoscienti ﬁc innovation and negotiating
different ways of conceiving the production of malga cheese, each basedon different notions of pro ﬁtability, health/hygiene, and property (intel-
lectual as well as material).Raffaetà Microbial Antagonism S329

microbes to place is overestimated because of an anthropocen-
tric bias: “Humans have cycles of about 25 years to reproduce;
microbes reproduce themselves within minutes. There are no
strains typical of a certain area or product. In two weeks, mi-
crobes already are something else. Tipicità is ﬁne for tourists
but you cannot measure it with scienti ﬁc methods. ”Helmreich
(2003:348) has already drawn attention to the commercial op-
portunities that open up when you acknowledge the extraordi-nary reproductive capacities of microbes (further heightened
by what is called lateral gene transfer):
17biotech companies can
patent a bacterium simply by embedding it “in a different set of
relations ”to those of its original context.18Italo ’sa r g u m e n ta l s o
resonates with anthropological arguments about tradition as
invention/reinvention and as a site of social and economic strug-gles. Italo emphasized that the process of isolating, purifying,
and selecting the strain is “costly, hard, and takes time, ”there-
fore rejecting the idea that casari might be able to reclaim anykind of right. The policy on intellectual property,
19indeed, links
rights more to invention than to maintenance or protection.
Moreover, the technique used to produce the cheese also has arole (Paxson and Helmreich 2014), con ﬁrming the much-debated
fact that a domain called “nature, ”neatly distinguished from
one called “culture, ”does not exist.
Italo ’s observations appear legitimate, but only if we keep
considering microbes exclusively as singular biological identi-
ties. Microbes behave as single cells in some circumstances,while in others as a community, exhibiting “multiscale inter-
actions ”(O’Malley 2014:169). That is why some scholars have
proposed to shift the attention from microbes as genetic enti-ties to microbes as metabolic paths (Bapteste and Dupré 2013;
Dupré 2013), and to their biosignatures, which mark an “absent
presence ”(Paxson and Helmreich 2014:182). Microbes are not
only “tiny individuals ”(Clarke 2010:321) but also arean eco-
system that exists with and through the microbial community
that makes it. The traditional do gma of microbial limitless dis-
persibility —also known as cosmopolitanism —is subject to de-
bate (Jenkins et al. 2007; Lindström and Langenheder 2011). In
some cases, speci ﬁc environments are associated with speci ﬁc
microbes, and vice versa, because dispersal requires the exis-
tence of multiple factors that may occur with dif ﬁculty in cir-
cumstances different to those of the origin (O ’Malley 2014:164 –
165). Microbes are pleomorphous: the same microorganism
can take on different forms and functions according to the cir-
cumstances. It is in the intimate relationship between a place
and the cheese produced there —malga cheese lovers suggest —
that its unique value lies.Nowadays, metabolomics and proteomics employ meta-
genomic techniques to try to trace microbial relationships andreproduce them, but, as the many researchers I have inter-
viewed in the last ﬁve years told me, we are not yet there
(Raffaetà 2020). It is possible to create very simpli ﬁed models
and test them, but understanding the multiple causes of a
microbe thriving, sleeping, or dying is still beyond the grasp of
scientists. A telling example of this is fecal transplant: it has aquite high rate of success, but scientists are not yet in agree-
ment about the reasons for its effectiveness. Sterile feces, for
example, are effective anyway in treating severe infections. AsVanessa, a researcher working on this, told me, “We ’re sur ﬁng
in a sea bigger than us because we do not know much. Not
only are we not yet able to know whether a microbe is goodor bad, but as for knowing whether the effect is due to the
process or the microbes, we ’re at ground zero. ”
Against this complexity, the idea to produce a nutraceu-
tical cheese was a consequence of the “molecular vision ”
in-
herited from genetics (Raffaetà 2020). Abstracting microbes
from their sociobiological topoi risks neglecting aspects of theenvironment that, according to the casari and cheese amateurs
I encountered, make malga cheese special.
Speaking with Alessandro, a leading scientist in the ﬁeld of
fermentation, I was reassured that working with fermented
food is different from working with feces: “We have less lim-
itations because, although it is true that we cannot cultivatemore than 10% of gut microbes, for fermented food this per-
centage is higher. ”However, many scientists fail to grasp the
modi ﬁcations that occur, over time, in long-lived sourdoughs
because “we do not care about who are subdominants, we do
not care about the metacommunity but we simply look for the
presence/absence of certain microbes and therefore we lose amore comprehensive view. ”
In a logic quite similar to this, Italo linked the importance
of a strain to its relative presence in the cheese, associating dom-inant strains to tipicità:
The strain we found was not dominant, it was present in
traces and not in all cheeses and therefore is not typical. By
deﬁnition, tipicità is a series of features that characterize a
certain product and therefore has to be recurrent: if a cer-
tain feature or strain is found only once in 100, for example,
it cannot be considered recurrent or typical. In absence of astarter, it is unlikely that casari can produce cheese with re-
current—and therefore —typical characteristics. Paradoxically,
17. Transfer of genetic material not through descent but through spatial
proximity.
18. It was indeed a bacterium, in 1980, that was the ﬁrst genetically
modi ﬁed organism to be patented. See Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S.
303 (1980).
19. Since 1992 there has been a Convention on Biological Diversity,
with two supplementary agreements: the Cartagena Protocol (enteredinto force 2003) and the Nagoya Protocol (2014). The latter protocolaims to strengthen the fair and equitable sharing of bene ﬁts arising from
the utilization of genetic resources. These policies, however, have beencriticized with regard to their ethico-political undertones and application(Brush 1999; Hayden 2003; Moran, King, and Carlson 2001; Orlove andBrush 1996). For example, bacteria are not mentioned in the ﬁfth report
of the European Union to the Convention on Biological Diversity,published in 2014, even though their “biovalue ”(Waldby 2002) has in-
creased exponentially with the rapid expansion of microbiome researchin the last decade.S330 Current Anthropology Volume 62, Supplement 24, October 2021

PDO20products are more typical because the starters are
standardized.
What about a tipicità based on variability (as in the con-
cept of “typical variability ”suggested by Gubert) instead of
standardization? Alessandro expresses a view that is sensitiveto the different roles microbes can play at certain times and
in certain places and that can shift over time, keeping the
microbial balance of a starter the same, yet at the same timedifferent. As already noted, this makes fermentation a very
delicate matter about which we still have limited knowledge.
As emphasized by Papadopoulos (2018:183), technoscienti ﬁc
invention is always something mediated and anticipated in
a human and more-than-human collective: “Experimental
achievement and invention are mediated by many differenttrajectories and actors already before it has taken place, even
before it has been formulated. If we neglect this, we neglect
the invisible and indeed invisibilized labors of so many dif-ferent human, animal, and inorganic actors that contribute to
the making of facts. ”This leads us to ask questions not only
about which kind of technoscienti ﬁc innovation but also which
forms of entitlements we should support and develop when
thinking about fermented foods: “It is dif ﬁcult to separate con-
tent from context, bodies from environments, when the envi-ronment (microbes, fermentable carbohydrates) is not just some-
thing to be converted into the body by the genetic machinery
commanding an enzyme army ”(Kelty and Landecker 2019:63).
Is it possible to imagine and advance intellectual property as
associated not just with the isolation, selection, puri ﬁcation,
invention, or manipulation of a biological entity but also withthe skillful maintenance, repair, and variable reproduction of
an entire ecosystem?
Conclusion
I have illustrated how the fermentation of malga cheese in
Giudicarie is not knowledge passed unchanged from gener-ation to generation but a process that, according to different
logics (overlap, transduction, abstraction) participates in the
creation of different spacetimes. These underscore differentways of coupling space and time with politics. While utopia is
an ideal but nonlivable space in which nature and culture
rigidly overlap, and atopia edits out space by abstracting it,heterotopia is a space that invites different encounters, even if
not without frictions. In this, fermentation is a way to trans-
duce knowledge, expertise, technique, microbial communities,and the ecosystem of which they are part into cheese. From
being food for premodern hunger and then a commodity to
please postmodern palates, cheese is transitioning toward be-ing valued as “superfood ”through its abstract connection to a
“superplace, ”namely, the alpine ecosystem of the malga. Its role
in contemporary times seems to be that of providing a moraleconomy in which continuous and moderately uncontrolled
variability is prized against standardization. In malghe the re-lationship between nature and culture has not yet been settled
and their ongoing differential differentiation may have gen-
erative effects. It is, indeed, the nonreproducibility of malgacheese, its unpredictable ferment ation, that makes it typical and
valuable.
Can the encounter between these different stories generate
new meanings and social con ﬁgurations? For example, could
we take variability to be part of what is generally considered
innovation and invention? If this is the case, not just biolog-ical entities but entire ecosystems and processes will have to
be part of intellectual property rights: not an “ownership ”but
an“altership , since what connects a person to an object is not
exclusive of what connects that person to other human and
nonhuman persons ”(Brightman, Fausto, and Grotti 2016:19).
How should the bene ﬁts be accounted for and shared? What is
the “community ”(casari, shepherds, malga owners, residents,
new highlanders, researchers, cows, pigs, donkeys, tourists,
bears, wolves, forests, rocks . . .)? Who belongs to the Alps(Raffaetà and Duff 2013) and who “owns ”them (Kezich 2018;
Varotto and Castiglioni 2012)? Which spacetimes will we be
willing to support in the Alps: utopias, heterotopias, or ato-pias? Geographically and metaphorically, the Alps have always
represented the limit. Can this become, instead, a political
horizon?
In this paper I argue that to try to answer these questions
we need a generative dialogue between whoever can con-
tribute to a discussion about what is the just constitution ofthe Alpine ecosystem. The sharing of views between the dif-
ferent actors, agendas, and visions involved is needed because
ecosystems are “socially made, not given ”(Olson 2018:6). The
concept of “microbial antagonism ”mentioned by Enzo pro-
vides some insights into how to do it. Microbial antagonism
counteracts pathogens not by directly blocking them but,rather, by transforming the entire system from a ﬁeld of struggle
into one of healthy cohabitation. In microbial antagonism, the
encounter of diversity is not the problem but the solutionbecause a new con ﬁguration can emerge from the encounter
of entities that are never stabilized but are always and already
in need of identi ﬁcation (Laclau and Mouffe 1985). Embracing
this view would make fermentation a technology for social
innovation rather than only a technology for technoscienti ﬁc
innovation.
Acknowledgments
I thank all the people who have shared with me their knowl-edge about the topic of this paper. I would like to dedicate thisarticle to the memory of Agitu Ideo Gudeta, one of those new
Trentino casari, horribly killed on December 29, 2020, by a
collaborator. Her sad story points to the dif ﬁculties of keeping
alternative spacetimes alive in absence of sociopolitical sup-
port. I also thank Luca Riccadonna for granting me access to
many casari, Aldo Gottardi and the Centro Studi Judicara for
20. Protected Designation of Origin.Raffaetà Microbial Antagonism S331

their support in the collection and analysis of historical data,
Rachel Vaughn for her careful reading and for encouraging meto elaborate on the concept of “microbial antagonism, ”and
Robert Elliot for his careful editing. Last but not least, I am
deeply grateful to the organizers and participants in the Wenner-Gren symposium in October 2019 in Sintra, Portugal, who
provided not only useful feedback but also an exceptional and
inspirational example of scholarly collegiality that will stay withme forever.
References Cited
Agamben, Giorgio. 2008. Che cos ’è il contemporaneo? Milano: Nottetempo.
Avanzini, Marco, Andrea Bonoldi, Geremia Gios, and Isabella Salvador. 2019.
Main drivers of the evolution of grazing in the alpine area of Valli del Leno(Trentino, northern Italy) during the last two centuries: natural resources,
labour and investments. Historia Agraria 78:37 –65.
Bapteste, Eric, and John Dupré. 2013. Towards a processual microbial on-
tology. Biology and Philosophy 28(2):379 –404.
Bender, Oliver, and Sigrun Kanitscheider. 2012. New immigration into the
European Alps: emerging research issues. Mountain Research and Devel-
opment 32(2):235 –241.
Brightman, M., C. Fausto, and V. Grotti. 2016. Ownership and nurture: studies
in native Amazonian property relations . Oxford: Berghahn.
Brush, Stephen B. 1999. Bioprospecting the public domain. Cultural An-
thropology 14(4):535 –555.
Clarke, Ellen. 2010. The problem of biological individuality. Biological Theory
5(4):312 –325.
Dematteis, Giuseppe, ed. 2011. Montanari per scelta: indizi di rinascita nella
montagna piemontese . Milano: Franco Angeli.
Dickau, Joel. 2019. Bad to chew: a commentary on the taste of texture. Food,
Culture and Society 22(5):566 –575.
Dupré, John. 2013. I. Living causes. Aristotelian Society Supplementary Vol-
ume 87(1):19 –37.
Fortun, Kim. 2012. Ethnography in late industrialism. Cultural Anthropology
27(3):446 –464.
Foucault, Michel. 1986. Of other spaces. Diacritics 16(1):22 –27.
Franceschini, Italo. 2008. L’alpeggio in Val Rendena tra Medioevo e prima età
moderna . Trento: Centro Studi Judicaria.
Gobbetti, Marco, Erasmo Neviani, and Patrick Fox, eds. 2018. The cheeses of
Italy: science and technology . Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Grasseni, Cristina. 2005. Slow foods, fast genes: timescapes of authenticity and
innovation in the anthropology of food. Cambridge Anthropology 25(2):79 –
94.
——— . 2009. Developing skill, developing vision: practices of locality at the
foot of the Alps . Oxford: Berghahn.
——— . 2017. The heritage arena: reinventing cheese in the Italian Alps .
Oxford: Berghahn.
Gretter, Alessandro, Ilaria Goio, and Geremia Gios. 2010. Beyond commons:
new perspectives and roles for common properties. In Local economies and
global competitiveness . Dallago Bruno and Chiara Guglielmetti, eds. Pp. 175 –
189. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gubert, Francesco. 2019. Novanta giorni: diario di una stagione in alpeggio.
Independently published.
Hayden, Cori. 2003. When nature goes public: the making and unmaking of
bioprospecting in Mexico . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Helmreich, Stefan. 2003. Trees and seas of information: alien kinship and the
biopolitics of gene transfer in marine biology and biotechnology. American
Ethnologist 30(3):340 –358.
——— . 2009. Alien ocean: anthropological voyages in microbial seas . Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Jackson, Steven J. 2014. Rethinking repair. In Media technologies: essays on
communication, mater iality and society . Gillespie Tarleton, Pablo J.
Boczkowski, and Kirsten A. Foot, eds. Pp. 221 –240. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Jenkins, David G., Camille R. Brescacin, Craig V. Duxbury, Jennifer A. Elliott,
Jennafer A. Evans, Katherine R. Grablow, Melissa Hillegass, et al. 2007.Does size matter for dispersal distance? Global Ecology and Biogeography
16(4):415 –425.
Kelty, Christopher, and Hannah Landecker. 2019. Outside in: microbiomes,
epigenomes, visceral sensing, and metabolic ethics. In After practice: thinking
through matter(s) and meaning relationally . Jörg Niewöhner, ed. Pp. 53 –65.
Berlin: Panama.
Kezich, Giovanni. 2018. Mario Rigoni Stern e l ’antropologia delle Alpi. In
Mario Rigoni Stern: u uomo, tante storie, nessun con ﬁne. Anna Maria Caval-
larin and Arianna Scapin, eds. Pp. 103 –114. Scarmagno, Torino: Priuli &
Verlucca.
Laclau, Ernesto, and Chantal Mouffe. 1985. Hegemony and socialist strategy .
London: Verso.
Landecker, Hannah. 2011. Food as exposure: nutritional epigenetics and the
new metabolism. BioSocieties 6(2):167 –194.
——— . 2016. The social as signal in the body of chromatin. Sociological
Review 64(1 suppl.):79 –99.
——— . 2019. On the odor of rancid butter, a twenty- ﬁrst century update.
History of Anthropology Newsletter , vol. 43. http://histanthro.org/notes
/odor-of-rancid-butter/.
Lindström, Eva S., and Silke Langenheder. 2011. Local and regional factors
inﬂuencing bacterial community assembly. Environmental Microbiology
Reports 4:1–9.
Moran, Katie, Steven R. King, and Thomas J. Carlson. 2001. Biodiversity pros-
pecting: lessons and prospects. Annual Review of Anthropology 30(1):505 –
526.
Munn, Nancy. 1990. Constructing regional worlds in experience: Kula ex-
change, witchcraft and Gawan local events. Man 25:1 –17.
Netting, Robert M. 1972. What Alpine peasants have in common: observation
on communal tenure in a Swiss village. Human Ecology 4:135 –146.
Olson, Valerie. 2018. American extreme: the making of a solar ecosystem .
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
O’Malley, Maureen. 2014. Philosophy of microbiology . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Orlove, Benjamin S., and Stephen B. Brush. 1996. Anthropology and the con-
servation of biodiversity. Annual Review of Anthropology 25(1):329 –352.
Papadopoulos, D. 2018. Experimental practice: technoscience, alterontologies,
and more-than-social movements . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Paxson, Heather. 2008. Post-Pasteurian cultures: the microbiopolitics of raw-
milk cheese in the United States. Cultural Anthropology 23(1):15 –47.
——— . 2021. Protecting perishable values: timescapes of moving fermented
foods across oceans and international borders. Current Anthropology
62(suppl. 24):S333 –S342.
Paxson, Heather, and Stefan Helmreich. 2014. The perils and promises of
microbial abundance: novel natures and model ecosystems, from artisanal
cheese to alien seas. Social Studies of Science 44(2):165 –193.
Poletti, Gianni, ed. 2009. Statuti della Giudicarie . Trento: Associazione di
promozione Sociale Il Chiese –CGS.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. Making time for soil: technoscienti ﬁc fu-
turity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science 45(5):691 –716.
Raffaetà, Roberta. 2020. Antropologia dei microbi . Roma: CISU.
Raffaetà, Roberta, and Cameron Duff. 2013. Putting belonging into place:
place experience and sense of belonging among Ecuadorian migrants in an
Italian Alpine region. City and Society: A Journal of the American An-
thropological Association 25(3):328 –347.
Rocca, Gianni. 2007. L’uomo di nuvole e lana . Caderzone-Val Rendena (TN):
Edizioni Museo della Malga.
——— . 2009. Giorni di malga . Caderzone-Val Rendena (TN): Edizioni Museo
della Malga.
Sardo, Pietro. 2003. La squisita inutilità dei formaggi di montagna. L’Alpe 9:46 –
49.
Varotto, Mauro, and Barbara Castiglioni, eds. 2012. Di chi sono le Alpi? ap-
partenenze politiche, economiche e culturali nel mondo alpino contemporaneo .
Padova: Padova University Press.
Viazzo, Pier Paolo. 1989. Upland communities: environment, population and
social structure in the Alps since the sixteenth century . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Viazzo, Pier Paolo, and Stuart Woolf, eds. 2002. Formaggi e mercati: economie
d’alpeggio in Valle d ’Aosta e Haute-Savoie . Aosta: Le Chateau.
Waldby, Catherine. 2002. Stem cells, tissue cultures and the production of
biovalue. Health: An Interdisciplinary Journal for the Social Study of Health,
Illness and Medicine 6(3):305 –323.S332 Current Anthropology Volume 62, Supplement 24, October 2021

