ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES IN PRACTICE
Minding the Gaps
How Humanists, Climate Scientists,
and Communities Can BecomeCollaborating Storytellers
LINDA SHENK
Department of English, Iowa State University, USA
KRISTIE J. FRANZ
Department of Geological and Atmospheric Sciences, Iowa State University, USA
WILLIAM J. GUTOWSKI, JR.
Department of Geological and Atmospheric Sciences, Iowa State University, USA
Abstract Increasingly, researchers share climate information as narratives to support decision-
making and public action. In these contexts, however, scientists remain the focal storytellers.This article offers our methodology for researchers and communities to share narratives with
each other and then to engage in collaborative storytelling. At the center of this work is how
the humanities embrace the importance of narratives having gaps —narrative lacunae into
which individuals can insert their experiences, needs, and values. Our storytelling- and gaps-
based methodology allows communities and researchers to enter and transform each other ’s
stories. We offer a simulation model that fosters collaborative storytelling and give examplesfrom the storytelling and social-environmental action projects that have emerged over three
years of partnership with communities and university students.
Keywords climate change, collaboration, narrative gaps, social-environmental action, story-
telling
The massive scale and inherent uncertainty of climate change often drive a wedge be-
tween researchers and the public —a divide widened by the differing languages and
epistemologies that separate researchers from the broader community.1To help bridge
1. Arnold, Climate Change and Storytelling ; Hastrup, “Scales of Attention. ”
Environmental Humanities 15:3 (November 2023)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-10746001 © 2023 Linda Shenk, Kristie J. Franz, and William J. Gutowski, Jr.
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

this divide, scientists have become interested in storytelling to connect research ﬁnd-
ings with lived experience. They often ask, How can we tell a better story? Be better sto-
rytellers?2They thus make research relevant and accessible by crafting narratives with
engaging plots and relatable characters, often including part of their own personal
story. But scientists remain the ones who produce and control those narratives. Human-
ities scholars, conversely, emphasize that the broader public needs to engage in the
narrative-making themselves. As Raul P. Lejano, Joana Tavares-Reager, and Fikret Berkeshave noted, “Issues like climate change need to be integrated into the everyday narra-
tives that people tell about themselves and their world. ”
3How might the narratives of
climate research become integrated into people ’s personal narratives? And how might
these narratives enter and transform those of researchers —in keeping with the upsurge
of interest in researchers and communities coproducing knowledge?4
In our collaboration as a Shakespeare professor –turned-public-humanist, a hydro-
logist working on social-environmental simulation, and a climate scientist and Lead
Author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ’s Assessment Reports, we
have developed a methodology for researchers and community members to ﬁrst tell
narratives to each other and then go further to engage in storytelling together.5We dis-
tinguish between narrative (the personal experiences individuals recount to each other)
and storytelling (a broader communal process embracing diverse ways of knowing andinvolving reciprocal connectedness). Narrative is a singular expression; storytelling is
a shared act, often likened to weaving, often associated with kinship. Such storytelling
has millennia-deep roots in Indigenous cultures and occurs in such collaborative perfor-
mance contexts as Climate Change Theatre Action, the Theatre of the Oppressed, and
the “cognitive ecology ”of the shareholder-actor companies of William Shakespeare ’s
early modern theater.
6Paradigms of collaborative storytelling are polyvocal and, as such,
expand the imaginations and capacities of those involved. It was to pursue these goals
with communities as our partner-storytellers that our transdisciplinary collaboration
began.
Our storytelling methodology joins disciplinary practices from climate science, the
environmental humanities, participatory human-natural systems modeling, performance
studies, and the relationships-to-resilience ties of social capital from the social sciences.7
These practices contribute different strands to the process. We draw on climate science ’s
2. Dahlstrom, “Using Narratives ”; Martinez-Conde and Macknik, “Finding the Plot. ”
3. Lejano, Tavares-Reager, and Berkes, “Climate and Narrative, ”61. See also Kluwick, “Talking about Cli-
mate Change. ”
4. For the ﬁrst time, the physical scientists of IPCC ’s Working Group I call for coproducing knowledge with
stakeholders in the Sixth Assessment Report (Doblas-Reyes et al., “Linking Global to Regional Climate
Change ”). See also Norström et al., “Principles for Knowledge Co-production. ”
5. Shenk and Gutowski, “Mind the Gaps! ”
6. Datta, “Traditional Storytelling ”; Ingold, “Naming as Storytelling ”; Kovach, Indigenous Methodologies ;
Sakakibara, “‘Our Home Is Drowning ’”; Tribble and Sutton, “Cognitive Ecology ”; Boal, Theatre of the Oppressed .
7. See, e.g., Adamson and Davis, Humanities for the Environment ; Adger, “Social Capital, Collective Ac-
tion”; Aldrich and Meyer, “Social Capital and Community Resilience ”; Garcia, Portney, and Islam, “Question84 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

work on storylines for memorable events and the scenario capabilities of computer simu-
lation modeling that can convey interdependencies across human and natural systems.
Fostering climate action, however, requires more than just the description of human-
natural connections: it requires direct relationship building. For this we incorporate social
capital building, with its emphasis on collaborative ties for resilience across diversity —a
focus that we strengthen through community-empowerment work from performance
studies. Also and most profoundly, the environmental humanities expand the humanties of social capital to kinships across the human and more-than-human realms (includ-
ing Indigenous cosmologies) and elevate narratives of the silenced and the marginalized.
At the center of this cluster of disciplinary practices is the need for communities
and researchers to engage in storytelling as a shared act. To address this element, we
employ one principle: humanities can help us “mind the gaps ”—in literary narratives
based on research in cognitive narratology and in the narratives of climate change re-
search itself. In both types of minding the gaps, storytellers cede control of a narra-
tive and allow others to enter as partners. Gaps could be considered simply un ﬁlled
spaces or places of disruption, but the hum anities approach gaps as places of oppor-
tunity and attention. In cognitive narratology, gaps are spaces where details, connec-
tions, and contexts remain unspeci ﬁed or unresolved —spaces readers ﬁll with their
own experience and needs and thus become collaborators with the author.
8For exam-
ple, in Romeo and Juliet , William Shakespeare leaves unspeci ﬁed the reason the lovers ’
families are feuding —a gap that allows each production and reader to place the con ﬂict
within issues currently polarizing a community. Likewise, in Sila, Chantal Bilodeau allows
each production to decide how to embody the more-than-human world, such as how
Mama and Daughter are portrayed and the representation of Nuliajuk ’s hair.9Bilodeau
and Shakespeare know the power of leaving space for others to enter the narrative and
layer in their own contexts and questions. This approach has synergy with Mike Hulme ’s
work on the gaps in climate change knowledge. He emphasizes that the scienti ﬁc com-
munity treats these gaps as spaces of absence that should be ﬁlled with “ﬁrmer facts, ”
whereas the humanities allow gaps to be places of weakness that require thickening
knowledge through public conversation and value-laden exchange. Gaps are places
of brittleness that should be minded —paid attention to, heeded.10
Our work combines these two humanities-based approaches to gaps, approaching
them as sites where researchers resist ﬁlling the space with their own narratives of
knowledge and as sites where researchers invite others into collaborative storytelling.
Driven Socio-hydrological Modeling Process ”;H e r n d le ta l . , “‘What ’s a Farm? ’”; Robin, “Environmental Human-
ities ”; Shepherd et al., “Storylines ”; Sze et al., “Stories from the Field ”; Zellner et al., “Modeling. ”
8. Abbott, “How Do We Read What Isn ’t There to Be Read? ”; Bernaerts et al., Stories and Minds ; Gerrig,
“Readers ’Experiences ”; Popova, Stories .
9. Shakespeare, Romeo and Juliet ; Bilodeau, Sila.
10. Hulme, “‘Gaps, ’”334.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 85Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

To facilitate this process, we use a storytelling tool —our simulation model, called “Com-
munity Environment ”(CE). It supports groups in moving from individual narrative-
sharing to collaborative storytelling through its gaps —aspects, details, and inadequa-
cies that require researchers and community members to ﬁll in together.11CE uses an
agent-based modeling approach that simulates interactions between autonomous enti-
ties ( “agents ”)i nas y s t e m .L i k ee v e r yo t h e rs i m u l a t i o nm o d e l ,C Ec a n n o tr e p r e s e n t
all possible interactions and agents and thus is inherently full of gaps. CE ’sg a p sa r e
places of brittleness that can be strengthened by layering diverse knowledges around
these gaps to form a bridging web. This essay offers our paradigm of using gaps to fos-
ter collaborative storytelling; the process of using CE to move from “narratives-to ”to
“storytelling-with ”; and excerpts from the storytelling, re ﬂections, and action projects
that have emerged in our collaborations with communities and students.
Narratives to Collaborative Storytelling to Action: The Overall Trajectory
In our methodology community groups and students share their narratives ﬁrst. Only
after they share and discuss their personal and local narratives does the process begin
to include the CE model. CE fosters narrative-making through a design that, as one stu-
dent described it, “asks as much as it answers. ”12CE’s gaps allow personal and research
narratives to enter each other, expand into storytelling among collaborating experts,and then support action. Our fellow collaborators include women farmland owners,
facilitators of the Women Caring for Land program (through the Women, Food and Agri-
culture Network [WFAN]), a neighborhood group, a city-water-programming coordina-
tor, local conservation board naturalists, a K –12 teacher, and university students. How
our team ﬁrst connects with these groups happens in various ways —from a stakeholder
hearing about our process at a conference and wanting to include it in their program-
ming (WFAN, the women landowners, and the K –12 teacher) to our team ’s outreach
(water-programming coordinator and neighborhood group) to our university students,
who recognize that collaborative and community-connected work is in their future.
Typically the storytelling sessions take at least two hours (which can be divided
into two shorter sessions), but having multiple sessions within a larger program (e.g.,
sessions with women landowners) allows the collaboration to develop more fully. Dis-cussion at the session ’s end fosters applying these ideas to action. Our research team
provides some funding for community groups to put their climate-wise projects into ac-
tion. Each group ’s collaborative storytelling yielded different action. Women farmland
landowners and neighborhood groups increased conservation practices (cover crops,
no-till farming, native prairie plantings), undertook sustainable urban conservationpractices (tree and native prairie plantings, composting), and sparked community build-
ing with interest in diversity, equity, and sustainability. We have also coauthored a
11. Shenk, Franz, and Gans, “Community Environment ”; its software NetLogo (Wilensky).
12. Collaborative storytelling class activity, Ames, IA, 2019.86 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

journal article —with the women landowners as full coauthors —to elevate the wisdom
of these women who are among the most potentially powerful yet silenced popula-
tions in agriculture ’s patriarchal system.13With the K –12 teacher we created a CE- and
storytelling-based curriculum for middle schoolers that allows them to discover inter-
dependencies and their own expertise. With university students we explored transdisci-
plinary paradigms of collaboration to address entrenched challenges —often called
“wicked problems ”—and considered modes of inquiry the literary humanities bring to
transdisciplinary and community-empowering work.
Telling Narratives to Each Other with Communities Controlling the Process
At the beginning of a storytelling session, each individual shares a memory/scene from
their life that is important to their story of land, weather, water —conveying who they
are, what matters to them, what they are thinking about in their decision-making. Re-
searchers listen. We, as researchers, do not come with precreated stories assumed to be
relevant. Thus when it comes time for researchers to share their narratives, what gets
shared is determined by what narratives community individuals share and then create
together with CE. Climate change is integrated into situations that individuals will have
experienced in some way. This notion of climate narratives and lived reality is deeply
inﬂuenced by an emerging approach to climat e narrative-making c alled storylines.
With storylines scientists share multiple p ossible climate futures by likening those
conditions (and their impacts) to events t hat stakeholders would recognize or might
have experienced. More frequent periods of intense rainfall may be likened to Hurri-
cane Ida, which caused considerable loss of life and damage, not only along the Gulf
Coast but also hundreds of miles away, in the northeastern United States. Extendedperiods of extreme heat could be likened to the 2003 heat wave in France, which deci-
m a t e dc r o p sa n dc a u s e do v e rf o u r t e e nt h o u s a n dd e a t h s .
14Our storylines process em-
braces this stakeholder-focused methodology, particularly with Regina Rodrigues and
Theodore Shepherd ’s bottom-up approach, and then adds one additional strategy:
community users devise multiple scenarios themselves.15
This notion of agency and action with tangible effects is a foundational principle
in that community members and students run CE and in the computer methodology —
agent-based modeling (ABM) —used to create it. Agent-based models (ABMs) simulate
individual, observable “agents ”who respond to each other and surrounding conditions
with microdecisions that, when enacted repeatedly, can create substantial and some-
times surprising changes to the larger system.16With CE the larger system spans the
13. Shenk, Eells, and Almitra, “Women Taking Action ”; Fairchild and Petrzelka, “Landownership and
Power. ”
14. Hazeleger et al., “Tales ”; Shepherd et al., “Storylines. ”
15. Rodrigues and Shepherd, “Small Is Beautiful. ”
16. Axelrod, Complexity of Cooperation .Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 87Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

human and more-than-human realms, allowing multiple entry points of interest into
the narrative-making. CE is built using principles from geophysical and social science
research (climate projections, hydrology, land-use practices, the human ties of social
capital, biodiversity) that have tangible, ob servable causation (rainfall, dry spells, ero-
sion, water degradation, species loss/thriving, human environmental action projects
or lack of them). CE ’s agents are rain, people, select species crucial for ecosystem health
(butter ﬂies representing pollinators; may ﬂies and dragon ﬂies representing often-
overlooked species with varying tolerances to pollution), and different types of land
(from resilient land with deep-rooted vegetation/year-round roots in the ground to the
hard surfaces, such as pavement or compacted soil, that allow damaging runoff).
These agents interact in narrative arcs that play out based on principles emerging
in research for what is needed for climate adaptation and resilience —not just knowl-
edge of geophysical conditions but also the interconnectedness of human and more-
than-human realms. The diversity of agents and causations in these narratives al-
lows individuals to enter the process based on their different interests and expertise.
This point is crucial. We have found that many individuals who believe they lack the
knowledge to take climate-wise action discover that their own gifts in community build-
ing are just as important. Suddenly the narratives of climate resilience have places
where they ﬁt.
Community groups and students have agentic control over what elements matter
most to them when they decide different scenarios with CE. Using the controls on the
left side of the interface ( ﬁg. 1), they adjust the top three controls to set the climate,
which ranges from dry to wet and can involve turning on or off the more extreme con-
ditions of dry spells and downpours that clim ate projections indicate will intensify
and compound. They also adjust two setting s on the bottom left to establish the num-
ber of humans ready to take action and the degree of community collaboration. True
to anthropogenic climate change, only huma n agents have the responsibility to take
the action needed to make the community environment resilient.
How far each human agent can travel and enact change is based on the amount
and diversity of the community ’s collaborative ties —what social scientists call social
capital. Social capital involves the range of relationships that foster cooperation, trust,and collaborative action —from the bonding ties of close-knit, like-minded people to the
bridging ties that emerge when people from various groups and backgrounds work to-
gether. Bridging ties are particularly crucial for resilience; these relationships involve
multiple perspectives and allow the fullest range of community members to share and
access information and resources.
17Based on CE ’s settings, the narrative arc of these
interactions unfolds in both the visual ﬁeld in the middle and the graphs to the right
(ﬁg. 1). Each narrative arc takes less than ﬁve minutes to run (facilitating multiple
17. Adger, “Social Capital, Collective Action ”; Aldrich and Meyer, “Social Capital and Community Resil-
ience. ”88 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

explorations) and depicts a timespan of ab out ten years to support smaller-scale ac-
tion projects with shorter planning horizons.
That is the extent of agents and basic narratives that CE can portray: CE is car-
toonishly simple. Its simplicity makes it profoundly inadequate for capturing the com-
plexities of anthropogenically caused climate change. But that is the point. CE ’s sparsity
is gap-driven. As with a micro ﬁction, its ample gaps open up in ﬁnite and endless possi-
bilities. As one neighborhood group user commented, “I bet this model does something
different for each group. I ﬁnd that liberating. ”18
What allows these in ﬁnite, unique outcomes are the three types of narrative gaps
built into CE ’s design and the activities that go with it: gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity, multiplic-
ity, and revision. Gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity invite researchers and community members to
share their narratives and enter the conve rsation as equally needed experts. Gaps of
multiplicity foster exploration of multiple and competing ideas in what could be brittle
places in climate change uncertainty and disagreement —but in a low-stakes context
where individuals might ﬁnd a common place to layer knowledges together. Such gaps
build agency through diversity and foster collaborative storytelling across different on-
tologies. Finally, gaps of revision evoke and invite counter-stories that draw attention
Figure 1. The Community Environment model interface. Controls for weather and community settings
are on the left, with the graphical display in the center. Rain falls on the land (green pixels) and erodes
less stable soil, causing a trail of eroded land behind it (brown pixels). Water picks up pollutants and
runs downhill/down-watershed to the river at the lower end of the screen, increasing water pollution.Water ﬂowing over hard surfaces (gray pixels) carries more pollution (visualized as larger circles). The
graphs on the right plot erosion and number of projects (top graph) and water pollution (bottom
graph) with time and will update continually during the simulation. Invertebrate indicator species(may ﬂies/dragon ﬂies) populate the river initially, and their numbers change as pollution in the river
changes.
18.“Pretty Bird, ”storytelling session, Ames, IA, November 2019.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 89Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

to the blind spots in the original research narratives and then use these places of brit-
tleness as opportunities to envision new possibilities that communities and researchers
create together as fully collaborating experts.
Engaging in Storytelling with Each Other by Minding the Gaps
Gaps of Nonspeci ﬁcity
Gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity in CE involve elements left purposefully unde ﬁned. For example,
in the setting for “individual readiness, ”there is no speci ﬁcity about what constitutes
readiness. The visual landscape is highly abstract; the geographical location is not pre-
determined. These gaps prompt groups to consider value-laden questions: What is use-
ful or needed for us and others we know to be ready to take action? What location mat-
ters to us —a farm, neighborhood, watershed, ent ire region? Cognitive narratologist
H. Porter Abbott describes how such permanent gaps create a place for questions that the
existing narrative does not answer.19Gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity stimulate the human brain ’s
natural creativity to ﬁll in what is missing with knowledge from experience and memory
in an act that Yanna Popova and Elena Cuffari call “participatory sense-making. ”20It is
theﬁrst step of inviting personal narratives to connect with research narratives.
This type of gap- ﬁlling occurred in an individual storytelling session with a woman
landowner, Tess. One scenario she chose drew her to two “not ready ”pixel people who,
over the course of the run, became “now ready ”to take action ( ﬁg. 2). Noticing these two
ﬁgures, she ﬁlled the gap of what is needed for readiness in her own story:
I’m just going to interject with something here that I ’ve kept to kind of keep me going.
There is in a different ﬁeld that I had done a bigger project, and one of the neighbors
said this to me. He had brought his mom back out to the farm to show her a few thingsand talk about a few things that were going on. So they have to drive by my place, andshe said, “Oh, what ’s[ T e s s ]d o i n g , ”a n dh et o l dm et h a th et o l dh e r : “What the rest of us
need to do: you take on a project each year to help improve the farm. ”...I ti sa l s on i c e
to not feel like you ’re the only one doing things or that has a mindset like this.
21
CE’s narrative gap of nonspeci ﬁcity about what constitutes readiness evoked Tess ’s per-
sonal story about what has supported her own readiness to take action.
Tess ’s story about readiness through relationships became part of the cluster of
micronarratives she shared that involved how she had taken incremental action, stepby step —just as smaller projects create larger outcomes in CE. Mapping this discussion
of social-environmental connection to her next climate-wise steps, she worked with a
tenant who had not wanted to try cover crops. She collaborated with him and used pro-
ject funding to buy cover crop seed for a many-acre ﬁeld of her highly erodible land. Her
19. Abbott, “How Do We Read What Isn ’t There to Be Read?, ”106–7.
20. Popova and Cuffari, “Temporality. ”
21.“Tess, ”storytelling session, Zoom, September 2020.90 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

approach of partnership and support was so successful that the next season he im-
plemented cover crops voluntarily. CE ’s simplicity provided the openness to invite
Tess ’s story about achieving readiness through collaboration. The narratives of social-
environmental connectedness from the research brought out and joined aspects of herlived reality. Such integration of land stewardship and relationships has long been rec-
ognized in Indigenous cultures, as Robin Wall Kimmerer has famously noted: “It is rela-
tionship that will endure and relationship that will sustain the restored land. ”
22
As groups ﬁll in the gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity, their storytelling often reveals how
each of them brings a different and needed piece that can foster collaborative action.
The neighborhood group we worked with was interested in conducting a waterwise pro-
ject on land surrounding their condominium building. At a storytelling session, the groupcomprised individuals (most of them retired) living in that building, their city ’s storm-
water manager, three researchers, and an international graduate student involved with
climate action at the nearby university. Their discussions about CE regarding readiness
and collaborative ties indicated that the condominium owners were interested in doing
sustainability projects and building relationships, particularly with the city and univer-sity students —our motivation for bringing these diverse individuals together for the
session.
Byﬁlling in the narrative of what readiness meant, the owners determined that
the manual labor needed for the projects was an impediment to their readiness. In turn,
the international graduate student said he and his colleagues wanted to do something
Figure 2. Humans “ready ”to take action (in
yellow) implement conservation projects on the
landscape. Conservation projects —visualized as
native ﬂowering plants —allow water to in ﬁltrate
and prevent erosion, thereby providing protection
to the environment. Humans “not ready ”to take
action (in red) move across the landscape but donothing. Red individuals may become ready
(signaled with the addition of a yellow heart on
their icon) if they interact enough with otherpeople. These “now ready ”individuals take
action, but at half the level of ready individuals.
22. Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass , 338.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 91Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

on the land locally but had no connection that gave them agency. Their narratives en-
tered each other as they began collaborative storytelling, and they realized that each
had aspects of readiness the others needed. As a result of these synergies, the condo-
minium owners, this international graduate student, and a growing group of students
he introduced to the partnership now work together on sustainability projects —they
have planted trees and native prairie plants and started composting projects.
Equally important, through these relationships they now occasionally cook for
each other, do yoga, and garden together as they strengthen their ties across diversity
(bridging social capital): “We are this really unlikely, motley crew —Boomers, Gen X, Y,
Z; different genders, different ethnicities, different ages. And it all works! ”23Such build-
ing of ties is crucial for supporting climate resilience, as social scientists emphasize,
and, indeed, another group member notes this very outcome:
For me I had no idea that this would spread beyond my living community, and it has. It
has brought in a whole new group of friends: people who have interests in common, peo-ple that I would have never had an opportunity to meet and be a part of their lives. I be-lieve in the legacy idea —look . . . that is a tree I planted. But what [this project and its
relationships have] given me is pleasure in the present, and that is important to me,especially in the present time [COVID]. It ’s been a part of my resilience. . . . All of this is a
result of a series of encounters and academic exercises that were brought to us that gaveus great discipline and gave us purpose. Researchers were also part of this community.Very important.
24
Working with CE, these individuals formed supportive relationships with each other.
They also formed supportive relationships with us as researchers that led to action
and, in turn, encouraged yet more collaborative connections. Crucially, the openness of
the gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity allowed unanticipated synergies to emerge through storytell-
ing together as contributors with diverse gifts. Everyone learned a great deal from each
other.
Another gap of nonspeci ﬁcity—that of geographical location —had important out-
comes for the university students in our STEM and humanities classes who had grownup in widely different locations. CE ’s nonspeci ﬁcity of location allowed them to explore
the common characteristics and impacts of weather extremes they have experienced
in their different communities. They shared their stories of droughts and ﬂashﬂooding
from rural and urban communities in Iowa, North Carolina, Minnesota, California, Texas,
Washington, and even Scotland, India, and Siberia. Prompted by the model, one group ofjustﬁve students shared experiences that ranged from growing up in the extremes of
Siberia, to experiencing ﬂuctuations between downpours and drought in Texas, to a recent
severe storm in Iowa that was common to the entire group. These conversations high-
lighted how a range of communities experience impacts of climate change and helped
23.“Christy1, ”storytelling session, Ames, IA, November 2019.
24.“Derz, ”storytelling session, Ames, IA, November 2019.92 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

students see that, even if the actual weather events were different, the characteristics
of extremes and ﬂuctuations that underlie those different events had commonalities.
Because of its visually abstract interface, CE ’s gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity allowed personal
and local contexts to remain unique to each individual while exploring common ele-
ments in their experiences.
This principle of diversity also translates to groups ’recognition that their experi-
ences could rest side by side as different manifestations and expertise that bene ﬁted
from diversity. One student group member said that over time “it dawned on me that
our stories all revolved around a connection with the earth and yet were all different. . . .
As we went on to doing the simulation, it was entertaining to see how we all lead with
different mindsets; some analytical, some creative, some focused on what story there
was to tell, others focused explicitly on the data [the graphs]. . . . Ultimately it was a per-
fect balance. ”25A student from a different group also commented on the strengths of
the diverse perspectives in his group:
Another thing I noticed was that I would mention more abstract concepts as potential
reasons such as religious or cultural details about the community involved. Many of my
group members had other ideas about the situation, ones that personally I would not
have considered. This also demonstrates the importance of collaboration in storytelling.Maybe it has to do with people ’s backgrounds or their upbringings, but nobody thinks or
p r o c e s s e si n f o r m a t i o nt h es a m ea l l o w i n gf o rd i f f e r i n gv i e w p o i n t s ....T h ed i f f e r i n gp e r -spectives others can bring is invaluable, especially in a storytelling or story creation pro-cess where having a dominating viewpoint limits a story ’sp o t e n t i a l .
26
The multiple perspectives evoked by CE, through its gaps of nonspeci ﬁcity and ease of
use, opened new perspectives and new within-group connections. And, signi ﬁcantly,
collaborative storytelling fostered respect across differences. This focus on multiplic-
ity emerges even more emphatically in the next step of the process.
Gaps of Multiplicity
Individuals and groups working with CE create gaps of multiplicity because they are
typically asked to devise and run at least six different scenarios that need not develop a
coherent trajectory. Such incommensurability through gaps boosts cognition and crea-
tivity, as Lars Bernaerts and colleagues note, for gaps in a narrative “not only require an
additional effort of the reader but also enable him or her to see something else and to
make new narrative connections. ”27Gaps foster cognitive expansion, allowing initial as-
pects of the familiar to stretch and become discoveries that embrace the new. In the
25. Collaborative storytelling class activity, Ames, IA, Spring 2022.
26. Collaborative storytelling class activity, Ames, IA, Spring 2022.
27. Bernaerts et al., Stories and Minds , 2, emphasis in original. See also P. C. Hogan, Cognitive Science ;
Popova, Stories .Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 93Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

storytelling sessions individuals expanded the geographical scale of their thinking (e.g.,
local plot of land to regional watershed) or expanded their thinking about how human
and more-than-human relationship building is all part of climate resilience work. These
elements are crucial for collaborative storytelling regarding climate change in particular.
The gaps of multiplicity allow discovery to occur at a pace and scale that meet individu-
als and communities where they are, preventing too large a gap between the scale and
uncertainties of the climate crisis and individuals ’agency. Bruno Latour addresses how
such misalignment can lead to overwhelm: “One of the reasons why we feel so power-
less when asked to be concerned by ecological crisis, the reason why I, to begin with,
feel so powerless, is because of the total disconnect between the range, nature, and scale
of the phenomena and the set of emotions, habits of thoughts, and feelings that would
be necessary to handle those crises. ”28CE’s gaps of multiplicity allow for expansion of
scenarios and scales to happen through the interactive nature of collaborative story-
telling and to shift as those involved feel comfortable.
Woman landowner Paulina ’s work with CE demonstrates the need to keep these
items aligned. Her ﬁrst scenario centered on her own farm. Her second started that way
but shifted when she noticed two speci ﬁc conservation projects that were implemented
in an ideal location uphill (toward the top of the visualized landscape), preventing deg-
radation below that area. At that moment, her exploration expanded to the larger scaleof watershed dynamics:
I’d like to learn more about watersheds and exactly how much manure runoff affects
water quality. Because by what I ’ve researched, [the state ’s agriculture and stewardship
department] is funding projects in twelve watersheds. We have two ﬁelds that are in
the —— Watershed, and in parts of those ﬁelds —through the years —we’ve been able to
do some improvements to improve runoff from our ﬁelds, but the problem is much
larger than what happens on our individual ﬁelds.29
As she began to move back and forth between her ﬁelds and the larger watershed, she
likened the overwhelm of the watershed s cale to that of climate change itself: “In our
community, water quality ’s a big deal; we have a lot of people that are very committed
to taking care of their environment. Many p eople get overwhelmed by the doom-and-
gloom scenario about climate change. ‘What do I do now? What do I do this week? ’So
we need to break it down into manageable bites. And that ’s not how we hear it, whether
it’s watersheds or climate change. ”30Paulina gets right to the heart of what happens
when the gap between the scale of environm ental concerns (climate change, water-
sheds) and one ’s emotional and cognitive perception of agency is too large. Because
her narratives involved scale, we introduced relevant narratives for her, using the
28. Latour, “Waiting for Gaia, ”21.
29.“Paulina, ”storytelling session, Zoom, October 2020.
30.“Paulina, ”storytelling session, Zoom, October 2020.94 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

watershed map that included her farm, and together we discussed the location of
her land and the land in her county in relation to the different watershed scales. This
moment exempli ﬁed the collaborative storytelling among experts, with each of us add-
ing knowledge and perspectives. Paulina ’se m p h a s i so n “manageable bites ”further
supports how the stories of climate change sometimes need to ﬁt into smaller spaces.
Paulina ’s action project expanded and diversi ﬁed her use of cover crops, and she began
looking into larger watershed issues with civic engagement steps in mind.
The gaps of multiplicity coupled with those of nonspeci ﬁcity foster collaborative
storytelling because they allow the exchange to evolve —often in ways in which social
and environmental scales move and stretch in alignment. Equally important in this co-
created process, the impacts related to these larger scales cease to be unmentionable
but instead become motivators that underscore the importance of local action. Suchshared storytelling happened when woman landowner Diana and her husband were
working together with researchers, WFAN facilitators, and CE. She and her husband ini-
tially imagined CE ’s abstract landscape as the farmland they own. Over the course of
multiple runs, they progressively expanded their consideration of water ﬂow, extend-
ing it to neighboring acreages and eventuall y to the larger watershed. Diana described
this and another realization at a later storytelling session with the other women land-
owners: “One of my biggest ah-ha moments when using the model was that our neigh-
borhood is at the top of our watershed, so what we do in our collective neighborhood is
going to in ﬂuence the area that much more. My other ah-ha moment was the impor-
tance of community in caring for the land . We want to create an opportunity to build
these relationships in our neighborhood. ”
31These priorities around community and
relationships underwrote Diana ’s action projects. Her ﬁrst project addressed water
ﬂow on her land and engaged family in land stewardship; in her next project, she hosted
a neighborhood ice cream social for the twenty- ﬁve households that, with her, have
farms and acreages at the top of the watershed. She described her motivation for hosting
this event: “So we don ’t have grand educational plans with our ice-cream social but
hopefully starting with the conversations and neighbors getting to know each other.
It’s not just about me as an individual to know the right things or do the right things
or all of this, but it ’s about that broader community effort. ”32When Diana signed up
for the learning circle only months before , she was a newcomer to conservation; now
she has become a local facilitator of conversation and conservation in a midwestern
area that plays a signi ﬁcant role in mitigating the environmental degradation that
will only intensify with climate change. Gaps of multiplicity allowed her to work on
narratives that started with the familiar and led to environmental action on a larger
scale than she would have ever imagined. Diana ’s expertise is community building, so
the ice cream social as her action project g rew out of her strengths, just as Paulina ’s
31.“Diana, ”storytelling session, Zoom, September 2020.
32.“Diana, ”storytelling session, Zoom, September 2020.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 95Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

thoughts about civic engagement and watershed issues ﬁth e ro w ne x p e r t i s ei nc i v i c
matters. The language of stewardship and climate entered each of their narratives
differently and emerged as different action.
Our collaborative storytelling with the neighborhood group had a different path.
The twelve members divided into three smaller subgroups to work with researchers,
community partners, and CE. Each group independently created scenarios by imagining
CE’s landscape as their group ’s shared property. After running a few scenarios, all three
subgroups began to expand the scale of their discussion but in different ways. One group
expanded its associations geospatially. One participant observed, “This reminds me about
what is happening in the Gulf of Mexico, ”33so the group then did two simulations that
imagined the upper part of the model ’s landscape as Iowa and the lower part as the Gulf
of Mexico —exploring the implications that choices made upstream in the Mississippi
River watershed have on the Gulf. Another subgroup started with its interest in local
property but then began to think about how the participants ’choices could impact and
even inspire their community relationships with other neighborhoods and the city itself.
These groups explored scenarios involving signi ﬁcant climate impacts, but the explora-
tion helped them realize the social and regional importance of what they were doing,
making the backdrop of climate change and watershed dynamics not overwhelming,
as it so easily can be, but empowering. What ’s more, when they got back together as a
large group, the topic of biodiversity that had emerged in two of the three small groups
reemerged to increase their commitment to their waterwise project, now with an added
focus of providing local habitat. Participants are now mentoring others in local urban
sustainability; their reach and network continues to expand.
With students —both at the lower levels and university —the gaps between multi-
ple narratives fostered shifts in scale but also involved a focus distinct to them: environ-
mental justice. One student group member explained,
The simulation obviously gets me thinking about erosion, ﬂoods, pollution, and climate
change, but I could not help but lose track of the problem as a readiness issue to ﬁnd my-
self looking at a poverty problem. Each variation of the situation shows a different com-munity, varying in location and level of income. Maybe it is because of the book that Iam reading right now, Heat Wave , but I was constantly looking at the rounds of the simu-
lation as separate communities experiencing the same issue.
34
This group ’s approach to multiplicity is another way gaps provide signi ﬁcant learning
opportunities for all involved; researchers never imagined approaching separate runs
as exploring issues of equity within the same community. This student included a nod
to another facet of interweaving more narratives into the story when he mentioned
33.“Rev H, ”storytelling session, Ames, IA, November 2019.
34. Collaborative storytelling class activity, Ames, IA, Fall 2020.96 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Heat Wave . Many students refer to texts they have read in other courses, such as Rob
Nixon ’sSlow Violence for issues of inequity and Linda Hogan ’sSolar Storms for kinship
among the human and more-than-human realm practiced in Indigenous cultures. Ex-
pansion and interweaving are precisely what we encourage, and the ﬁnal type of narra-
tive gap moves emphatically to the most radical aspect: that of revision. Gaps of revi-
sion openly invite individuals to transform the stories of research.
Gaps of Revision
With the gaps of revision we ask groups to share what they believe the model does not
tell—or tell adequately —but should. This act draws out stories of those —human and
more-than-human —who might have been silenced or disempowered. It uncovers our
biases and blind spots as researchers and challenges the obscured logics that algorithmscan impose. The gap of revision involves community individuals as fully transformative
collaborators, able and encouraged to change the narratives of research. It is the most
complicated of the three types of gaps and involves several steps.
The process for this gap begins with cultivating in community collaborators a crit-
ical stance to using simulation models that acknowledges and questions model design
and output. To move from such critical inquiry to revision for action, we draw from
community-based, activist performance practices, notably the Theatre of the Oppressed(TO) and Climate Change Theatre Action (CCTA).
35Both CCTA and TO reject the notion
of spectators as passive viewers and emphasize instead collaborative storytelling for ac-
tion. In TO spectators become spect- actors who contribute ideas that revise a given sce-
nario or, in some activities, take over telling parts of the story themselves.36For CCTA,
events can occur within contexts that place the storytelling directly alongside local andimmediate opportunities for action. In CCTA and TO, participants are expected to move
from watching narratives to joining their action to empower change. The collaborative
act of storytelling is geared toward prompting transformative intervention.
Researchers often serve as the ﬁrst revisionists by indicating how CE ’s narratives
are inadequate to capture the narratives of research. These additions often begin with
the hidden stories of “life overlooked ”—such as those of CE ’s small and unassuming
dragon ﬂies and may ﬂies and the vibrancy of the microbial life in the soil itself.
37Be-
cause the may ﬂies and dragon ﬂies are depicted explicitly on CE ’s interface, their story
is more visible, and there is brief text on the lower right of the interface that links the
presence of these two often-unnoticed species with ecosystem health. Groups often
ask why those two species are included beca use, they admit, they have never thought
35. See Boal, Theatre of the Oppressed ; and Climate Change Theatre Action, http://www.climatechange
theatreaction.com/about/ (accessed July 12, 2023).
36. Boal, Theatre of the Oppressed .
37. For related work see Adamson, LeMenager, and Sandilands, “Citizen Humanities ”; Krzywoszynska
and Marchesi, “Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils. ”Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 97Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

much about them (other than the beauty of the dragon ﬂies). These questions invite
researchers, or ideally someone else in the group, to share the story of these small spe-
cies so crucial to, and indicative of, ecosystem health. One of our conservationist part-
ners emphasized the importance of using these two species to cultivate individuals ’art
of attentiveness and the need for indicator species tied to ecosystem health.38
Another hinted-at story underwrites why the simulated native prairie ﬂowering
plants absorb the runoff and stop the erosion. In CE the rain agents simply disappearwhen they encounter this vegetation, and the graph quantitatively registers improve-
ments in water quality and erosion. But the re is no explanation. Underneath the sim-
plicity of the visualized process are powerful stories of soil —exchanges among roots,
fungi, bacteria, and minerals. The part of the prairie plant above the ground is the
only visible part of the larger underground story of vast microbial networks surroundingroot systems that can reach down twenty- ﬁve feet. Most people we have worked with
have never considered this vast network.
Sharing these hidden, untold stories opens the conversation to what other quiet or
omitted stories need to be told —particularly those of lives overlooked or silenced through
systemic inequities. When time permits or the opportunity arises, we ask groups to share
what CE needs to include or outright revise. For example, CE glaringly omits issues of
environmental justice. On the interface all human agents are affected equally, with noacknowledgment that individuals who occupy the space downhill/downstream bear
the impacts of choices made by individuals uphill/upstream. Students often address
this need for revision, emphasizing
/C15the need to hear the voices of Indigenous and other disenfranchised pop-
ulations
/C15the reality that some areas naturally receive either full or only limited ac-cess to water and/or the conservation efforts implemented ( “What if only
one part of the place received [the actual water from] the rainfall? What ifone part of the place was protected from too much rainfall? What if no
matter what they [some ‘ready ’people] did, their subcommunities could
not bene ﬁt from their work? ”)
/C15the lack of human agents “in direct opposition to the changes being made,
such as special interest groups or big business that pro ﬁt from releasing
sediment into the rivers. What would their sway be? ”39
With these suggestions we do not modify CE to “get it right ”the next time. We are not
trying to build a more realistic model or be better, more complete storytellers ourselves.
38. For the art of attentiveness, see van Dooren, Kirksey, and Münster, “Multi-species Studies. ”
39. Collaborative class activities, Ames, IA, Spring 2020 and Fall 2020.98 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

We intentionally will not ﬁx the depiction of the human agents to have the downhill/
downstream individuals suffer the im pacts from uphill/upstream humans ’actions.
R a t h e r ,w ew a n tp e o p l et ob ea n n o y e d ,t oc h a nge the narrative, to take charge of it.
Like TO ’s Forum Theatre activities, we want the spect-actors to, essentially, call out
“Stop! ”in the scenarios that are not right, step in to change the story, and revise it to
make it more inclusive, more just, more nuanced. And with that revision take a step
that contributes to making that story reality.
Our most powerful example of using the gaps of revision comes from the women
landowners. Hearing their stories, we recognized how CE ’s depiction of what consti-
tutes conservation action is too narrow, even overtly disempowering, because it repre-
sents conservation action primarily as the act of planting. These women own the land;
their tenants are the ones who put “roots in the ground. ”The women ’s disconnection
from the land sometimes hinders them from feeling empowered to push for conserva-
tion practices on their own land. Therefore, in an additional group session we asked the
women to challenge and revise this representation in CE. Their responses revealed how
an emphasis on planting as conservation privileges certain systems that are already
present in the divisive and hierarchical language of “operator ”/“nonoperator ”that pre-
supposes and negates their agency (as nonoperators) and that carries a land-dominance
mindset. The women ’s ideas have prompted us to advocate that agriculture replace
operator/nonoperator terminology with that of “stewardship partners ”and expand con-
servation outreach and programming to more pointedly support relationship building —
a paradigm practiced by Indigenous populations for centuries.40As these women cor-
rected and expanded the model ’s representation of conservation action, their insights
added to and sharpened the existing wisdom our group of facilitators and women land-owners created together —wisdom shared in the article our full group produced as coau-
thors.
41The collaborative storytelling with these women was distributed among all of
us; our narratives truly entered and transformed each other.
Concluding Remarks
Minding the gaps is about leaving space for others to join and own the story. To help our
particular team share the narrative-maki ng, we used a conventional tool of Western,
modern science, a computer-simulation model (CE), to counter the paradigm of research-
ers as the primary storytelling experts. Our interest, however, is not to advocate for use
of the CE model and its more Western science –based assumptions but rather for minding
the gaps as a larger practice that goes beyond different epistemologies coexisting. Inten-
tionally integrating gaps in storytelling allows epistemologies to weave together: the nar-ratives of climate resilience become part of the everyday stories people tell. Time and
time again, we have had individuals start the storytelling process believing they know
40. Shenk, Eells, and Almitra, “Women Taking Action. ”
41. Shenk, Eells, and Almitra, “Women Landowners. ”Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 99Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

too little or see no meaningful entry points for action in large-scale scenarios of climate
change presented in the media and research reports. By engaging in a process that in-
cludes their memories and experiences, they see how the building blocks of action that
contribute to climate resilience may have been in their stories all along. Now climate ac-
tion grows out of the stories of their own life stories.
Although this process is energizing, we admit that we researchers still ﬁnd it chal-
lenging to practice. Reciprocal storytelling requires us to step out of our epistemic com-fort zones to actively invite plurality and uncertainty. It invokes an intensity of collabo-
ration much like what Noel Castree calls for in transdisciplinary work —for scholars not
“merely to collaborate but to unsettle each other .”
42In our work, communities become part
of the unsettling, which requires a willingness to be vulnerable and to trust. This brings
us back to Hulme ’s emphasis on gaps in climate change knowledge as places of brittle-
ness. They are spaces that involve unknowns. As such, they are inherently weak even
as they can be used to invite the conversation and layering of diverse knowledges that
could form a strengthening web of joined narratives.
Minding the gaps offers a way to acknowledge vulnerability and uncertainty as the
dynamic places for collaboration and interdependence. As such these sites become loci
for responsibility that require turning —continuously —outward from the solidity of one ’s
own perspectives to engage in the larger knowledge ecosystems that surround us, includ-ing those of the more-than-human. It is about humility and kinship. It is about allowing
what we do not know to be a strength that urges us to collaborate. Kinship and responsi-
bility through uncertainties is precisely what climate collaboration needs to embrace.
LINDA SHENK, professor of English, applies her background in Shakespeare to how researchers and
community members cocreate narratives for action. She has published in such journals as WIREs
Climate Change, Journal of Soil and Water Conservation, andELR: English Literary Renaissance .
KRISTIE J. FRANZ, professor of hydrology, studies hydrologic modeling systems with a focus on
investigating stream ﬂow-forecasting methods and modeling the coupled effects of climate and
human activities on watershed processes.
WILLIAM J. GUTOWSKI, JR., professor of meteorology, researches the regional hydroclimate, with
an emphasis on extreme-precipitation processes and their projected changes. He was a Lead
Author for the Working Group I report of the IPCC Fifth and Sixth Assessment Reports.
Acknowledgments
The research in this publication has been funded by the USDA/NRCS; Iowa State University; US DOE/
DE-SC0016605; and NSF/AGS-1243030. We also thank individuals who helped make this work possible:
our community partners, particularly Jean Eells, and our undergraduate student research assistants —
Nick Gans, Danielle Robinson, and Arie Sirotiak.
42. Castree, “Global Climate Research, ”65; emphasis in original.100 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

References
A b b o t t ,H .P o r t e r . “How Do We Read What Isn ’t There to Be Read? Shadow Stories and Permanent
Gaps. ”InThe Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Literary Studies , edited by Lisa Zunshine, 104 –19.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Adamson, Joni, and Michael Davis, eds. Humanities for the Environment: Integrating Knowledge, Forging
New Constellations of Practice . New York: Routledge, 2017.
Adamson, Joni, Stephanie LeMenager, and Catriona Sandilands. “Citizen Humanities: Teaching Life
Overlooked as Interdisciplinary Ecology. ”Resilience: A Journal of the Environmental Humanities 5,
no. 2 (2008): 96 –121. https://doi.org/10.5250/resilience.5.2.0096 .
Adger, W. Neil. “Social Capital, Collective Action, and Adaptation to Climate Change. ”Economic Geog-
raphy 79, no. 4 (2003): 387 –404.
Aldrich, Daniel P., and Michelle A. Meyer. “Social Capital and Community Resilience. ”American Be-
havioral Scientist 59, no. 2 (2015): 254 –69.https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764214550299 .
Arnold, Annika. Climate Change and Storytelling: Narratives and Cultural Meaning in Environmental Com-
munication . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2018.
Axelrod, Robert M. The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of Competition and Collaboration .
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Bernaerts, Lars, Dirk De Geest, Luc Herman, and Bart Vervaeck, eds. Stories and Minds: Cognitive Ap-
proaches to Literary Narrative . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2013.
Bilodeau, Chantal. Sila: The Arctic Cycle .V a n c o u v e r :T a l o n b o o k s ,2 0 1 5 .
Boal, Augusto. Theatre of the Oppressed . Translated by Charles A. and Maria-Odilia Leal McBride. New
York: Theatre Communications Group, 1985.
Castree, Noel. “Global Climate Research and the ‘People Disciplines ’: Toward a New Dispensation. ”
South Atlantic Quarterly 116, no. 1 (2017): 55 –67.https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-3749315 .
Dahlstrom, Michael F. “Using Narratives and Storytelling to Communicate Science with Nonexpert
Audiences. ”PNAS 111, supp. 4 (2014): 13614 –20.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1320645111 .
Datta, Ranjan. “Traditional Storytelling: An Effective Research Methodology and Its Implications for
Environmental Research. ”Alter Native 14, no. 1 (2018): 35 –44.https://doi.org/10.1177/11771801
17741351 .
Doblas-Reyes, Francisco J., et al. “Linking Global to Regional Climate Change. ”InClimate Change 2021:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Workin g Group I to the Sixth Assess ment Report of the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change , edited by Valérie Masson-Delmotte et al., 1363 –1512. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021.
Fairchild, Ennea, and Peggy Petrzelka. “Landownership and Power: Reorienting Land Tenure Theory. ”
Agriculture and Human Values 39: 997 –1006. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-022-10300-x .
Garcia, Margaret, Kent Portney, and Sha ﬁqul Islam. “A Question Driven Socio-hydrological Modeling
Process. ”Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions 12, no. 8 (2016): 8289 –335. https://doi
.org/10.5194/hessd-12-8289-2015 .
Gerrig, Richard J. “Readers ’Experiences of Narrative Gaps. ”Storyworlds: A Journal of Narrative Studies 2
(2010): 19 –37.
Hastrup, Kirsten. “Scales of Attention in Fieldwork: Global Connections and Local Concerns in the
Arctic. ”Ethnography 14, no. 2 (2013): 145 –64.https://doi.org/10.1177/1466138112454629 .
Hazeleger, Wilco, Bart J. J. M. van den Hurk, Erik Min, Geert J. van Oldenborgh, Arthur C. Petersen,
David A. Stainforth, Eleftheria Vasileiadou, and Leonard A. Smith. “Tales of Future Weather. ”
Nature Climate Change 5 (2015): 107 –14.https://doi:10.1038/NCLIMATE2450 .
Herndl, Carl G., Sarah Beth Hopton, Lauren Cutlip, Elena Yu Polush, Rick Cruse, and Mack Shelley.
“‘What ’s a Farm? ’: The Languages of Space and Place. ”InField Rhetoric: Ethnography, Ecology, and
Engagement in the Places of Persuasion , edited by Candice Rai and Caroline Gottschalk Druschke,
61–94. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2018.
Hogan, Linda. Solar Storms: A Novel . New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 101Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Hogan, Patrick Colm. Cognitive Science, Literature, and the Arts: A Guide for Humanists .N e wY o r k :R o u t -
ledge, 2003.
Hulme, Mike. “‘Gaps ’in Climate Change Knowledge: Do They Exist? Can They Be Filled? ”Environmen-
tal Humanities 10, no. 1 (2018): 330 –37.https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-4385599 .
Ingold, Tim. “Naming as Storytelling: Speaking of Animals among the Koyukon of Alaska. ”InBeing
Alive: Essays on Movement, Knowledge and Description , 165 –75. New York: Routledge, 2011.
Kimmerer, Robin Wall. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scienti ﬁc Knowledge, and the Teachings of
Plants . Minneapolis: Milkweed, 2013.
Kluwick, Ursula. “Talking about Climate Change: The Ecological Crisis and Narrative Form. ”InThe
Oxford Handbook of Ecocriticism , edited by Greg Garrard, 502 –16. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2014.
Kovach, Mary. Indigenous Methodologies: Characteristics, Conversations, and Contexts . Toronto: University
of Toronto Press, 2009.
Krzywoszynska, Anna, and Greta Marchesi. “Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils: Introduction. ”
Environmental Humanities 12, no. 1 (2020): 190 –204. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-8142297 .
Latour, Bruno. “Waiting for Gaia: Composing the Common World through Arts and Politics. ”InWhat
Is Cosmopolitical Design? Design, Nature and the Built Environment , edited by Albena Yaneva and
Alejandro Zaera-Polo, 21 –32. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Lejano, Raul P., Joana Tavares-Reager, and Fikret Berkes. “Climate and Narrative: Environmental
Knowledge in Everyday Life. ”Environmental Science and Policy 31 (2013): 61 –70.https://doi.org/10
.1016/j.envsci.2013.02.009 .
Martinez-Conde, Susana, and Stephen L. Macknik. “Finding the Plot in Science Storytelling in Hopes
of Enhancing Science Communication. ”PNAS 114, no. 31 (2017): 8127 –29.https://doi.org/www
.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711790114 .
Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2011.
Norström, Albert V., et al. “Principles for Knowledge Co-production in Sustainability Research. ”Na-
ture Sustainability 3, no. 1 (2020): 182 –90.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0448-2 .
Popova, Yanna. Stories, Meaning, and Experience: Narrativity and Enaction . New York: Routledge, 2015.
Popova, Yanna, and Elena Cuffari. “Temporality of Sense-Making in Narrative Interactions. ”Cognitive
Semiotics (2018): 1 –14.https://doi.org/10.1515/cogsem-2018-0007 .
Robin, Libby. “Environmental Humanities and Climate Change: Understanding Humans Geologically
and Other Life Forms Ethically. ”WIREs Climate Change 9, no. 1 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1002
/wcc.499 .
Rodrigues, Regina R., and Theodore G. Shepherd. “Small Is Beautiful: Climate Change Science as If
People Mattered. ”PNAS Nexus 1, no. 1 (2022): 1 –9.https://doi.org/10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac009 .
Sakakibara, Chie. “‘Our Home Is Drowning ’: Iñupiat Storytelling and Climate Change in Point Hope,
Alaska. ”Geographical Review 98, no. 4 (2008): 456 –75.
Shakespeare, William. Romeo and Juliet . Edited by Brian Gibbons. London: Methuen, 1980.
Shenk, Linda, Jean Eells, and Wren Almitra. “Women Landowners and the Language of Partnership
Needed for Water Quality Change. ”Open Waters: Rethinking Water, Place and Community 21 (2022):
110–17.https://doi.org/10.24926/2471190X.9254 .
Shenk, Linda, Jean Eells, and Wren Almitra. “Women Taking Action: Multi-session Learning Circles,
Storytelling, and an Ecosystem of Relationships for Conservation. ”Journal of Soil and Water Con-
servation 78, no. 3 (2023): 245 –59.https://doi.org/10.2489/jswc.2023.00129 .
Shenk, Linda, Kristie Franz, and Nick Gans. “Community Environment. ”NetLogo Modeling Com-
mons, 2021. http://modelingcommons.org/browse/one_model/6792 .
Shenk, Linda, and William Gutowski. “Mind the Gaps! Climate Scientists Should Heed Lessons in Col-
laborative Storytelling from Shakespeare. ”WIREs Climate Change 13, no. 5 (2022). https://doi.org
/10.1002/wcc.783 .102 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Shepherd, Theodore G., et al. “Storylines: An Alternative Approach to Representing Uncertainty in
Physical Aspects of Climate Change. ”Climatic Change 151, nos. 3 –4 (2018): 555 –71.https://doi.org
/10.1007/s10584-018-2317-9 .
Sze, Julie, Tracy Perkins, Julie Anand, and Netra Chhetri. “Stories from the Field: Public Engagement
through the Environmental Humanities and Allied Disciplines. ”Resilience: A Journal of the Envi-
ronmental Humanities 5, no. 2 (2018): 49 –73.https://jstor.org/stable/10.5250/resilience.5.2.0049 .
Tribble, Evelyn, and John Sutton. “Cognitive Ecology as a Framework for Shakespearean Studies. ”
Shakespeare Studies 39 (2011): 94 –103.
van Dooren, Thom, Eben Kirksey, and Ursula Münster. “Multi-species Studies: Cultivating Arts of At-
tentiveness. ”Environmental Humanities 8, no. 1 (2016): 1 –23.https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919
-3527695 .
Wilensky, Uri. NetLogo. http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/ . Evanston, 1999.
Zellner, Moira L., Leilah Lyons, Charles Hoch, Jennifer Weizeorick, Carl Kunda, and Daniel Milz. “Mod-
eling, Learning, and Planning Together: An Application of Participatory Agent-Based Modelingto Environmental Planning. ”URISA Journal 24, no. 1 (2012): 77 –93.Shenk, Franz, and Gutowski / Minding the Gaps 103Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/83/2034206/83shenk.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

