ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)  253–276 doi: 10.60827/zfe/jsca.v149i2.1924 © 2024 Dietrich Reimer VerlagNegotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene:  
Mining Conflicts, Unacknowledged Loss  
and Responsibility for Absent Others
Felix Lussem
University of Cologne
Abstract:  Starting from the premise that modern legal institutions are increasingly challenged by the 
temporal and spatial implications of Anthropocene phenomena, this article shows how various civil-so -
ciety actors struggle for a more just approach to coal-exit policies in the Rhineland’s brown coal mining 
region. Contrary to general criticisms arguing that the Anthropocene narrative inherently disregards a differentiated perspective on issues of justice, I follow approaches that engage with the concept’s gen -
erative tensions and situate it ethnographically. The article goes on to suggest that growing awareness of the entanglements of industrial infrastructures with planetary crises has led to local protests against mining coinciding with an engagement for future planetary habitability. Whereas mining-induced losses were previously written off as a necessary sacrifice for growth and progress, I discuss how the affected inhabitants reframe them in this emerging context as injustices on a planetary scale. Motivated by a re -
sponsibility towards non-human others and coming generations, these coal-critical actors contest official transition measures that center on ‘green growth’ and instead call for situated policies that account for matters of concern related to accelerated planetary change. The article concludes by arguing that the pursuit of justice in the Anthropocene is fundamentally characterized by a responsibility towards absent others, spatially and temporally.[Anthropocene, (planetary) justice, mining conflicts, coal exit, civil-society, responsibility]
Introduction
It is early 2021, still a few months before devastating floods caused many deaths in the 
Ahr valley, brought large-scale damage to parts of the Erft region and the Rhineland, 
and reheated the cyclically waxing and waning media debate about climate change 
impacts in Germany. Of course, the coronavirus pandemic has been ongoing for about a year now, sparking some discussion about the links between accelerating anthropo -
genic habitat and biodiversity loss and the risks of zoonotic pandemics. Generally, 
however, this is being anticipated as a crisis that will be overcome by a mixture of 
patience and medical engineering. At that time, I am participating in a voluntary group of active citizens (‘Aktive’) at the Hambach open-pit mine in the Rhineland’s 
brown coal region, who are protesting against mining impacts and demand a greater 
recognition of planetary climate change, biodiversity loss and other problems related to the Anthropocene in regional politics. We are mostly meeting in virtual calls or com -
254 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
municating via email, owing to public health restrictions or voluntary precautions. The 
group is all that remains of a larger self-organized network of coal-critical civil-society 
actors who had gathered in the mining region around the installation of the so-called 
Kohlekommission  (‘Coal Commission’) which was in session from summer 2018 until 
early 2019.1 This commission was itself inaugurated by the federal government to de -
liberate over possible coal-exit paths and the accompanying frameworks for structural transition ( Strukturwandel ) from an economy based on fossil fuels to renewable energy 
generation in Germany’s brown coal regions, after the country ratified the Paris Agree -
ment and set out its national emission goals. 
As we ruminate on possible ideas for regeneration of the damaged landscape at the 
mines, a curious message is spreading on social media and in the news, profoundly tied to the group’s own concerns: in what is dubbed a ground-breaking decision, the Ger -
man constitutional court judged partly in favour of a joint lawsuit initiated by climate activists and environmental associations targeting the recently adopted national climate protection law (‘Klimaschutzgesetz’). The court did indeed not support the general 
claim that the German government would fail to meet its constitutionally stipulated 
responsibility for climate mitigation in absolute terms. However, the judges did reason that the complainants’ fundamental rights were being violated because the quantities of emissions permitted by the bill until 2030 will substantially reduce the remaining 
CO
2budget after that date, thereby endangering virtually all of the claimants’ rights 
to freedom protected by the constitution. On the one hand, the court’s reasoning did acknowledge that CO
2-related uses of freedom will most likely have to be completely 
abolished if ‘climate neutrality’ is to be reached eventually. But its decision only obliged 
lawmakers to revise existing legislation in a way that ensures a more just distribution 
of the burden of climate protection between generations on the basis of ‘intertemporal’ 
fundamental rights of freedom (‘intertemporale Freiheitssicherung’).2 The constitu -
tional court’s reasoning thus not only concedes the deep conjuncture between liberal democratic freedoms and fossil-fuel use that political theorist Timothy Mitchell (2009) 
has so vividly identified: it also addresses the threats to those freedoms posed by climate 
change, famously alluded to by postcolonial historian Dipesh Chakrabarty (2009). This ruling by Germany’s highest federal court of justice is therefore remarkable in 
that it declares climate protection a matter of constitutional priority and qualifies the 
conventional concept of freedom in light of intergenerational justice concerns as they relate to anthropogenic climate change. Some of my interlocutors indeed consider it a partial success that climate protection oriented to the current state of research and 
international agreements has become a litigious matter nationally, and most appreciate 
that the climate legislation in place has to be adjusted accordingly. Yet, many are rather cautious about what impact these abstract formulations will actually have on the day-
1 https://revierperspektiven-rheinland.de/koordinierungskreis/ 
2 https://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Pressemitteilungen/DE/2021/bvg21-031.
html 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  255
to-day activities of anti-coal activism and their joint engagement in environmental and 
social concerns.
The fact that the past and present freedoms claimed by certain parts of humanity 
are impinging on future planetary habitability is one of the most general discoveries to have been woven into the space-time configuration referred to as the Anthropocene (cf. Chakrabarty 2021). In this context, the remarkable decision by the constitutional court illustrates how the established procedures of legal institutions – the principal 
vehicles for pursuing justice in liberal democracies – are being substantially challenged 
by the temporal and spatial scales of Anthropocene phenomena, as questions of fu -
ture burden-sharing become urgent matters in the here and now. Departing from this 
point, I will explore critical civil-society actors’ extra-legal and legal struggles for a more 
just approach towards the energy transition that not only includes industrial workers’ interests but also anthropocenic concerns beyond CO
2-reduction, as well as the per -
spectives of local communities regarding their region’s future. First, the article briefly 
summarizes the history of brown coal extraction in the Rhineland and introduces the 
current situation. Then, it offers a reflection on positionality in contested fields of trans -
formation research, followed by a section that discusses the literature on extractivism and questions of justice in the Anthropocene. The next two sections trace recent devel -
opments in the local resistance to the mining industry in the context of anthropogenic climate change and the impending exit from coal. The penultimate section describes the critical engagement of self-organized civil-society actors oriented on the ideal of a ‘sustainable transition’. Motivated by a responsibility towards non-human others and 
the coming generations, these coal-critical actors contest official transition measures 
that center on ideologies of ‘green growth’. Instead, they call for situated policies that account for matters of concern related to accelerated planetary change. The article then 
concludes by arguing that the pursuit of justice in the Anthropocene is fundamentally 
characterized by a responsibility towards absent others, spatially and temporally.
Brown Coal Extraction in Germany’s Rhineland Region
The Rhineland’s mining district ( Rheinisches Revier3) is a relatively rural area, which lies 
between the urban centres of Cologne, Aachen and Mönchengladbach, thus bordering 
on Germany’s largest metropolitan area, the Rhine-Ruhr region. Historically this peri-
urban area is characterized by agricultural land-use, large stretches of woodland and a comparatively low population density. It also has a long history of lignite or brown coal extraction, a soft, combustible rock geologically formed from compressed peat 
with a relatively low energy value and therefore a high environmental impact when 
3 Curiously, this mining-centred denomination was not widely used in public discourse to refer to the 
area before political plans to phase out the coal industry became more concrete.
256 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
burned. The vast seams of brown coal currently exploited by some of the world’s largest 
excavators in depths of up to 400 meters below the surface formed in the lower Rhine 
bay more than 10 million years ago. While small-scale extraction of deposits located 
closer to the surface existed before that, the Rhineland’s modern brown coal industry developed around the end of the 19
th century in the context of Germany’s accelerating 
industrialization. At first, brown coal was mainly used for the production of heating briquettes and then increasingly in generating electricity in newly constructed power plants (Jansen 2017). 
As a domestic energy source, brown coal played a vital role in Nazi-Germany’s war 
economy and its concomitant policy of energy autarky. After World War II and the country’s partition, brown coal extraction in the Rhineland was further intensified to supply West Germany’s growing population and expanding economy with heat and electricity. Unlike domestic black coal that could not compete with cheaper black 
coal on the liberalizing world market, brown coal is not traded internationally because 
transport costs would quickly exceed the resource’s energy value. For this reason it became an important building block for national energy security ( Energiesicherheit ) as 
a ‘cheap’ and reliable energy source (Kierdorf 2018). With the postwar modernization 
of the brown coal industry and the development of large-scale surface mines ( Großtage -
baue), the negative environmental and social impacts of resource extraction increased 
significantly. To date, more than 40,000 people in the Rhineland have had to relocate for mine expansion, scores of villages have been devastated, and fertile farmland and 
large forest areas destroyed.
4 
In the wake of the 1970s’ oil shock and the growing need for a domestic energy 
supply, brown coal extraction received a further push, which resulted in the devel -
opment of the currently still operating large-scale surface mines Hambach, Garzweiler  
and Inden . Local resistance to mining mostly came from the Hambachgruppe , a group 
of young scholars from the Technical University of Aachen that formed in the late 
1970s and was active throughout the 1980s (cf. Hambachgruppe 1985). Otherwise, 
opponents of brown coal extraction were for the most part politically sidelined, their concerns never achieving widespread public support in the mining region, let alone in 
the rest of the country. After Germany’s reunification, rationalization measures led to 
a stark decrease in employment in the brown coal industry over the following decade. This is why it can be argued – and I have often heard this argument from opponents of mining during my research – that the ‘structural transition’ has already largely been 
accomplished in the Rhineland’s mining region, at least when it comes to the brown 
coal industry as a factor in regional employment (cf. Oei et al. 2020). 
As the extractive industry partly forfeited its prominent position in the region’s 
economy, opposition to mining in the Rhineland received a vital impulse from the 
growing climate movement after 2010. Besides climate camps and spectacular protest 
4 Cf. https://www.bund-nrw.de/themen/braunkohle/hintergruende-und-publikationen/verheizte-hei-
mat/ 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  257
actions conducted at the mines, the most important development in this context was 
the occupation of the forest at the Hambach mine. In 2012 a small group of younger 
activists from outside of the region built treehouses and other protest infrastructure 
in the remaining patch of a formerly continuous forest area that had been cleared for brown coal extraction (cf. Krøijer 2020). Their goal was to protect it from further mine expansions and to protest against the global environmental impacts of the brown coal industry.
5 Even though the activists were regularly evicted by police to enable planned 
expansions, their presence reinvigorated local resistance to the extractive industry, brought unprecedented media attention to the mining region and contributed to the public problematization of brown coal as a domestic driver of anthropogenic climate change. The rising awareness of the links between fossil-fuel use and planetary trans -
formation in German politics culminated in the federal government’s decision to phase 
out the brown coal industry as a national contribution to the Paris  Agreement’s  climate 
goals ratified in 2016. 
In 2018, the year I started my dissertation research, the federal government even -
tually inaugurated a commission with the mandate to negotiate a wide public con -
sensus over the timeframe and conditions of exiting from coal. This so-called Coal 
Commission
6 consisted of politicians, industry and union functionaries, scientists and 
representatives of environmental associations, as well as one citizen to represent the mining region in the west and one for the mining regions in the east of Germany. In 
the case of the Rhineland’s mining region the person invited to represent affected cit -
izens was a longstanding opponent of the coal industry and a member of the most vocal 
citizens’ initiative against mining. Her appointment to the commission was a huge suc -
cess for the regional anti-coal movement and sparked the formation of a self-organized 
network of locally active opponents of mining. During the period the coal-exit com -
mission was in session in Berlin from the summer of 2018 until early 2019, this local 
‘coordination circle’ ( zivilgesellschaftlicher  Koordinierungskreis ) regularly assembled in 
a Protestant community centre in a village close to the Hambach mine. The group of 
usually twenty to forty participants was made up of mining-affected citizens, activists 
from the forest occupation, members of protest groups and anti-mining initiatives, members of environmental organizations, church groups and local representatives from 
the Left and Green Party, among other local stakeholders. While most of the regular 
participants were already connected to the fields of environmental protection, sustain -
able energy, or anti-coal activism prior to the commission’s commencement, quite a few 
5 In 2018, three of the Rhineland’s brown coal-fired power plants were in the top five of the EU’s 
largest single emitters of CO2. Cf. https://www.energiezukunft.eu/klimawandel/von-den-10-groessten-
klimasuendern-kommen-7-aus-deutschland/ 
6 The official name was Kommission ’Wachstum, Strukturwandel und Beschäftigung’, or ‘Commission for 
Growth, Structural T ransition and Employment’, signaling the commission’s economic bias (cf. KWSB 
2019).
258 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
took this officially inaugurated localization of global climate politics as an opportunity 
to become more involved. 
After conducting a number of more formal interviews with key members, I joined 
the circle’s meetings in the autumn of 2018, when the conflict around the contested Hambach forest was escalating. At that time, coal-critical actors and environmentalists demanded the forest be protected and further mine expansions halted, at least for as long as the commission was debating a framework for exiting coal. On the other hand, 
the energy company operating the Rhineland’s brown coal mines and power plants 
insisted on its right to exploit the coal deposits under the remaining forest, which incited large-scale protests and caused the biggest police operation ever conducted in 
the state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
7 During most of the meetings I attended, the 
local commission representative informed the participants about recent commission proceedings and asked for pressing issues to be brought up in negotiations with the 
commission. After that, the participants typically exchanged information about recent events surrounding the conflict around mining, coordinated protest activities, and dis -
cussed further steps to influence coal-exit policies from a local perspective. With the support of environmental organizations and larger protest networks, and backed by 
general public opinion, the locally active coal-critical actors ultimately achieved their 
goal of stopping the Hambach mine when the coal-exit commission officially suggest -
ed protecting the remaining forest at the edge of the mine in its final report, and both 
state and federal governments announced they would comply with this recommen -
dation (Grothus and Setton 2020).
‘Passively’ Engaged Transformation Research
Being from the Rhineland’s brown coal region myself,8 I still somewhat hazily re -
member how my mother, who worked in one of the Umsiedlungsdörfer  (‘relocation 
villages’), told me about mining-induced displacements and the demolition of whole 
landscapes for brown coal extraction around the time of my elementary school. Look -
ing back, this is one of my first memories of injustice beyond my immediate individual involvement, as even my childhood self could not fathom how the state coerces its 
citizens to leave their homes for a mining company to dig coal out of the ground. 
More than two decades later, I returned to this constellation of problem as a doctoral researcher interested in local negotiations over exiting coal and climate change. Before 
my dissertation project, I was not involved in opposition to mining in the Rhineland 
7 Cf. https://www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/hambacher-forst-gruene-werfen-nrw-landesregie-
rung-taeuschung-der-oeffentlichkeit-vor-a-bec05674-fb0a-4fc8-99ba-7013c714edfb 
8 Until its recent shutdown, my hometown hosted the largest facility for the production of heating bri-
quettes in western Germany.
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  259
and only followed the conflict sporadically on the news. But to gain access to the 
activities of coal-critical civil-society actors it has been advantageous and sometimes 
downright necessary to maintain a certain distance from the mining industry. This has 
led me to adopt an approach oriented towards ‘interface ethnography’ (Ortner 2010), where I mainly focus on public communication strategies or interactions with mining opponents with regard to industry actors. My own research experience thus borders on activist ethnography without being fully committed to it, as I am consciously making 
efforts to establish at least some level of reflexive distance from my engaged access to 
the field. 
Although I share most concerns and agree with many of my interlocutors’ opinions 
on the topics of exiting coal, transition policies and eco-social politics, this distancing results in a kind of ‘passive’ engagement in which I do contribute to the group’s activ -
ities, but for the most part only if explicitly approached or to maintain rapport. The situational dynamics can sometimes mean deeper engagement such as co-writing an 
alternative concept for the agroecological development of post-mining landscapes and 
even jointly presenting it to officials of the state ministry for the environment or func -
tionaries of the locally active mining company. Given my status as a doctoral research -
er with limited resources who is not part of a larger institutional research project, I can often only contribute minimally to my interlocutors’ activities, not least because they are already well connected with various actors in the fields of NGOs, politics and science. Common assumptions about the relatively privileged and powerful position 
of ethnographers in researching mining-affected communities (cf. Bainton and Skrzy -
pek 2022), which primarily developed in the context of research in the Global South, 
are therefore less applicable to my own ethnographic experience. So when we are not working to acquire knowledge about a mining-related issue together, I mostly learn 
from my interlocutors about the history, politics and impacts of the lignite mining 
complex. In that regard, my research experience comes closer to the educational ap -
proach outlined by Mario Krämer in this special issue. In practice, however, this inter -
est in learning about mining-related issues from their perspective while participating 
in activities critical of the coal industry at times causes awkward positioning vis-à-vis 
my interlocutors, who typically have a clear mission and standpoint regarding per -
ceived injustices. 
In reflecting on doing research in the contested field of structural transition, so -
cial and political scientists Herberg and colleagues have coined the term ‘committed transformation research’ ( engagierte Transformationsforschung ). Instead of taking a per -
spective from ‘nowhere’, they argue, committed researchers are searching for a vantage 
point in the middle of the transformation process (Herberg et al. 2021:25). Granted 
that this situatedness is one of the basic principles of ethnographic research, their term nonetheless illuminates my own approach and stresses that even less ethnographically oriented social sciences recognize the impossibility of establishing an ‘objective’ dis -
tance in complex negotiation processes associated with planetary change. In this con -
text of unavoidable personal implications, Kim Fortun formulates a justice-oriented 
260 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
direction for a committed anthropology in the Anthropocene, which identifies eth -
nographic research with the critical practices of engaged actors: 
We [here: anthropologists] work from soiled grounds, in an atmosphere thick with 
the byproducts of fossil-fuel-intensive political and economic systems. Our an -
thropologies to come must work to dislodge the future these systems so forcefully anteriorize. (Fortun 2014:324)
Matters of Justice and Anthropocene Concerns
While mining conflicts and environmental justice are central topics in the anthropol -
ogy of resource extraction, conventionally the field has focused more on the colonial legacies of extractivism (cf. Acuña 2015; Appel 2019; Ferguson 1999; Kirsch 2014; Li 
2015; Pijpers and Eriksen 2018) than on Europe’s centres of resource accumulation. 
However, with the ongoing acceleration of planetary crises, it is becoming clear that even the traditional beneficiaries of ecologically unequal exchange  (Hornborg 2009) are 
increasingly affected by the ruinous effects of extractivist activities, which calls for 
a more symmetrical study of mining impacts. Accordingly, the research interest in 
brown coal mining in Germany is growing in the recent context of the impending phasing out of coal and policies for the structural transition. Whereas the Rhineland’s mining region has been at the centre of the current wave of climate protests and resis -
tance to mining, anthropological research has so far tended to focus instead on the two remaining brown coal regions in the former GDR or East Germany (cf. Everts et al. 2023; Müller 2019; Müller 2021). To mitigate possible social issues related to plans to 
phase out coal, the concept of a ‘just transition’ is increasingly being applied in both 
policy and research. However, as my ethnographic research with opponents of mining suggests, in practice the concept is primarily geared towards the interests of industrial workers and often tends to eclipse broader issues of environmental justice, which are 
becoming more and more urgent in the Anthropocene. 
Contrary to the perspective taken in this article, anthropologists and other social 
scientists have criticized the Anthropocene concept for various reasons, often connect -
ed to issues of (environmental) justice. For example, two of the most prominent critics, 
Alf Hornborg and Andreas Malm, argue that the ‘dominant Anthropocene narrative’ is overwhelmingly informed by natural-science perspectives and is therefore ahistor -
ical and socio-economically undifferentiated. By positing the whole of humanity as a 
species actor responsible for accelerated environmental change, the concept not only 
veils the ‘sociogenic’ nature of problems related to the Anthropocene – their historical rootedness in capitalist formations of ecologically unequal exchange – but also over -
looks the vastly unequal distribution of vulnerabilities with potentially disastrous de -
politicizing effects (Malm and Hornborg 2014). While Hornborg and Malm, coming 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  261
from a Marxist perspective, do not at all take exception to the central focus on humans, 
several other critics like Donna Haraway have taken the Anthropocene concept to task 
exactly for its anthropocentrism, supposedly inscribed into its very name (Haraway et 
al. 2016). Such criticisms have spurred the suggestion of a variety of alternative con -
cepts from the humanities and social sciences, aimed at decentring or entirely replacing the Anthropocene concept, including the Capitalocene , Plantationocene , Technocene  or 
Haraway’s own Chthulucene  (Antweiler 2022). 
On the other hand, in a short piece on ‘The Anthropocene and Environmental 
Justice’, the environmental humanities scholar Rob Nixon urges social scientists not to shun the concept completely and risk letting technocrats or economic interest groups 
define the public meaning of the Anthropocene. Instead, he suggests taking up the 
particular challenges Anthropocene thinking poses to customary approaches to justice, despite all conceptual reservations. Nixon thus urges humanities scholars to work as ‘stratigraphers’ who combine geohistorical perspectives with analyses of social stratifi -
cation and ‘tease out the complex connections between rising atmospheric CO
2 levels, 
the rising oceans, and rising levels of inequality, connections that are not reducible to a centralized species story’ (Nixon 2016:31). 
In a recent contribution to Anthropology Today , Manuela Tassan argues in a similar 
direction. She briefly retraces the environmental justice movement’s genealogy and shows how its early focus on environmental racism  crucially amended then popular 
ideas of the global risk society . However, Tassan argues that the ‘movement mainly of -
fered a “technicist” anthropocentric reading of the “environment”’ as background to human action, thus being more concerned with issues of distributive equity than with an expansion of justice to the non-human or the environment itself (Tassan 2022:13). 
In light of the material-symbolic unsettling of the nature-culture dichotomy that the 
Anthropocene constitutes (cf. Latour 2014), Tassan suggests decentralizing the ‘an -
thropocentric view of the environment without losing sight of social equity issues’. She therefore even goes beyond Nixon and reformulates environmental justice in the 
Anthropocene as a ‘multispecies issue’ (Tassan 2022:14–15). Far from viewing it as in -
trinsically anthropocentric, she thus seems to employ the Anthropocene – in the words 
of Liana Chua and Hannah Fair – as a ‘lens onto the world’ that raises questions about 
how categories such as ‘human’ or ‘non-human’, ‘nature’ or ‘culture’ are presently being 
transformed (Chua and Fair 2019:13). 
In their widely received plea to ‘retool’ the discipline of anthropology for the chal -
lenges of the Anthropocene, Anna Tsing, Andrew Mathews and Nils Bubandt have 
already pushed in the same direction of simultaneously accounting for multispecies 
relations, histories of inequality and geological scales in ethnographic research (Tsing et al. 2019). The authors suggest directing ethnographic attention to the emergence of An -
thropocene Patches  to capture the entanglements, tensions and contradictions between 
particular sites and the universal ‘geostory’ of the Anthropocene. While Tsing et al. understand patches as empirically accessible patterns of multispecies relations, they are also supposed to be ‘sites for knowing intersectional inequalities among humans’ and 
262 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
thus offer the possibility of a situated, justice-sensitive approach to the temporal and 
spatial complexities of the Anthropocene (Tsing et al. 2019:S194). 
Despite some influential criticisms, there therefore seems to be no inherent reason 
for the Anthropocene concept not to permit acknowledging differences in the dis -
tribution of risk or vulnerability. What it does elucidate, however, is that there will ultimately be no possibility of avoiding its impacts, for the Anthropocene is coter -
minous with the continuing breakdown of mechanisms that externalize the negative 
effects of industrial modernity into other times and places. As industrial progress and 
the unequal accumulation of wealth depends on this destructive process of external -
ization, the Anthropocene is fundamentally marked by the undeniable return of pre -
viously externalized elements,
9 whether in the form of impending climate catastrophe, 
an increasing number of marginalized people demanding their fair share of wealth and 
safety, or even the coronavirus pandemic (cf. Lessenich 2018). According to such con -
siderations, questions of (human) justice are not necessarily discounted by the scales 
associated with the Anthropocene and might even become more urgent if articulated with planetary conditions with situated attentiveness. Since Anthropocene conditions warrant a political recentring on the more-than-human meshwork of live-ability, social 
justice struggles, and a less anthropocentric perception of environmental issues can 
potentially reinforce each other instead of being mutually exclusive. 
Nonetheless, tensions between systemic perspectives and concrete matters remain 
in this context that cannot easily be unravelled on either side of the knot, as Andrew Mathews implies in emphasizing temporal matters: 
There is, however, a structural tension between the urgencies of focusing on a par -
ticular mine, dam, or toxic waste site and a longue durée anthropological analysis of the processes that have produced environmental degradation and social deprivation. 
[…] This tension between long-term change and the urgencies of policy or politics is 
both productive and problematic. (Mathews 2020:76)
In attending to such tensions, this contribution follows Donna Haraway’s now classical injunction to ‘stay with the trouble’ in the sense of ethnographically exploring how different actors navigate possible contradictions between urgent matters and planetary 
concerns (Haraway 2016). Accordingly, I understand my field-site at the Hambach 
mine as an ‘Anthropocene patch’ (Tsing et al. 2019), where planetary issues are nego -
tiated in conjunction with social injustices, destructive extraction and environmental care. 
9 Thus, in a vital modification of Chakrabarty (2009: 221), there will most likely be ‘lifeboats [...] for 
the rich’ in the Anthropocene, yet these will not allow them to evade precarities quite in the same way as 
in regard to earlier upheavals of economic globalization. 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  263
Expanding the Backyard: Dealing with Injustices beyond  
Official Institutions 
Adhering to the views of coal-critical locals undoubtedly privileges a partial perspective 
of the universalizing geostory of the Anthropocene. Yet, such a situated approach can complicate narratives of change on a planetary scale and account for how concerns 
related to the Anthropocene make a difference in matters of the everyday. Even though 
my interlocutors do not actively utilize the Anthropocene concept, the realization that they are living in a time of inextricable anthropogenic poly-crises of planetary scale is one of the fundamental insights motivating their engagement. During a debate about possible next steps in the face of global impacts of extractivist destruction, one senior 
participant of the ‘coordination circle’ boiled it down as follows: 
I do not think we always realize how dramatic the situation is. […] The damage 
is already enormous, but politicians are looking the other way – all the alarm bells should be ringing!
10 
While some of the core members of the local anti-mining network feel connected to the climate justice movement, the group usually does not frame its actions in terms 
of a fight for justice , but more against locally experienced injustices  related to mining 
activities. As Sandra Brunnegger notes, justice, especially outside juridical contexts, 
tends to remain tacit, while injustices are often vividly felt and clearly expressed (Brun -
negger 2019). On a practical level, therefore, justice can be understood in terms of what 
is lacking in a specific context to achieve a desired state of things. It serves as an under -
determined guiding principle that allows ‘concerned agents’ (Wolf and Zenker, this 
issue) to denounce certain matters as unjust and thus differentiates current conditions 
from possible, more desirable futures. Justice, it can thus be said, operates as a force 
of the otherwise which extends the call for responsibility to formerly unacknowledged concerns. 
In Germany, the extraction and burning of brown coal for energy generation is still 
officially defined as an indispensable contribution to the national common good ( Allge-
meinwohl ). This legal-political definition of brown coal mining and burning as serving 
the general public interest establishes a formal state of exception in the country’s brown coal regions that enables most of the injustices experienced by the affected inhabitants 
to occur relatively unchallenged. For decades now, this legal exception has allowed 
mining law to trump civil rights, authorizing the expropriation and displacement of local inhabitants and the destruction of landscapes for the sake of expanding vast open-pit mines. Needless to say, the destruction of the familiar landscape and the loss of their 
homes are incontrovertibly unjust for the human as well as non-human populations 
10 Original conversations held in German. All translations by the author.
264 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
in the Rhineland’s ‘energy sacrifice zone’ (Lerner 2010). Yet, the local extraction of 
lignite was largely inscribed into a national narrative of progress, first with imperialist 
underpinnings, then, after the founding of the Federal Republic, with welfare-state 
characteristics and later on, following reunification, with stronger neoliberal tendencies basically equating social progress with economic growth (Herberg et al. 2021). 
Guaranteeing the domestic supply of cheap energy, brown coal generally function -
ed as a material and symbolic resource for national prosperity and the promise of a 
better future, or at least the continuation of current socioeconomic conditions for the 
majority of the population. This dominant narrative of industrial progress construed unequal environmental burdens as a necessary sacrifice for economic growth rather 
than injustice. It also sustained a far-reaching ideology of the reversibility of the neg -
ative effects of mining. In line with this ideology, displaced persons were financially 
compensated, demolished villages rebuilt in other places and destroyed (agricultural) landscapes ‘recultivated’. Thus, according to the locally active energy corporation, 
mining-induced losses were not only fully offset by such measures of compensation, 
but resource extraction ultimately led into a better future, with more modern com -
munities and ‘prettier’ landscapes (Brock 2023). 
This hegemonic alignment of coal-mining with the general public interest or na -
tional common good eventually resulted in an ambivalent relationship between critical civil-society actors and state institutions in the Rhineland’s brown coal region. After all, positioning oneself against the coal industry ultimately means acting against the 
state’s interest. Moreover, the factually implemented state of exception which assigns 
special privileges to mining structurally calls for an expansion of engagement beyond legal procedures and representative politics to achieve the public acknowledgement of marginalized concerns, as the following example of a local initiative against mining 
impacts illustrates.
One of my first contacts in the field of mining conflicts and coal-exit policies was 
Thomas,
11 who lives in a village close to the Hambach mine. He usually co-hosts the 
sessions of the informal circle of coal-critical citizens together with the local represent -
ative in the coal-exit commission, and he has developed into one of the leading voices 
of the local anti-coal movement over the past years. In one of our first meetings at the contested Hambach forest, he told me how the local commission member, himself and other villagers founded a citizen’s initiative ( Bürgerinitiative ) years ago which acted as 
the nucleus for the larger civil-society platform formed during commission negotiations. Originally, their aim was to prevent the relocation of the nearby highway closer to their homes by protesting about the unjust burden of an anticipated loss of quality of life 
(Lebensqualität ). The state and local administration deemed this large-scale infrastruc -
tural intervention necessary for the mining company to expand the Hambach mine, 
one of Germany’s largest single sources for CO
2 emissions, further and allow a smooth 
11 All the names in this article have been changed by the author.
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  265
continuation of extractive activities. To stop this destructive project, the members of 
the initiative made efforts to educate the public about possible noise and air pollution 
resulting from the highway’s relocation and tried to convince politicians to support 
their concerns. They also supported a joint lawsuit by environmentalist associations to halt the mining-induced relocation, which was ultimately rejected by the Federal Administrative Court in Leipzig. One member of the initiative described the course of the trial to me as an experience that has severely shaken his confidence in democratic 
procedures, since independent legal experts assured him, Thomas, and their fellow 
claimants of at least a partial success after the main session. He went on to criticize the fact that, instead of independent assessments, the court relied heavily on data provided 
by the energy company for its decision. He also told me that he later learned from ‘in -
formed circles’ that the lawsuit was ultimately only narrowly rejected: 
We thought that there had to be another massive exertion of influence [after the 
court session], there is really no other way to explain it – but that is idle talk, that is speculation […] 
Until the appointment of ‘one of their own’ to the coal-exit commisson, this experi -
ence of defeat was followed by numerous other setbacks in their involvement against the injustices resulting from what many involved actors perceive as worryingly close ties between state institutions and the energy industry. But even though the actors associated with the initiative are predominantly middle-class, white German citizens, 
who can habitually expect the justice system to work in their favour and politicians 
to represent a great deal of their concerns, such experiences of ‘betrayal’ did not lead them to indulge in demobilizing cynicism or to resort to a ‘politics of resentment’ (cf. Krämer, this issue). Instead, they doubled down on their call for more democracy and 
stronger participation in matters of industrial politics, as Thomas explained to me:
That [court decision] was devastating for us, and then we immediately sat down 
together and said, What do we do now? […] And for me it was clear: Now more than ever, now we have to organize with everything we’ve got against the real issue behind it, because if they treat us the same way when it comes to mining, what else 
will be in store for us?... Then we asked ourselves the question for whom we are 
doing this – because when we turn against RWE [the energy corporation respon -
sible for mining in the area], it was clear that there are some who support us openly 
here in the village, some who support us covertly because they agree with us but do 
not want to show themselves, but we also have many against us! Then I said at some point ‘I’m doing this for me, for my own personal attitudes and for our children’, and that was actually, from that moment on, the second wave of our initiative. It 
soon became clear that we will conduct it this way and position ourselves quite 
openly against fossil fuels and against RWE.
This first-hand experience of injustice related to the court as a public judicial in -
stitution which they expected to protect their rights as citizens made the members of 
266 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
the initiative come to the resolution that they should rely less on legal procedures or 
representative politics. Rather, they decided to resort to autonomous engagement and 
actively search for allies in environmentalism and social movements going forward. As 
the initiative’s original motivation placed a stronger emphasis on preventing the loss of quality of life in their immediate ‘backyard’, transitioning to focus more directly on matters of mining and the burning of fossil fuels made them gradually expand their scope towards broader injustices related to the coal industry.
12 
As they were still struggling to gain support for their concerns in the villages around 
the mines, many coal-critical civil-society actors13 welcomed the first forest occupation 
in 2012 by younger activists from outside the region as a breath of fresh air, which, 
moreover, brought about increasing media attention to the issues surrounding brown 
coal mining. Together with public debates about the causal relationship between the domestic coal industry and anthropogenic climate change gaining momentum over the years, the activists’ translocal perspective and radical devotion
14 further inspired 
members of the initiative and other mining opponents to connect local mining impacts 
more concretely to processes of accelerated planetary change.
Shifting ‘Public Interest’ from Below: Articulating Locally 
Experienced Injustices to Planetary Damage 
Whereas the inauguration of the coal-exit commission was generally embraced as a po -
litical confirmation of the end of the hegemony of brown coal extraction in the region, 
even during and after the commission, opponents of mining had to sustain numerous 
injustices related to the industry’s privileged position. In the autumn of 2018 for exam -
ple, various civil-society actors, politicians and media personalities publicly demanded a moratorium for the clearing of the forest at the Hambach mine while the commission 
12 As an effort to forge international connections with other climate and environmental activists, for 
example, they even hosted the ‘Pacific Climate Warriors’, a grassroots movement for climate justice from 
the Pacific island states during the international climate policy negotiations at COP 23 in Bonn.13 Coal-critical residents often refer to themselves as Zivilgesellschaft or zivilgesellschaftliche Akteure to 
give further legitimacy to their non-institutionalized, ‘informal’ engagement in relation to politicians, corporate actors or unions and to differentiate their positioning as actively engaged local citizens from more radical activists, as well as more professional NGOs or environmental associations active in the field. 14 Despite feeling a general indebtedness to the forest squatters’ devoted struggle, the civil-society 
actors do not always agree with their interpretation of ‘civil disobedience’ and regularly feel the need to distance themselves publicly from some of their more radical activities. This is especially the case when industrial actors or conservative politicians and media accuse the local residents of supporting alleged acts of ‘climate terrorism’, conducted by radical activists. 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  267
was negotiating a national coal-exit path and while a lawsuit to recognize the highly 
biodiverse old-growth forest as a protected area was still pending. In spite of this, the 
conservative-led state government of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW) escalated the 
conflict in concert with the mining company by conducting the largest police op -
eration the state has ever seen with the aim of removing the forest occupation. During the operation, which lasted several days, many protesters and police were injured, large parts of the forest severely damaged, and one person fell off the bridge of a treehouse 
in the turmoil and died. Shortly after this tragic incident, the Higher Administrative 
Court in Münster finally enacted a stop on clearing the forest while the lawsuit to protect the forest ecosystem was still pending. In 2021, the Administrative Court in 
Cologne even declared the entire police operation illegal, deeming the government’s 
reasoning for evicting the activists from their treehouses because of fire-safety regu -
lations as a pretext to enable RWE to utilize the territory for extraction.
15 For many of 
my interlocutors, such publicly recognized occurrences are only the tip of the iceberg showing how the state’s institutions act as proxy for the mining company. This is why 
some of them have come to speak of ‘NRWE’ in this context to signify the indis -
tinguishability between administration and energy corporation regarding issues related 
to coal-mining in the state of NRW. 
In early 2019 the coal-exit commission presented the final compromise negotiated 
by its members, the so-called Kohlekompromiss . This document served as the basis for 
Germany’s climate protection law that was later declared insufficient by the constitu -
tional court. Even though it was already obvious at the time that the planned exit path for the domestic coal industry in the compromise was not in line with national climate-
protection goals, the Rhineland’s local representative and other coal-critical commis -
sion members ultimately supported the negotiated outcome to break the logjam of 
German climate policy. Taken together, these examples show that in recent years many 
of the coal-critical actors’ worries have proved to be at least partially valid. While some 
of their demands have ultimately been met by the courts, this often happens only after the mining company and the government have created ineluctable material facts such as the destruction of protest infrastructure or even entire landscape patches (Lussem 
2021). So although the increasingly undeniable links between climate change and 
burning fossil fuels have tended to tip legal judgements more in favour of coal-critical voices, the judicial system generally figures as a slow force in urgent matters of plan -
etary justice (cf. Johnson and Sigona 2022). While this habitually delayed recognition of concerns related to the brown coal industry which my interlocutors regularly experi -
ence is certainly also rooted in institutional procedures that are not explicitly part of my research, in countless instances legal institutions still effectively sanction injustices 
by allowing the avoidance of responsibility for Anthropocene phenomena to continue. 
15 More recently, however, in June 2023, the Higher Administrative Court of NRW revised this deci-
sion and ultimately declared the operation legal. Cf. http://www.justiz.nrw.de/nrwe/ovgs/ovg_nrw/
j2023/7_A_2635_21_Urteil_20230616.html 
268 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
My coal-critical interlocutors therefore vehemently criticize the state’s contradictory 
position in coal-exit politics, which on the one hand acknowledges the coal industry’s 
opposition to the general public interest of ensuring a live-able future for all, while on 
the other hand still allowing it to operate within a legal state of exception based on the national common good of ‘energy security’ ( Versorgungssicherheit ).
These localized negotiations are currently contributing to the wider redefinition of 
the domestic coal industry as an actor that might have supported economic growth and 
prosperity historically, but only at the incalculable cost of threatening a liveable future 
on a planetary scale. This ongoing redefinition also entails the erosion of the ideology of the general reversibility of mining-induced damage. Instead of being ‘necessary sac -
rifices’ for the common good of energy security and associated promises of prosperity (cf. Bovensiepen 2018), losses related to coal-mining and burning then become entan -
gled with irreversible damage on a planetary scale, leading to a potentially catastrophic future. Whereas the mining company still adheres to the logic of offsetting damage 
locally in the future by investing in the construction of new villages and practices of 
landscape recultivation, coal-critical actors increasingly argue that such matters cannot be accounted for locally anymore since local resource extraction is inextricably linked 
to accelerated planetary change. In this way, referring to Anthropocene phenomena 
enables the affected residents to frame local damage as a matter of planetary justice and to challenge the idea that industrial actors could settle their debt once and for all and absolve themselves of all future responsibility by simply fulfilling their contractual 
obligations to complete post-mining restoration (cf. Lussem, forthcoming). 
Critical civil-society actors in the Rhineland’s brown coal region thus aim to rede -
fine the general public interest or Allgemeinwohl  to be guided not only by the blinkered 
promise of national prosperity, but also by other scales, actors and entities implicated in matters associated with the Anthropocene (cf. Barad 2019). As I garnered mostly 
from social media research and participation in public discussion forums, however, many people who profit from the coal industry’s activities in the region perceive cur -
rent phaseout plans as a grave injustice to them too. Members of the industrial union IGBCE ( Industriegewerkschaft Bergbau, Chemie, Energie ), for example, often argue that 
Germany’s contribution to global CO
2-emissions is minimal, whereas countries such 
as China, Russia or Indonesia keep increasing their exploitation of fossil fuels. While these actors usually do not deny the general necessity to transition to a carbon-neu -
tral economy, they often champion a ‘not now, not here’ approach and insist on their entitlement to ‘have stable jobs and make good money’, as one union spokesperson phrased it during a public debate. Sometimes criticizing anti-coal activists for mis -
using environmental problems such as climate change to push their own particularistic agendas, these industrial workers and local proponents of mining partly disavow the urgency my interlocutors ascribe to Anthropocene concerns and actively insist on their individual freedom to avoid responsibility for entanglements beyond their immediate 
lifeworld instead.
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  269
Situated Engagement: Dissensus and Transformations Towards  
a More Just Order for the Anthropocene
Aside from supporting the local commission member’s work, the self-organized co -
ordination circle was established to act as a grassroots organization in matters of struc -
tural transition policies after the end of the commission. As impending coal-exit and 
related processes of socioeconomic transition promised to break up the perceived nexus 
of state and industry to a degree, this also meant the outlook for more democratic par -
ticipation in regional future-making brightened for many of my interlocutors. Against official plans for a transition oriented towards securing jobs and energy supplies under the aegis of ‘green (industrial) growth’, the group developed its own guidelines for an 
eco-socially sustainable development. Focusing on ending the destructive exploitation 
of the environment and stopping dispossession for corporate profit, their engagement is connected to aspirations to regain political agency in the search for a ‘good life’ beyond 
the imperatives of economic growth. An integral part of this is the stated desire to ‘re -
connect’ with a home region many felt alienated from because of drastic environmental 
transformation and a related lack of possibilities for democratic participation ( Mit-
bestimmung ). Striving for stronger participation in a region dominated by industrial 
interests, at first many of the civil-society actors appreciated the public opportunities to participate in development policies which state government and communal admin -
istrations offered following the official inauguration of the structural transition process 
(Kamlage et al. 2021). 
Soon however, most of them grew increasingly frustrated because the very limited 
and highly pre-formatted occasions provided by the responsible development agency gave little room for articulating real dissensus in fundamental questions regarding the 
future relationship between economic growth and ecological survival (cf. Eriksen & Schober 2018). Furthermore, the official planning agency responsible for coordinating structural transition measures in the region cooperates closely with the mining compa -
ny. This led some of my interlocutors to worry that the participation process might not only distract them from more impactful engagement on their own terms: they also sus -
pected that their criticisms could at worst be co-opted to legitimize transition policies that do not break with hegemonic industrialism (cf. Fortun 2014). Thus, after a brief 
period of rapprochement, the group decided to assert a more critical stance publicly 
and to refocus its engagement outside officially prescribed institutions, to actively shape the structural transition process in a socially and ecologically just direction. However, 
when the commission ended, this self-organized network of active citizens lost some 
of its momentum and struggled to develop a unifying structure and common modus operandi. The outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic further complicated the process of reorganization so that only a fraction of the larger group is currently still active 
(Lussem 2020). 
270 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
Besides Thomas, the leading figure in this new constellation was Britta, a retired 
biologist and teacher, former local politician and well connected, active environmen -
talist. She often described the grassroots initiative as a ‘delicate gem’ ( Schätzchen ) since 
it assembled so many different perspectives and provided an opportunity to engage 
collectively with ‘matters of concern’ (Latour 2004) outside the more rigid structures of political parties or environmental associations. However, for lack of a more institu -
tionalized structure, it was also a rather precarious organization. Even though the size 
of the group considerably decreased over time, the remaining members still value the 
autonomous form of organizing as an opportunity to transcend the classic divisions between nature conservation, climate protection and (environmental) justice issues and 
actively engage with planetary problems from a localized perspective. 
Emphasizing the inescapable continuation of current injustices into the future, crit -
ically engaged residents explicitly defy the official rhetoric of ‘new beginnings’ after coal 
(Anders and Zenker 2014). In this context, those who have been negatively affected by 
mining impacts often consider it somewhat cynical that ‘just transition’ discourses 
centre around the concerns of industrial workers, who are comparatively sought after on the labour market and relatively privileged economically.
16 Yet, this has not led my 
interlocutors to resent workers employed in the coal industry totally. On the contrary, Thomas, for example, openly criticizes the mining company for allegedly funnelling state subsidies to shareholders, rather than publicly committing itself to securing the future of its employees, an injustice he sees as further fuelling social conflicts in the re -
gion. So, instead of a ‘just transition’ that only assumes the responsibility for a narrowly defined group of affected actors, they argue for a ‘sustainable transition’ ( nachhaltiger  
Strukturwandel
17), understood as a more encompassing eco-social transformation . This 
objective goes against official planning ideologies of ‘new beginnings’ for the area as a 
‘green’ industrial model region after coal to encompass also more than human issues 
such as landscape integrity and the interests of future generations and geographically distant populations. Taking up the opportunity to actively shape their region’s future, as presented to them by the process of phasing out coal, the group around Britta and 
Thomas is developing alternative concepts for transition measures that advocate local 
cooperation and a renewed care for environmental relations. The remaining working group for a sustainable transition presents its ideas to administration officials, politi -
cians and other local stakeholders to raise awareness, get feedback, gain support, or 
simply make their point of view known. 
One concept I was involved in drafting recommends the ecological reconnection 
of the remaining Hambach forest to other forest patches insulated by mining and agricultural activities. The concept argues that this reconnection project would not 
only protect the severely damaged forest from succumbing to recently intensifying 
16 https://arepoconsult.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/2017_gruene_arbeitsplaetze-braunkohle_
kurzstudie.pdf 
17 https://www.ansev.de/unsere-ziele 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  271
climate-change impacts, but also contribute to carbon dioxide sequestration and the 
regeneration of biodiversity as healthy old-growth forests act as effective carbon sinks 
and biodiversity hotspots. In contrast to environmentalists or more traditional nature 
conservationists, the group of engaged residents aims to combine this ecological recon -
nection with agroecological development centred around the conversion of intensively used agricultural fields bordering the forest into corridors for regenerative agroforestry. As Britta explained to me, this combination of silviculture and agriculture would not 
only potentially strengthen the edges of the existing forest, it could itself actively con -
tribute to the regeneration of soils and make regional food production more resilient 
with respect to climate change impacts. Another aspect of the concept was that its 
successful implementation would require all the remaining land near the forest to be 
utilized. This was important because the mining company is actively pursuing the demolition of a not yet completely abandoned village adjacent to the forest for ex -
traction of the soil needed to stabilize the banks of the mine after its shutdown. Rather 
than being a technical necessity, as the company claims, my interlocutors are convinced 
that the demolition of the village is justified solely by the mining company’s business considerations, which makes the ongoing destruction of land and buildings another 
of the countless injustices that go unacknowledged by the state government and com -
munal administration in their eyes. 
Britta, Thomas and other engaged residents actively offer opposition to official tran -
sition measures that in their opinion do not seriously engage with the problems related to anthropogenic climate change, but almost exclusively bank on the development of 
technical solutions to guarantee a continuation of economic growth in a ‘green’ guise. Taking the structural transition process as an opportunity to consider how the needs of human and non-human actors like the forest or the soil can be jointly accounted 
for from the perspective of regional development, the self-organized group also goes 
beyond classic environmentalist concerns of nature conservation. The struggle for the public acknowledgement of mining-related damage as injustice and the active engage -
ment for social and ecological regeneration thus to a certain extent overlap with the idea 
of ‘justice as healing through recognition’, that is, the striving to repair and revitalize 
damaged relations (Johnson and Sigona 2022:2). However, rather than emphasizing the closing of wounds once and for all, the justice negotiations entail a call for ongoing engagement with the inextricable mess that is present in the Anthropocene. Arguing 
for a simultaneous transformation of (agricultural) practices of production, care for 
extractivist damage and active engagement with planetary crises from a situated per -
spective, coal-critical civil-society actors in the Rhineland are challenging the destruc -
tive continuation of industrial exploitation (or the ‘conquest of nature’; cf. Krämer, this issue) that rests on the avoidance of responsibility towards unacknowledged others, whether human or non-human. 
The mining area’s relative geographical marginality was once drawn upon to define 
it as a ‘void’, a sacrifice zone subject to destructive extractivism. Yet, under the aus -
pices of intensifying environmental crises, coal-critical residents now posit its rural 
272 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
character against official plans for industrial development and redeploy it as a resource 
for more socio-ecologically responsible future-making (cf. Puig de la Bellacasa 2015). 
In contrast to traditional(ist) conservationists (cf. Krämer, this issue), however, they are 
trying less to restore an idealized past than to intervene in the present situation and mobilize everything at their disposal to make a habitable future possible. While none of the people I met in this context were convinced their engagement would ‘save the world’, they nonetheless felt compelled to act in light of a perceived inability of official 
institutions to match the scale and urgency of the issues in question. By raising matters 
of concern against the matter of factness of the government and the mining company, my interlocutors insist on the possibility of a fundamental dissensus in the question 
of what has a part to play in political considerations and what does not (Rancière 
2008). As I have shown, their engagement for a sustainable transition is characterized by calls for the public recognition of formerly unacknowledged losses, accounting for future uncertainties related to planetary transformations, and factoring in the well -
being of future generations and distant others, as well as valuing non-human entities as something other than mere resources. Accordingly, the civil-society actors actively oppose the looming threat of the externalization, avoidance or invisibilization of An -
thropocene concerns in official transition policies. In this sense, their practical commit -
ment to situate deep time scale problems with planetary distribution within everyday matters may open up a space for responsibility for absent, yet entangled others (Barad 2010). In an evocative discussion of generational justice, Jacques Derrida even suggests 
that ‘[n]o justice […] seems possible or thinkable without the principle of some respon -
sibility  […] beyond all living present’ (Derrida 1990:xix). Justice in that sense is more 
than reparation, revenge, or the repayment of debts associated with the law. Instead of 
completely restoring some disjointed order, therefore, there is always the task of inher -
iting responsibility from other times and places. Derrida considers this responsibility towards spatially or temporally absent others to be the fundamental requirement for justice as something other than the effect of legal procedures. In the context of the An -
thropocene, this assertion appears to become immediately more applicable since issues of planetary justice need to account for the entanglements of past actions with future events and to recognize the needs of absent others.
Conclusion
If I now apply Anna-Lena Wolf’s and Olaf Zenker’s analytical definition of justice, proposed in the introduction to this special issue, we can see this article depicting the self-organized coal-critical actors as the main concerned agents  of justice in the present 
case. Based on a common obligation to maintain earthly habitability, these actors not only demand the discontinuation of industrial infrastructures, which are locally de -
structive and entangled with planetary crises: they also insist on a political transfor -
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  273
mation towards more sustainable socio-environmental relations as the objects of justice . 
Even though my interlocutors mainly engage with these issues from a localized per -
spective, the subject of justice  ultimately implied in their actions is thus every entity 
that is threatened by accelerated planetary change. They do address state institutions 
and industrial actors as agents responsible  for delivering what they consider is due. Yet, 
owing to the longstanding experience of close ties between the state and industry, as well as the overwhelming scale and urgency of the issues in question, the critical locals 
in the Rhineland’s brown coal region primarily envisage themselves, and ultimately 
everyone, as responsible for challenging the status quo. This might lead us to another core element of an analytical definition of justice that is not explicitly mentioned by 
Wolf and Zenker: the antagonists of justice  or sources of injustice that concerned agents 
regularly invoke. In the context of coal-mining as a local issue affecting villagers’ qual -
ity of life, this position was chiefly ascribed to the mining company and some other 
influential local actors. However, with the potential loss of planetary habitability be -
coming a plausible possibility in the Anthropocene, this position is increasingly at -
tributed to what can be called an ‘imperial way of life’ that is dependent upon infra -
structures of externalization and implicates basically everyone, albeit in very different 
ways (Brand and Wissen 2017). Hence, the most fundamental norm or value animating 
my interlocutors’ struggle against injustices related to brown coal mining is a care for the environment in terms of a Mitwelt  (as some of them explicitly call it) that includes 
non-human others and future generations, as well as other matters of concern made 
absent in industrial relations of growth and progress (cf. Latour et al. 2018). 
As illustrated by the recent decision of Germany’s constitutional court, introduced 
at the beginning of this article, questions of intergenerational justice and responsibility 
for past actions and unintended (planetary-scale) consequences are increasingly being 
addressed in the legal arena as well. Yet, although the court ruling was influenced by 
taking future impacts of irreversible planetary damage into account, it still essentially depended upon the claims of presently living human subjects. The same, of course, goes for the practices of critical engagement I presented in this article, which depend 
on human faculties like language or social inventions like rights to make claims on 
behalf of the civil-society actors themselves, as well as on behalf of non-human others, or absent (human) others who are structurally excluded from the realm of politics. As I have shown, these practices of negotiation bring unacknowledged, avoided or exter -
nalized entanglements of human and nonhuman actors – like the spatial and temporal interrelations of forest, people, the energy industry and climate change – into the arena of politics, rearticulating them as matters of public concern.  
Accepting the premise that the responsibility for absent (or absentized ) others is the 
central condition of justice, I have presented my interlocutors’ coal-critical activities as a struggle for justice in the context of accelerated planetary change. In light of this, the question remains if clinging to the ontological assumption of human exceptionality 
might not serve to justify the avoidance of responsibility for entangled others and even -
tually run the risk of obstructing the conditions for justice in the Anthropocene. 
274 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
References
Acuña, Roger Merino 2015: The Politics of Extractive Governance: Indigenous Peoples and Socio-Envi -
ronmental Conflicts. The Extractive Industries and Society  2(1):85–92.
Anders, Gerhard, and Olaf Zenker 2015: Transition and Justice: An Introduction. In: Gerhard Anders 
und Olaf Zenker eds., Transition and Justice. Negotiating the Terms of New Beginnings in Africa . Pp. 
1–19. West Sussex: Wiley Blackwell (Development and change book series).
Antweiler, Christoph 2022: Anthropologie im Anthropozän. Theoriebausteine für das 21. Jahrhundert . 
Darmstadt: wbg Academic.
Appel, Hannah 2019: The Licit Life of Capitalism. US Oil in Equatorial Guinea . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Bainton, Nicholas, and Emilia E. Skrzypek 2022: Positionality and Ethics. In: Lorenzo D’Angelo and 
Robert Jan Pijpers eds., The Anthropology of Resource Extraction . Pp. 131–148. New York: Routledge.
Barad, Karen 2010: Quantum Entanglements and Hauntological Relations of Inheritance: Dis/continu-
ities, SpaceTime Enfoldings, and Justice-to-Come. Derrida Today  3(2):240–268. 
Barad, Karen 2019: After the End of the World: Entangled Nuclear Colonialisms, Matters of Force, and 
the Material Force of Justice. Theory & Event 22(3):524–550.
Bovensiepen, Judith M. ed. 2018: The Promise of Prosperity. Visions of the Future in Timor-Leste . Acton: 
ANU Press.
Brand, Ulrich, and Markus Wissen 2017: Imperiale Lebensweise: Zur Ausbeutung von Mensch und Natur 
im Globalen Kapitalismus . Munich: oekom verlag.
Brock, Andrea 2023: Securing Accumulation by Restoration – Exploring Spectacular Corporate Con -
servation, Coal Mining and Biodiversity Compensation in the German Rhineland. Environment 
and Planning E: Nature and Space 6(4): 2134–2165.
Brunnegger, Sandra 2019: Theorizing Everyday Justice. In: Sandra Brunnegger ed., Everyday Justice. 
Law, Ethnography, Injustice . Pp. 1–34. Cambridge University Press.
Chakrabarty, Dipesh 2009: The Climate of History: Four Theses. Critical Inquiry  35(2):197–222. 
Chua, Liana, and Hannah Fair 2023 [2019]: Anthropocene. The Open Encyclopedia of Anthropology . 
http://doi.org/10.29164/19anthro .
Derrida, Jacques 1994: Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, & the New Inter -
national . New York: Routledge.
Eriksen, Thomas H., and Elisabeth Schober 2018: Economies of Growth or Ecologies of Survival? Ethnos  
83(3):415–422.
Everts, Jonathan, Asta Vonderau, Christian Tietje, Azar Aliyev, Mareike Pampus, and Felix Kolb eds. 
2023: Postfossile Zukünfte: Strukturwandel Gemeinsam Gestalten . Halle (Saale): Institut für Struktur -
wandel und Nachhaltigkeit (HALIS) der Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg.
Ferguson, James 1999: Expectations of Modernity. Myths and Meanings of Urban Life on the Zambian 
Copperbelt . Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Fortun, Kim 2014: From Latour to Late Industrialism. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 4(1):309–
329.
Grothus, Antje, and Daniela Setton 2020: Die „Kohlekommission“ aus zivilgesellschaftlicher Perspek -
tive: Chancen und Herausforderungen bei der Partizipation in Expertengremien. Forschungsjournal Soziale Bewegungen  33(1):282–304.
Haraway, Donna, Noboru Ishikawa, Scott F. Gilbert, Kenneth Olwig, Anna L. Tsing, and Nils Bubandt 
2016: Anthropologists Are Talking – About the Anthropocene. Ethnos  81(3):535–564. 
Haraway, Donna Jeanne 2016: Staying With the Trouble. Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, Lon -
don: Duke University Press (Experimental futures). 
Herberg, Jeremias, Johannes Staemmler, Patrizia Nanz 2021: Wenn Wandel Wissenschaft erfasst: 
Die paradoxe Praxis engagierter Forschung im Strukturwandel. In: Jeremias Herberg, Johannes 
Felix Lussem: Negotiations of Justice in the Anthropocene  275
Staemmler and Patrizia Nanz eds.: Wissenschaft im Strukturwandel. Die paradoxe Praxis engagierter 
Transformationsforschung . Pp. 7–40. Munich: oekom Verlag,.
Hornborg, Alf 2009: Zero-Sum World: Challenges in Conceptualizing Environmental Load Displace -
ment and Ecologically Unequal Exchange in the World-System. International Journal of Comparative Sociology  50(3–4):237–262.
Jansen, Dirk 2017: Lignite Mining in the Rhineland – “Garzweiler II” . Düsseldorf: BUND NRW. https://
www.bund-nrw.de/fileadmin/nrw/dokumente/braunkohle/2017_11_02_Lignite_mining_in_the_
rhineland_Garzweiler_II_01.pdf, accessed September 2, 2024.
Johnson, Adrienne, Alexii Sigona 2022: Planetary Justice and ‘Healing’ in the Anthropocene. Earth 
System Governance  11:1–9. 
Kamlage, Jan-Hendrik, Sonja Knobbe, Ute Goerke, and Anna Mengede 2021: Transformative For -
schung im Rheinischen Revier – Aufbau einer partizipativen Governance zur nachhaltigen Bioö -
konomie. In: Jeremias Herberg, Johannes Staemmler, and Patrizia Nanz eds.: Wissenschaft im Struk -
turwandel. Die paradoxe Praxis engagierter Transformationsforschung . Pp. 239–262. Munich: oekom 
Verlag,.
Kierdorf, Alexander 2018: Zur Geschichte der Braunkohle im „Energie-Kreis Rhein-Erft“. In: Kreisar -
chiv des Rhein-Erft-Kreises eds.: Braunkohle im Rhein-Erft-Kreis. Perspektiven . Bergheim: Rhein-
Erft-Kreis, der Landrat.
Kirsch, Stewart 2014: Mining Capitalism. The Relationship between Corporations and Their Critics . Oak -
land, CA: University of California Press.
Krøijer, Stine 2020: Civilization as the Undesired World. Radical Environmentalism and the Uses of 
Dystopia in Times of Climate Crisis. Social Analysis  64(3):48–67. 
KWSB (Kommission „Wachstum, Strukturwandel und Beschäftigung“) 2019: Abschlussbericht . Berlin: 
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie.
Latour, Bruno 2004: Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern. 
Critical  Inquiry  30:225–248.
Latour, Bruno 2014: Anthropology at the Time of the Anthropocene: A Personal View of What Is to Be 
Studied (draft for comments). http://www.bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/139-AAA-Washington.
pdf, accessed September 2, 2024.
Latour, Bruno, Denise Milstein, Isaac Marrero-Guillamón, and Israel Rodríguez-Giralt 2018: Down to 
Earth Social Movements: An Interview with Bruno Latour. Social Movement Studies  17(3):353–361.
Lerner, Steve 2010: Sacrifice Zones: The Front Lines of Toxic Chemical Exposure in the United States . Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
Lessenich, Stephan 2018: Neben uns die Sintflut. Wie wir auf Kosten anderer leben . Paperback edition. 
Munich: Piper.
Li, Fabiana 2015: Unearthing Conflict. Corporate Mining, Activism, and Expertise in Peru . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.
Lussem, Felix 2020: Monströs oder gespenstisch? Fragen von Schuld, Verantwortung und Solidarität in 
Zeiten der Corona-Pandemie. boasblogs #Witnessing Corona . https://boasblogs.org/witnessingcoro -
na/monstros-oder-gespenstisch/, accessed September 2, 2024.  
Lussem, Felix 2021: Alienating ‘Facts’ and Uneven Futures of Energy Transition. FocaalBlog . https://
www.focaalblog.com/2021/04/07/felix-lussem-alienating-facts-and-uneven-futures-of-energy-tran-
sition/, accessed September 2, 2024.
Lussem, Felix (forthcoming): Cloud Factories: Renewable Energy Transition and Popular Resistance in 
a German Brown Coal Mining Region.
Malm, Andreas, and Alf Hornborg 2014: The Geology of Mankind? A Critique of the Anthropocene 
Narrative. The Anthropocene Review  1(1):62–69. 
Mathews, Andrew S. 2020: Anthropology and the Anthropocene: Criticisms, Experiments, and Collab -
orations. Annu. Rev. Anthropol . 49(1):67–82. 
Mitchell, Timothy 2009: Carbon Democracy. Economy and Society  38(3):399–432.
276 ZfE | JSCA 149 (2024)
Müller, Katja 2019: Mining, Time and Protest: Dealing with Waiting in German Coal Mine Planning. 
The Extractive Industries and Society  6(1):1–7.
Müller, Katja 2021: Heat Pipelines and Climate Camps: Coal Mining’s In/Visible Infrastructure. The 
Extractive Industries and Society  8(3):100944.
Nixon, Rob 2017: The Anthropocene and Environmental Justice. In: Jennifer Newell, Libby Robin, and 
Kirsten Wehner eds., Curating the Future. Museums, Communities and Climate Change . Pp. 23-31. 
London: Routledge (Routledge Environmental Humanities). 
Oei, Pao-Yu, Hauke Herrmann, Philipp Herpich, Oliver Holtemöller, Benjamin Lünenbürger, and 
Christoph Schult 2020: Coal Phase-Out in Germany – Implications and Policies for Affected Re -
gions. Energy  196:1–19. DOI: 10.1016/j.energy.2020.117004
Ortner, Sherry B. 2010: Access. Reflections on Studying Up in Hollywood. Ethnography  11(2):211–233.
Pijpers, Jan Robert, and Thomas Hylland Eriksen eds. 2018: Mining Encounters. Extractive Industries in 
an Overheated World . London: Pluto Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria 2015: Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care. 
Social Studies of Science  45(5):691–716.
Rancière, Jacques 2008: Zehn Thesen zur Politik . Zürich: DIAPHANES AG (TransPositionen). 
Tassan, Manuela 2022: Rethinking Environmental Justice in the Anthropocene: An Anthropological 
Perspective. Anthropology Today  38(3):13–16.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt, Andrew S. Mathews, and Nils Bubandt 2019: Patchy Anthropocene: Land -
scape Structure, Multispecies History, and the Retooling of Anthropology. Current Anthropology 
60(S20):S186–S197. 
Zenker, Olaf and Anna-Lena Wolf 2024: Towards a New Anthropology of Justice in the Anthropocene: 
Anthropological (Re)Turns. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie | Journal of Social and Cultural Anthropology  
149(2): 189–216.
