ADVANCING THE 
COMMONSVERSE: THE 
POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE COMMONS (GUEST EDITORS: H. WAGENAAR & K. BARTELS)No Commons Without 
Micropolitics. Learning with 
Feminist and Municipalist Movements in Spain
MANUELA ZECHNER 
ABSTRACT
This article emphasizes the importance of micropolitical and feminist research into the 
commons, particularly for understanding and developing forms of articulation between the public and the commons. It draws on experiences of autonomist-feminist and municipalist commons in Barcelona, presenting a case study on childcare commoning, based on engaged and situated research conducted between 2015–20. Those years were a lively period of city based commons experimentation that coincides with the first mandate of the municipalist Barcelona en Comú government. Emphasizing feminist and micropolitical understandings for commons research as a matter of going beyond technical visions of commons, based in Spanish and Latin American commons thinking, this text emphasizes the contribution of micropolitics as activist analytical lens that places a focus on knowledge production across social movements and institutions, and on the role of the invisible others of organization. To do so, it analyzes childcare commons through three micropolitical-feminist terms: care, community and resurgence. It points to possible ways of thinking alliances across grassroots and public institutions, as a matter of micropolitical articulation between claims to self-governance and claims to universality, and between autonomy and interdependence. Feminism and micropolitics feature as indispensable lenses for developing lively and lasting commons practices here.CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Manuela Zechner
FSU Jena, DEmanuela.zechner@uni-jena.de
KEYWORDS:
commons; micropolitics; care; municipalism; feminism; barcelona; community; resurgence
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Zechner, M. (2023). No Commons Without Micropolitics. Learning with Feminist and Municipalist Movements in Spain. International Journal of the Commons, 17(1), pp. 447–461. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/ijc.1232
448
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
INTRODUCTION
The following pages articulate feminist micropolitical 
analysis with the politics of the commons, giving glimpses 
into phases of micropolitical learning as I have followed 
it in Spain between 2013–2020.1 Drawing on Spanish-
language commons thought that emerges at the interface 
of movements and institutions in the first decades of the 
2000s, similar to how micropolitical thought emerged 
at this same intersection after the 1960s, I follow the 
specifically feminist terms and knowledges created in the 
context of Spanish commons municipalism after 2014. The 
continuity of micropolitical and feminist commons thinking 
and practice here leads me to present a case study of 
childcare commoning, via the terms care, community  and 
resurgence , as fields where micropolitical knowledges lead 
to the invention of commons from below, in tension with 
public institutions. Care  refers to the capacity of commons to 
look after and sustain themselves and their environments, 
community  refers to their capacity to build collective 
subjects and forms of organization, and resurgence  refers 
to their capacity to resurface after periods of dormancy, 
pause or generational change.
For context: following the 15M movement of 2011 that 
demanded real democracy and an end to austerity and 
corruption in Spain, occupying squares all over the country, 
in 2014 a wave of grassroots municipalist candidatures 
emerged and soon won elections in a considerable number 
of cities. This has implied vast changes for the political, 
social and urban landscape. My attempt here, based on 
engaged research during 2005–20 (Zechner 2021 , 2022b ) 
is to offer a micropolitical reading that rethinks the relations 
between social movements and institutions, traces 
learning processes and transformations of subjectivity, 
by way of offering some tools for analysing commons – 
across the dimensions of autonomy and interdependence. 
I provide the example of childcare commons in Barcelona 
as a way to give account of micropolitical knowledge 
production and feminist challenges to building commons 
based institutions. This feminist-autonomist perspective 
on commons builds on theories and practices of social 
reproduction and care commons, particularly prolific in 
the Spanish speaking world (Zechner, 2021 ; Vega Solis, 
Martínez Bujan and Paredes Chauca, 2018 ; Gutierrez 2008 , 
2017 , 2017a ). This text thus also aims to offer a partial and 
situated translation, through an analysis of practice as well 
as some key concepts of this feminist school of commons 
thinking, of feminist micropolitical commons thinking 
towards English speaking contexts.
I contribute this paper on the back of my situated and 
engaged research – as feminist co-researching mother 
and municipalist activist in Barcelona. These pages give an account of what I have found to be key to lively, open 
and diverse commons: an attention to micropolitics as the 
dimension of relational, collective learning. My learning 
has grown through key impulses from the work on the 
micropolitics of groups (Vercauteren, Crabbé and Mueller, 
2007 ) and on the role of care and militant research in 
feminist and activist networks (Precarias a la Deriva, 2003 ; 
Casas Cortes 2009 ; Zechner 2013 ).
Those grassroots-driven knowledges are less interested 
in theories of good commons management as articulated 
from the outside (and thus less grounded in academic 
debates on commons, from the important work of Ostrom 
to the racist ideas of Hardin,2 and beyond), and more intent 
on narrating and activating commons discourses in relation 
to specific contexts, through what we may call situated 
and engaged militant research. As will become clear in 
my account of childcare commons, this micropolitical 
approach to commons thinking is steeped in a processual 
understanding of politics, emphasising singular processes 
of learning and the formation not just of political subjects 
or identities but crucially also of subjectivities (Guattari and 
Rolnik, 2007 ).
The approach I outline here is an experimental and 
situated one, where commons cannot be disarticulated 
from community (Mies, 2014 ) and care (Vega Solis, 
Paredes Buchan and Paredes Chauca, 2018 ). Indeed these 
terms – care, community, commons – have been key to 
Spanish language feminist commons debates, which 
spring from experiences of self-governance rather than 
policy making, and have been subject to translation into 
commons policy in municipalist Spain (2015–20 is the 
period I focus on here). The relation between commons, 
care and community is a micropolitical matter, meaning 
it hinges on the fine tuning of relations, protocols, 
negotiations, synergies, articulations, rhythms, tonalities 
and imaginaries in collective process. Micropolitics 
offers no overarching formula, best practice or guiding 
principles: every commons experience must develop its 
own rigorous micropolitical learning and knowledge, in 
order to thrive (Guattari and Rolnik, 2007 ). This type of 
commons knowledge crystallizes in accounts, narrations 
and genealogies more than in best practices.
While micropolitical knowledge does not lend itself 
to encapsulation in formulas and recipes – key forms of 
knowledge in institutional governance – it however does very 
much exist in institutional contexts. Across the dimensions 
of social movements, grassroots institution building and 
municipal institutions, micropolitical intelligence a key 
factor to understanding and enabling commons. As Silke 
Helfrich points out, there is no single formula for commons, 
and indeed commons always need to ask: “how do we 
relate” – an inherently micropolitical question (Helfrich et 
449
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
al, 2012 ). My argument here will be that we had better see 
and grasp micropolitics, as it enables us to build forms of 
organization and institution that are not only more just, 
but also more sustainable and ecological. These may be 
less easy to grasp and replicate than commons formulas 
(of commons-public partnerships for instance), yet they are 
key to enabling the kind of processual intelligence needed 
for commons to persist and transform.
Concretely, this means that commons that are privy 
to micropolitics can defend their own democratic – and 
moreover caretizen  – forms of organization and life. 
Caretizen  is a concept that the influential feminist collective 
Precarias a la Deriva casually contributed to the questioning 
of subjectivity in politics (Precarias a la Deriva, 2010 ). In 
displacing the subject of politics from the autonomous 
individual male to the interdependent feminized subject, 
they propose to replace citizenship  with caretizenship , as 
a way of reformulating the basis of who we consider to 
be the subjects of democracy (from citizens to caretizens, 
meaning all the others  that exist and work to sustain 
our lives, locally and globally) (Zechner 2016 ). Here we 
find the kind sensitivity to non-citizen or migrant realities 
that a micropolitics of commons and public institutions 
must imply if it is to be rigorous: a critique of the very 
limited notion of ‘citizens’ and institutional democracy. 
Micropolitics imagines political subjects as based on their 
relations and collectivities, rather than based on their 
formal status (citizenship, age, employment status) – it 
enables us to go beyond the sociological gaze towards 
redefinitions of subjecthood as connected to (individual as 
well as collective) subjectivity (Guattari and Rolnik, 2007 ).
In what follows below, you first find a brief genealogy 
of micropolitical thinking following on from 1968, then 
a section on how this thinking is situated within recent 
Spanish movements of the commons via the lenses of 
precarity, militant research, feminism, and commons 
institutions. A further section outlines the micropolitics of 
commons municipalism via two brief examples: public-
commons partnerships and neighbourhood childcare 
commons in Barcelona. I close this text with reflections 
on three key dimensions of micropolitical commons 
thinking – care, community and resurgence – and a series 
of conclusions.
MICROPOLITICS: SOME GENEALOGY, 
THEORY AND KEY CONCEPTS
1968 AND AFTER: AGAINST IDEOLOGY, 
AUTHORITY AND HIERARCHY
Micropolitical analysis is key to understanding social 
movements and institutions. Hierarchies, dynamics of power and desire, relationships and conflicts, modes of 
communication and care – understanding these is what 
makes forms of organization and institution sustainable. 
‘Micro’ here does not merely refer to small scale or to an 
individual psychological dimension, but to subjective, 
somatic, affective and relational dimensions that run 
across the individual and collective dimensions. Felix 
Guattari, who most prominently shaped the term, insisted 
that ‘The problematics of micropolitics don’t involve the 
level of representation but the level of the production of 
subjectivity’ (Guattari and Rolnik, 2007, 39 ), whereby 
crucially subjectivity is not to be understood as a matter 
of individuals but also of collective agents of enunciation.
Guattari was interested in how micropolitical practices 
shape desire as well as organizational and institutional 
cultures. An example of such analysis is the book 
‘Molecular Revolution in Brasil’ by Felix Guattari and Suely 
Rolnik, which traces conversations and visits to different 
political groups, unions, and movements in 1982 in Brasil, 
to analyze ‘micro’ or ‘molecular’ dimensions of politics 
and movement in a dictatorship context (Guattari and 
Rolnik, 1986/2007 ). As such, micropolitics implies a series 
of dimensions beyond the strategic, legal or strictly 
organizational dimension: such as the (co-)production 
of subjectivity, desire, collectivity, relationality, care and 
reproduction, divisions of labour, embodiment and affect. 
Seen micropolitically, institutionality is a compositional 
socio-ecological matter, concerning embeddedness and 
interdependence within larger social and more-than-
social systems (Guattari 2000 ).
Micropolitical analysis – and its sibling institutional 
analysis (linked closely to antipsychiatry and pedagogy, 
as in the work of Jean Oury and Fernand Oury, Célestine 
Freinet and Guattari himself) – emerged in the 1960s, 
during a time of socio-political upheaval that entailed a 
push to transform institutions and organisations from 
below – the 68 revolutions inEurope brought a refusal 
of party-line, macro-political approaches and posited 
relationality as key site of politics, but also beyond Europe 
subversive movements emerged to micropolitically 
undermine dictatorship regimes such as in Spain or Brasil. 
Micropolitical struggles set out to overcome traditional 
politics as linked to authoritarianism, rigid structure, 
hierarchy and repression – identifying them as a problem 
not just of the political right but also of parts of the left – as 
well as to empower social struggles to build better process, 
and open up to experimentation with new ways of relating 
and organising. Guattari and Deleuze were concerned 
with the microfascisms inherent in capitalism and residual 
in group and institutional culture (Deleuze and Guattari, 
1983 ), leading them to place emphasis on subjectivity 
rather than ideology.
450
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
AFTER THE MILLENIUM: AGAINST NEOLIBERAL 
SUBJECTIVATION AND GOVERNMENTALITY
While the rejection of ideological politics is no longer as 
relevant as it was today, in a context of neoliberal fluidity 
(Holmes 2002 , Rolnik  2019 ), the incipient sensitivity to care, 
ecology and the post-normative that we find in this early 
micropolitical thought is today more relevant than ever. 
Guattari worked in post-psychiatric institutions (Dosse 
2011 , Guattari 2012 ) and dwelled on non-prohibitive 
approaches to otherness and madness: the importance 
of escaping modernist rationality, the collectivization and 
democratization of care, as well as the experimental and 
affective dimensions of politics came to be carried forth into 
workerist thought (Franco Bifo Berardi, Maurizio Lazaratto, 
Brian Holmes), feminist thought (Precarias a la Deriva, Rosi 
Braidotti), decolonial and indigenous thought (Suely Rolnik, 
Barbara Gloczewski, Ailton Krenak) to mention but a few of 
its becomings.
Crucially, micropolitics was at the same time taken up 
by movements. Feminism pushed micropolitical analysis 
to engage with gendered power and exploitation (Malo 
de Molina 2007 , Casas Cortes 2009 ). Shifting from a 
politicization of man as more-than-rational, feminists 
posited a non-male subject of politics and thus worked 
the dimension of care work, reproduction and feminist 
collective care into micropolitics in powerful ways. This 
work has been very lively in Spain at the beginning of the 
millenium, in feminist struggles around precarity and care 
(via the collective Precarias a la Deriva) as well as groups 
in the UK (the Micropolitics research group), in political 
collectives in Belgium (see Vercauteren, Crabbé  and 
Mueller, 2007 ) and beyond (see Zechner, 2013 ). As such, 
micropolitical analysis fed into many social movements 
around the 2010s, amongst them the 15M and commons 
experimentations in Spain, coming to be incorporated in 
everyday language and practice of movements.
In this way, and particularly in articulation with feminist 
claims, micropolitical sensibilities also informed the early 
institution-building of commons-municipalist candidacies, 
as we shall see below. A key aspect of this is the attention 
to forms of relation, communication, knowledge production, 
affective and care work, community building and situatedness 
– Spanish municipalisms at this time showed high sensitivity 
to those when negotiating commons policy and pilot projects 
with social movements, as well as (though less successfully) 
in their internal institutional work (Zechner 2021 ).
This micropolitical commons thinking comes close to 
the kinds of sensibilities and roles that Helfrich and Bollier 
propose (Bollier and Helfrich, 2019 ) and have called patterns 
of commoning  (Bollier and Helfrich, 2015  and Mustersprache 
Commoning Wiki, undated ). Their work and vocabulary on 
togetherness, self-organisation and autonomous caring economies articulates patterns or rules of commoning that 
are useful both for analysis and practice (in the form of a 
card game, for instance). Whilst this work on commons, 
and the necessary ontological shift they imply, shares 
the micropolitical intelligence referenced in this text, and 
partakes in overlapping struggles, Bollier and Helfrich’s 
more pattern-oriented work also differs from micropolitical 
analysis in that the latter focuses less on forms, vocabularies 
and principles and more on processes, whose narration and 
analysis emerges from situated and tactical knowledge 
production processes. This way of thinking commons 
puts less emphasis on abstracting principles of commons 
or commoning and works more with the singularity of 
specific struggles, inserting itself into quasi-oral, activist 
forms of giving account, tracing processes of becoming 
and genealogy that function as open histories or working 
documents (Gutierrez Aguilar  2010 ).
Micropolitical commons thinking implies working on 
affects, desires, tensions, contradictions and inventions 
within a specific tactical field of political tension between the 
grassroots and the state. A key hypothesis of micropolitical 
commons thinking is, we may say, that commons are only 
interesting and effective in so far as they do something 
specific in relation to social struggles and the state: whether 
that is defending public infrastructures from privatization or 
defending commons from the state or market, whether it 
is challenging governance and power or opening spaces of 
autonomy for popular resistance and counter-hegemony, 
escaping control and regulation, etc. Commons that fail to 
position themselves in this sense remain islands, perhaps 
utopian but not political in the way micropolitics implies: 
the ‘micro’ here does not refer to small or personal but 
to forms of subversiveness to power that pass through 
affects, bodies, relations, subjectivity, forms of instituting 
(see Transversal  2007 ).
What all these forms and currents in micropolitical 
thinking have in common is that they all look for other ways 
of relating, or in different words, of ways of relating to others  
that overcome fear, stereotypes, classes and hierarchies. 
Therein lies the complicity between micropolitics, feminism, 
anti-racism and anti-speciesism. There is an ecological 
sensitivity that already underpinned Guattari’s ‘Three 
Ecologies’ (1989 ), where he argues that psychic, social and 
natural processes must always be seen as intertwined.
Another important precedent and referent of the 
commons thinking and research that I draw on here lies 
in recent Latin American movements. A lot can be learned 
from how movements, political actors and scholar-
activists have reflected the tensions and negoations 
between movements, governments and institutions 
there. The feminist strand of this current has produced 
harsh critiques (for striking documents see Galindo and 
451
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
García Linera, 2014 ; Galindo and Brunner, 2019 ) but also 
shifted attention away from macropolitics by promoting 
analyses of commons as focused on community, care 
and social reproduction  (Vega Solis, Martínez Bujan and 
Paredes Chauca, 2018 , Federici 2004 , Gutierrez Aguilar 
2008 ). Those theoretical-political currents are rich sources 
of micropolitical knowledge as they reflect processes and 
situated knowledges of commons-building, steeped in 
care, community and resurgence.
These feminist commons politics deal with the political 
field of tension that commons are set within: between 
the private and the public, the state and the market, but 
also the communitarian and the institutional. They don’t 
try to be descriptive or normative, rather they are situated 
and partisan (Haraway 1988 ). Their loci of knowledge 
production lie between the spaces of movements, the 
streets and public sphere more broadly, touching upon the 
institutions of the state and questions of public institutions 
(more so than in the academy). In this they resemble the 
constellations within which micropolitical thinking emerged 
in the 1960s and beyond. Having briefly traced some of 
the key genealogies and concepts of a micropolitics of 
the commons, let me now give more context about the 
concrete genalogy of Spanish commons movements.
COMMONS MOVEMENTS IN SPAIN: 
AUTONOMY AND INTERDEPENDENCE IN 
RESONANT TENSION
A BRIEF MOVEMENT GENEALOGY
Spanish commons movements have their base in 
autonomous movements of the 2000s, where right-to-the-
city movements, occupied social centres and anti-copyright 
hacking and what was then called procomún  counterculture 
(pro-commons, literally) provided a strong frame for a 
radical politics of the commons. Autonomist movements 
in Spain had been the first to introduce the horizon of the 
commons via the notion and practice of a new type of social 
center as ‘institutions of the commons,’ a political practice 
and vision of institutions that care for all those excluded 
from citizens or unwilling to fit the template of the ‘normal’ 
citizen as wage-labouring, consuming, middle-class aspiring 
and nationally proud subject. Occupied social centres 
functioned (and still function) as commons institutions 
that harboured migrant cantines, feminist and queer/
trans groups, undocumented people’s self-employment 
projects, hacker spaces, and other groups that refused or 
were excluded from the trinity of citizenship, property and 
wage labour. Those commons institutions initially inspired 
municipalism, with radical councilors setting out to make 
public institutions more accessible and open to all those traditionally excluded subjects of liberal democracy (in a 
spirit of undercommons, see Harney and Moten, 2013 ).
Taken up and subverted by feminists some years later, 
complicating but not refusing the horizon of autonomy, 
commons came to be articulated with feminised precarity, 
care and social reproduction (Precarias a la Deriva, 2003 ; 
Vega Solis, Martínez Bujan and  Paredes Chauca, 2018 ). 
As a feminist revolution came into full swing during the 
2010 decade, it moved from pro-choice and anti-austerity 
to radical motherhood and care commons, to the fight 
against sexual violence and femicide, always in synergy 
with movements to defend public healthcare, education, 
and social rights for all. The powerful feminist turn 
affected every dimension of life, and raised a generation 
of women with a strong consciousness of the importance 
of care and interdependence. Feminist economics and 
the politics of care provided a strong analytical frame 
that emphasised the sustainability of life (Pérez Orozco, 
2022 ) and vulnerability (Gil, 2011 ) as matters we all have 
in common. In the air was an affirmation of struggling 
for autonomous infrastructures (as commons) and public 
provision (as institutions) at the same time, refusing any 
binary or opposition between public and commons.
The time was ripe for reconfiguring political imaginaries 
in favour of transforming institutions, changing cities and 
towns, commoning governance. This is, in a nutshell (for 
more detailed accounts see for instance Rubio Pueyo 2017 , 
Zechner 2021 ), the background to the commons based 
municipalist candidacies that emerged across Spain in 2014, 
leading many of those newly formed parties into political 
office. It is important to note that the idea of movement-
institutions – later often termed ‘institutions of the commons’ 
(Radio  Reina Sofia, 2011 ) – informed the municipalist turn 
towards re-making institutions from below, based on the 
claim that institutions and cities could be for everyone: 
municipalism thus in good part emerges out of an imaginary 
of grassroots institutions. Inevitably, with elections and 
time in office, municipalist politics came to turn from the 
principle of radical transversality, based in an affirmation 
of the multitude (Hardt and Negri 2004 ), to a more populist 
interpellation of the people as a unitary subject, involving 
interpellations of ‘citizens’ that let go some of those others  
of their former movement micropolitics. Rather than present 
a story of failure here however, I wish to give an account 
of ways of struggling for autonomy and interdependence at 
the same time, for building strength from vulnerability and 
care, as a matter of micropolitical rigor.
FEMINIST APPROACHES TO THE RELATION 
BETWEEN MOVEMENTS AND INSTITUTIONS
Vulnerability is, as we again learn from feminists, the 
core of our common condition, what often opens doors 
452
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
to other possibilities, and as such something we must 
connect to (Zechner, 2022a ). I’ve shown how, in commons 
municipalism in Spain, different feminist tendencies 
compete as well as mix, when it comes to the politics of care 
and interdependence. The relation between movements 
and institutions is not a peripheral or anecdotal matter to 
political projects like those of municipalism. Rather, it lies at 
the very core of their possibility of existence. Following the 
mixed lineage of autonomous and feminist movements, 
municipalist instantiations of commons institutions rely on 
what we might at times identify as three distinct currents:
1) autonomous-feminist politics – as in the work of Raquel 
Gutiérrez Aguilar or Silvia Federici, see also Galindo and 
García-Linera (2014 ) and Lugano and Gutiérrez (2016 )
2) an ethics and politics of care within and beyond the 
institution (P érez and Salvini-Ramas, 2019; Tronto, 
1994 ; also found in different strands of institutional 
analysis in the work of Fernand Deligny, Jean Oury, F élix 
Guattari, Franco Basaglia)
3) a feminization of politics (Roth & Shea Baird 2017a ; 
2017b ) that seeks to make institutional politics more 
inclusive (Institut  Diversitas and Barcelona en Comú, 
2018 ).
These currents often mixed, mashed and clashed in recent 
Spanish municipalism, producing fresh tensions and 
new articulations between the politics of autonomy and 
heteronomy (Zechner, 2021 ). They are tendencies, not 
positionalities strictly speaking, that a person or group can 
adopt any of these approaches at different times.
The new municipalism that arose in Barcelona would 
have been impossible without all this feminist groundwork. 
Not just because it strongly hinges on Ada Colau as a 
leading figure and on a range of radical women councilors 
that have done incessant educational and consciousness- 
raising work amongst their male colleagues as well as the 
general population, but also because the very concept of 
the commons that the municipalist movements started 
from had already been strongly influenced by feminist 
movements and struggles around social reproduction, 
in Spain and beyond. The post-15M social movements 
would never have endorsed a municipalism that were 
not at the level of its claims for another modality of social 
care, one that matched the modes of listening, caring and 
commoning of the squares and neighborhoods.
To shed light on learning and subjectivity formation 
across grassroots movement and public institutions, we 
must dwell on experiences and lessons articulated from 
within institutions as well as within movements, focusing 
particularly on the labors and lives that connect them. One 
of the core expressions of intelligence of municipalisms during this time was the notion that learning must happen 
across these levels. Lawyer and politician Jaume Asens 
put it simply in 2016 ‘Social Movements have certain 
limits, institutions have others’ (Barcelona en Comú, 
2017 ). Social centre activist Kike España Naveira put it 
this way: ‘The problems of representation are well known 
and detestable, so is the ingeniousness of certain forms 
of horizontal organization that leave many things out 
and sometimes look inward too much’ (España Naveira, 
2019 ; my translation from Spanish). In the early years of 
municipalism, ‘movement’ and ‘institution’ were both seen 
as sites of struggle, constituting the poles of a tension that 
could bring forth new political forms and practices (see 
Barcelona en Comú, 2017 ).
SOME METHODOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF 
MICROPOLITICAL COMMONS RESEARCH
How to research micropolitics? Many situated, engaged, 
participatory action and co-research methodologies 
lend themselves to fostering micropolitical analysis. Key 
amongst them is militant research, a co-research practice 
emerged at a similar time and context (autonomist-
experimental movements of the 1970s in Italy, France 
in particular; workers’ inquiries and co-research, see 
Viewpoint Magazine, 2013) as micropolitical thinking. 
It saw a second wave of development in the context of 
precarity movements in Italy, Spain, Portugal and France at 
the turn of the millenium, as well as in subsequent feminist 
and autonomist contexts in Spain and Argentina (Precarias 
a la Deriva, Colectivo Situaciones). In this trajectory, the 
meaning of ‘militant’ shifts from the original figure of the 
male factory worker to the precarious, flexibilized worker 
on to the feminized, sexualized and care worker (Malo 
de Molina, 2007 ) as well as to the dissident subjects of 
socio-economic crisis (Colectivo Situaciones). The role of 
experience and the production of desire and subjectivity 
are central in these militant research processes.
Micropolitical production of knowledge is necessarily 
situated (Matheney, Garcia-Lamarca, Calderón-Argelich, 
Alfandari, Papillon 2023 ), hence the case study I will share 
here is one I have a deep first person (in the singular and 
plural) understanding of. It draws on at least four years 
(2016–20) of co-research as mother and feminist activist 
in a neighbourhood in Barcelona, as well as drawing on my 
experiences as active part of early municipalist movements 
and Barcelona en Comú in particular. Situated in a concrete 
place and singular time of political experimentation, 
my research aims to give account of learning processes, 
contradictions, tensions and synergies that may inspire. In 
what follows I give some more detail on the specific socio-
political context my work on childcare commons and the 
micropolitics of municipalism stems from, how it sits within 
453
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
broader municipalist commons experimentation, and what 
its key micropolitical traits are as seen through the lenses of 
three concepts: care, community and resurgence.
MUNICIPALIST COMMONS
SELF-MANAGED NEIGHBORHOOD SPACES AND 
PUBLIC-COMMONS PARTNERSHIPS
There is a lot to learn from the municipalism that started 
in Spain after 2014, micropolitically speaking. A vast 
collective project of experimentation and learning, it 
has engaged the lives and labors of tens of thousands 
of people from neighbourhoods, social movements 
and institutions in Barcelona and beyond (Rubio Puyeo, 
2017 ). When municipalist candidacies were born out of 
social movements in 2014, there was a hypothesis of 
bringing the commons into city politics in a major way – 
in Barcelona they set themselves the hurdle of gathering 
30.000 signatures of support in order to really run for 
the elections. Many people in social movements shared 
an assessment of the urgency of seizing the moment to 
propose an electoral political struggle over resources, to 
attempt institutional transformation, and a wager was 
made to run for elections. With all its difficulties, these 
grassroots candidacies set out to combine the force of 
struggles with ‘the force of manoeuvres’ (Lugano and  
Gutierrez, 2014 ) in the political domain.
In international commons movements and research, 
this municipalism is often praised and analysed via the 
concept of ‘public-commons partnerships’ (Milburn and 
Russel, 2019 ; Russel, Milburn and Heron 2022 ). This has 
implied a refiguring of notions and models of participation, 
and reimagining the range of possible articulations across 
the commons and the public (Ayuntamiento  de Barcelona 
2019a ). It consists of grassroots, ongoing and collective 
modalities of participation – as modalities of cooperation 
and partnership, and indeed these terms are more 
appropriate for our descriptions – between movements 
and institutions. In Barcelona, where it has been most 
successful, this concerns the local collective governance 
of neighbourhood spaces like Can Battló, Ateneu9Barris, 
or Calabria 66, as spaces of building community and 
commoning politics.
The key to this approach is enabling a co-governance 
and use of spaces that operates by its community’s own 
logic and laws, those of autonomous or neighborhood 
movements, but cooperates with the city administration on 
accountability (in the framework of Patrimoni Ciutada, see 
La Hidra Cooperativa, 2021 ), health and safety, accessibility 
and similar matters. This can mean ‘public socio-cultural 
centers that operate on the basis of the model of community management’ (Ateneu 9 Barris), publicly funded but ‘an 
infrastructure [equipamiento] of citizen management that 
is not run by an intermediary administration or company, 
but administered via neighborhood debate and decisions’ 
(Calàbria 66), a ‘neighborhood self-managed space’ (Can 
Battló).
Public-commons partnerships, contrary to the public-
private partnerships of the neoliberal era, which can 
essentially be understood as enclosures of the public by 
the private, should open onto new circuits of collective 
ownership that extend and ground the commons by 
articulating them with the public system. Grassroots 
activists as well as municipalists at different levels 
recognize that the public as well as the commons need to 
be defended, strengthened and articulated; that they must 
not be pitted against one another in competition; that 
great political strength and power comes from articulating 
these two dimensions. In what follows, I will give an 
account of attempts to work towards such partnerships 
in the domain of childcare commoning, a sphere of work 
and politics often underrepresented and misconceived in 
patriarchal notions of activism and governance. This is not 
a success story, but an account of the processes, efforts, 
contradictions, tensions and alliances that underpin the 
making of any articulation of the commons with the 
public. In micropolitical and feminist terms, it is a very rich 
example, one that eschews the production of formulas or 
recipes but engages complex questions any struggle to 
partner the commons with the public must face.
NEIGHBOURHOOD CHILDCARE COMMONS 
AND THE CHALLENGE OF BUILDING FEMINIST 
INSTITUTIONS
Childcare commons: I prioritise this field of commons 
organization as a feminist and mother, to counter the 
association of childcare with ‘unpolitical’ domestic matters 
and render this most vital dimension of commoning 
visible, and also as embedded researcher engaged in 
micropolitical knowledge production on the governance of 
childcare commons (Zechner 2022b ). There is a lot to learn 
from mothers self-organising childcare, building temporal 
and spatial commons for childcare to happen and be 
reinvented, questioned, politicized. The organization 
of care and the practice of childrearing and education 
are key spheres that commons have all too rarely been 
associated with – this is something that Spanish feminist 
movements, often in dialogue with rising municipalism, 
set out to counter (Keller-Garganté 2015 , Ezquerra 2013 , 
Nociones Comunes 2013 ). How are commons to allow us 
to socially reproduce ourselves differently, if they don’t 
think about how we reproduce human life and bring 
children into community?
454
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
When it comes to care and education, the public 
and the commons make for powerful alliances. In the 
neighbourhood of Poble Sec, there is a public healthcare 
centre that locals are assigned to. Pregnant women go 
there for pre- and post-partum care, to have midwives 
accompany them. Within this public model of healthcare, 
feminist midwives run pre- and post-partum classes 
that encourage mothers to self-organise, network and 
exchange. Such midwives, like the midwife Pepi in the 
case of Poble Sec, silently and rather invisibly operate 
within public institutions to create lively and rich models 
of care that reach into neighbourhoods and create their 
own infrastructures, networks, communities. From Pepi’s 
classes, a new generation of parents – the vast majority 
mothers – springs every 8–12 months, forming chat groups 
that extend the pre/post-partum classes into an ongoing 
collective conversation, into neighbourhood encounters, 
buggy walks, playground dates, mutual aid, childcare rotas 
and general debate. 200+ messages a day, anything from 
green vomit to nappy giveaways to welfare cuts to special 
sales to good reads to whatever else you can imagine. 
Those webs generate vital encounters as parents – mostly 
mothers – meet up to escape loneliness, boredom, 
insecurity, and indeed also patriarchy and other tricky 
familial relations within and beyond the home.
From those encounters, different forms of commoning 
care are born: can you watch my baby as I do that job 
interview call? Can our kids play at yours while I run to the 
doctor? All this, we can call childcare commoning, a form 
of feminist commoning that in the act also commons self-
care. But there is more: as mother’s systematize the sharing 
of their kids care, making rotas and regular dates, they 
often begin to generate institutions, their own common 
institutions. In a context of precarity, patriarchy and 
austerity, such sharing of care can be vital: because Ana 
can’t afford a babysitter, because Vivi’s kid didn’t get a place 
in the public nursery (in 2022, only 60% of families who 
sought a place in public ‘Bressol’ nurseries could be offered 
a place [ Baraza 2022 ]), because Alba lost her job, because 
Leila has no family support whatsoever, because Efi has 
postpartum depression. When those emergent institutions 
stabilize and become more formal, they are called ‘Grupos 
de crianza compartida’: self-organised nurseries basically. 
In the face of a shortage of public nursery places and in 
a context of grassroots movements rethinking childcare 
and education starting from the 15M movement of 2011 
(Zechner, 2021 ; Keller-Garganté, 2015 ), many more such 
groups emerged, with Poble Sec featuring between 7–9 of 
them at different moments between 2015–20.
These self-organized nurseries participated actively in 
political life: in feminist and anti-austerity protests (forming 
baby blocs), in solidarity actions against evictions or local solidarity economies. After 2015, they were also entwined 
with municipalist movements as many parents were 
either activists or had voted for Barcelona en Comú. There 
wasn’t much talk of public-commons partnerships but 
there was an acute sense of having to reinvent institutions, 
to democratize and enliven public education as well as 
foster commons based institutions. The ongoing process 
of experimentation and negotiation around spaces like 
Can Battló was known in self-organized spaces across the 
city (Ayuntamiento de Barcelona 2019b ; Eroles 2011 ). So in 
2016, different groups in Poble Sec formed a network (names 
PEPI, Plataforma de Educació I Participació dels Infants, in 
reference to Pepi the midwife), in order to negotiate the 
right to use spaces for their activities with the Barcelona 
en Comú city government. This could lower their costs – as 
they were entirely self-funded, running on a mix of unpaid 
labour of parents doing rotas as carers, and paid labour 
of professional educators, renting shopfront type spaces. 
Could municipalities cover parts of their costs – labour, rent, 
running costs – or maybe cede spaces to them for use?
Over several years, PEPI had discussions and meetings 
– both formal and informal – with neighbourhood and 
district councillors about this. In the end, as of yet, no 
solution was reached as different parts of Barcelona 
en Comú couldn’t agree on whether and how to fund 
grupos de crianza compartida. The municipalist feminists 
found these projects too reliant on women’s labour still, 
not sufficiently subversive of the patriarchal order; the 
education department will not conceive of destining 
money to commons projects until the public system 
is properly funded; the solution was most likely to be 
found in solidarity economy related programmes. But 
contradictions weighed too heavy to create a consensus 
or solution, as those commons projects were mostly 
populated by (higher) educated, (lower) middle class, 
(more or less) white families. The claim to universality 
that accompanies public institutions is not met in 
common’s project like these. Whilst we are perhaps used 
to imagining improvements in the public system based on 
commons experiences, indeed looking at commons from 
the viewpoint of public can also reveal many interesting 
contradictions and limitations (for more detail on all the 
above, see Zechner 2021 , 2022).
In the grupos de crianza compartida, we see intersections 
of different aspects of the becoming-feminist of politics, as 
concerning the politicization of care (Pérez Orozco 2022 ) 
and the imagination of feminist commons institutions 
(Vega Solis, Martínez Bujan and Paredes Chauca, 2018 ). 
We find autonomous feminist politics of reproduction, the 
question of an ethics of care within and beyond institutions, 
and a claim to a ‘feminization’ of politics in the sense 
of women making public policy and decisions, setting 
455
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
institutional agendas. How may we analyze this kind of 
process micropolitically?
THREE CONCEPTS FOR MICROPOLITICAL 
ANALYSIS: CARE, COMMUNITY AND 
RESURGENCE
COMMONS AND PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS: CARE AS 
AN OPERATIVE CONCEPT
Social movements play a vital role in enabling, accom-
panying and inhabiting municipalist commons-based 
formulas of public policies. The chains of connection and 
interdependence that mark the conditions of possibility of 
such commons-making processes run deep into the histories 
and infrastructures of social movements, tapping their 
knowledges in ways that don’t coopt grassroots knowledges 
and practices but value them in their autonomy. Making 
commons policy based on micropolitical understanding 
entails a recognition of interdependence across movements 
and institutions: municipalist governments needing 
institutions in order to be able to legitimise and properly 
develop radically democratic caretizen  politics and policies, 
and commoners and activists needing responsive politicians 
and administrators to make their demands heard.
This requires at least two kinds of political sensitivity and 
openness to others . On the one hand, it requires translators, 
intermediaries and mediators across these realities, figures 
and processes that enable negotiations and shifts in 
discourse and subjectivity. In the case of the grupos de 
crianza, that’s parents, educators and councilors who reach 
out beyond their own remit, often because they inhabit 
several roles at once: councillors who have their kids in 
grupos de crianza and translate information between these 
two realities, parents active within municipalist movements, 
educators who foster parent self-organization or build 
networks between nurseries… This kind of micropolitical 
labour – often entirely unrecognized, invisible to the public 
eye and indeed often also to parts of the parties concerned 
– is what enabled the success of the Barcelona commons 
models described above: people who refused to take sides 
or take on formal roles, act as points of contact and debate 
across movements and institutions in public fora, echo and 
channel contradictions as well as proposals, etc.
On the other hand, micropolitical and care-based 
openness to others also requires a subjective shift within 
politics, away from the idea of citizens towards an inclusion 
of all those others  who labour to reproduce cities and their 
people and spaces. So many of those performing crucial 
care in our societies are not citizens, but what we may 
call caretizens , people with essential roles but without 
passports of residency permits. Carers, cleaners, nurses, maintenance and delivery workers, garbage collectors are 
not seen as lowly and uninformed people but as agents 
of knowledge and skills, experts in their fields and vital 
to the reproduction of society. Letting those invisibilzed 
and undervalued others  into institutions requires not only 
forms of openness and desiring production, but also ways 
of speaking different languages and dialects, valorizing 
different kinds of knowledge and body, learning from the 
forms of communication and organisation that different 
communities work with.
Thanks to the feminist underpinnings of Barcelona en 
Comú, this interdependence across the commons and the 
public can be affirmed and accepted as a matter of strength 
rather than weakness – no more illusions of sovereign 
political subjects but rather an intelligent articulation 
across interdependence and autonomy. Care workers of 
all kinds can be recognized and valued for their work, with 
migrant care worker’s organizations leading the way in their 
demands – something that municipal institutions are now 
no longer in denial of in Barcelona, with the ‘Caring City’ 
policy that features care workers centres (Barcelona Cuida) 
and care worker’s cards (targeta cuidadora). In education, 
traditionally, it’s children who are the others, a notion that 
childcare commons as much as municipal policies like the 
City of Play (Ciutat Jugable) contest, putting children and their 
families at the heart of the design of learning, growing up 
and of the city. This micropolitical shift profoundly transforms 
what institutions and governments are and do, shifting away 
from the idea that public systems cater to uninformed people 
needing help, to valorizing and empowering the labours, lives 
and knowledges of those who reproduce everyday life as 
well as those who receive care (Zechner 2021).
COMMUNITY AND INFRASTRUCTURES OF THE 
COMMONS
Grupos de Crianza compartida are first and foremost 
community spaces and actors, as spaces that generate 
relations and community and occupy an important role 
within neighbourhoods, and can get organized to have a 
voice in local debates (like the PEPI network). Community is 
rendered operative and rich through a series of dispositifs 
(tools, configurations) and infrastructures of the commons. 
For Spanish language commons movements, the emphasis 
on community often comes via Latin America (Vega Solis, 
Martínez Bujan and Paredes Chauca, 2018 ; Gutierrez 
Aguilar 2017 ). As Raquel Gutiérrez Aguilar puts it, learning 
from indigenous epistemologies:
We learned a lot from the American indigenous 
tradition…, they speak like that in a properly poetic 
way, I really like how they put it. They speak of the 
four flowers of the common, they say: land/ground/
456
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
soil [tierra], work/chores [trabajo-faena], assembly 
and celebration [fiesta]. These are the four things 
that make up the possibility… there have to be 
these four things in order for there to be a common 
(Gutiérrez Aguilar, 2017 ; my translation from 
Spanish).
Commoning is about relating as much as it is about material 
resources –the assembly and the fiesta are key platforms 
for the circulation of affects and development of relations 
and organizational strength. In this sense, commons are 
about ‘putting life at the center’ of our activities (a key 
phrase of the Spanish-speaking feminist movements, see 
Pérez  Orozco 2022 ), which hinges on radical collective care 
and the capacity for doing situated politics. Its materiality 
and relationality are specific to time and place, and as 
such any theory or politics of the commons must work 
through situated methodologies. It must be able to read 
the importance of practices, of rituals, of relations, rhythms 
and forms of collective practice, of ways of weaving 
community [ tramas comunitarias ] as Gutiérrez Aguilar, 
Gago, Gil and many other theorists call it. Needless to say 
that the role of women in these communitarian weavings 
is crucial, as is their role in the subversion of community 
(Dalla Costa and James, 1972 ).
In this view, commons are not just resources, but they are 
matters of relation, work and organization in a necessary 
sense: no commons without relations, processes of (re)
production and organization of commoning, or in the words 
of feminist Maria Mies, ‘no commons without a community’ 
(Mies, 2014 ). The question of work –visible or invisible, 
reproductive or productive, communal or individual, paid 
or unpaid, etc. – in this sense is key to thinking commons, 
to avoid mystifying them. Their material conditions and 
bases, and the resilience of relational, micropolitical and 
communitarian fabrics and weavings, is what conditions 
the resurgence of commons, their capacity to revive.
RESURGENCE: PASSING ON MEMORY AND 
CULTURE
As Stengers and Gutwirth (2016 ) point out, self-
organizational human commons (as opposed to natural 
commons such as land, water, forests, etc.) are by nature 
resurgent. They emerge, transform, collapse, reemerge and 
reconfigure themselves over time and across generations. 
They require our constant labors and attention in order 
to sustain themselves. To survive, both natural and social 
commons need to resist enclosure and construct memory, 
resilience and continuity – making ‘humus’ or compost, 
as Maria Puig de la Bellacasa calls this commons-piling 
on of living and dead matter and of memory (Puig de la 
Bellacasa, 2015 ).As commons with a strong generational element, 
instances like childcare cooperatives (Zechner, 2022b ) as 
well as municipalist platforms depend a lot on knowledges 
and practices of memory and resurgence. Their possibilities 
of existence and sustainability rest on the capacity of a 
group of people to set their own rules and to adapt to 
changing internal and external challenges, to produce 
and sustain living knowledges across generations  (see 
also Vercauteren, Crabbé and Muller, 2007 ; Bartels , 2022 ). 
The generational transfer or knowledges, experiences, 
memory, as part of ‘common cultures’ (Stengers and 
Gutwirth, 2016, p.27 ) or ‘écoliteratie’ (Capra and Mattei, 
2015 ) are key to most commoning. In the case of self-
run nurseries, this presents itself as challenge to pass 
knowledges, practices and cultures of care on, as kids 
(and with them their families) grow out of the nurseries 
and into schools (cross-institutional transfer, from 
commons into public schools, being another key element 
here). In the case of municipalism, it presents itself as an 
immense challenge for the first activist generation that 
built Barcelona en Comú, who have to avoid getting stuck 
in professionalized roles and hierarchies of knowledge 
(their own ethics code prescribes rotation after two terms 
in office), to bring new people into the project continually 
and transmit memory and knowledge while also allowing 
for reinvention.
Commons build up an immense wealth of knowledge 
for those involved in them, yet their ceasing can often 
mean this knowledge is lost, leading to groups having to 
“reinvent the wheel” over and over again. Not all commons 
must last, but their knowledges of histories, processes and 
failures need to find a way to live on in communities and 
infrastructures, to enable powerful resurgence. As F élix 
Guattari put it, groups need to know how to die  (Guattari, 
2003 ) – and as members of the Collectif sans Tiquet put it 
in their book on the Micropolitics of Groups, (Vercauteren, 
Müller and Crabbé, 2007 ), groups also need to foster a 
culture of precedents. Those two eminently micropolitical 
challenges require an openness to transformation that also 
honors its memories and elders. This is a crucial concern in 
studies of commoning, particularly those that deal with the 
others  of organization (or the supposedly unorganizable , as 
some put it (Milkman  2006 , Kim 2015 ) – migrants, women, 
undocumented and informal workers, mad people, the 
ill, children): how to give account of, give concepts to, 
remember and transmit the experiences and knowledges 
gained, so that they can benefit future generations, 
nourish a sense of history, identity, tradition and belonging. 
Childcare commoning is a privileged space for this as it 
builds not only its own processual knowledge – carried 
forth by collective agents like PEPI and different chroniclers 
(Keller Garganté 2015 , Rodrigo and Iberika 2020 , Zechner 
457
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
2021 ) – but it’s also where future generations can first 
encounter cultures of community and commoning.
CONCLUSIONS
I started this text with questions about the relevance 
of micropolitics for understanding commons – and by 
extension commons municipalism. My guiding lines for 
this questioning came from the situated and transversal 
insights of militant research, building on the Spinozist 
question of the capacities to act  that micropolitical 
knowledges can confer upon us. Following Guattari and 
Deleuze, I emphasised how the production of subjectivity 
across the grassroots and institutional dimensions of 
commons can come to make a difference, producing 
new common knowledges, referents, positionalities: new 
possibilities of being, speaking and doing. Municipalism in 
Barcelona has shown, in my view, that transforming public 
institutions is possible (much more so than transforming 
the political system in sweeping ways) and necessary, and 
that the commons and the public are not two opposed 
principles but that as matters that concern all, and often 
ought to be articulated. Though we must always evaluate 
what’s possible and desirable in a given situation, overall 
we must not demand any less than that.
Care , community  and resurgence  have been three of 
the key lenses through which I have proposed to read the 
micropolitics of commons, as pillars for understanding 
what makes commons sustainable at a relational and 
collective level. Often overlooked and underestimated, 
those three dimensions point to the ways in which bodies 
and lives are sustained (care), in which collectivity and its 
infrastructures matter for commons (community), and in 
which commons last and reinvent themselves through time 
(resurgence). Those make for long and textured stories and 
genealogies of the commons, rather than just anecdotal 
or insular examples, or technical-organisational analyses 
and recipes. I have taken inspiration, in my genealogy-rich 
narrations here, in Latin American commons, which tend 
to valorize these dimensions of liveliness , collectivity  and 
memory  over more formalist accounts.
This way of paying attention to commons is what I have 
called micropolitical. Micropolitical knowledge, irreducible 
to a set of principles or hypotheses, challenge us to lean 
into complexity and struggle. While micropolitical learning 
may involve study, I have shown how it is mostly a matter 
of embodied, relational, inhabitational, organizational and 
associative intelligences (Rübner-Hansen and Zechner, 
2015 ) – wherein the importance of listening, feeling, sensing 
and affect do not diminish the capacity to distinguish, 
criticize, reject. Understanding the interplay between dynamics of autonomy and interdependence as a fruitful 
and vital part of micropolitics, I have emphasised the 
importance of feminist knowledges and practices. I have 
written up these lessons on micropolitics in an attempt to 
show how commons can not do without care, relational 
intelligence and an openness to others.
Vibrant commons, just like public institutions, are always 
traversed by these others, and their capacity to enter 
into relation with them is an important marker of their 
collective health and openness. As a political-analytical lens, 
micropolitics comes, as I remembered at the outset of this 
paper, from the radical desire to transform institutions, to let 
in the madmen, mad women, the strangers, dreamers and 
irregulars. Not those who lay claim to truth or totality, but 
those who render visible all the blind spots in productivist 
and andocentric narratives, and expose the cracks of seeing, 
feeling, being and relating, making incompleteness and 
vulnerability palpable. Vulnerability is, as we again learn from 
feminists, the core of our common condition, what often 
opens doors to other possibilities, and as such something 
we must connect to (Zechner, 2022a ). The invisibility and 
undervaluing of care and reproduction are not a must, 
feminist municipalism also shows, and as different feminist 
tendencies clash as well as mix in this context, theirs is a 
quest for justice and synergies, rather than hegemony. As 
such they are quintessentially micropolitical.
We have seen that the relation between movements and 
institutions was a core political matter for recent Spanish 
municipalism. This relation matters not because of a moral 
imperative or tactical electoral calculus, but because it is a 
condition for the capacity of an antagonistic, anticapitalist 
politics, and thus of a radical democratization along lines 
of class, race, gender, and so on. Some key lessons here: it 
matters not just that institutions listen to movements but 
also that they do not coopt or paralyze them. It matters 
that movements know how to confront institutions and 
make demands not just so that they achieve wins, but 
also affirm their autonomy. It matters that institutions and 
movements -as agents of the public and the commons- 
can see and inhabit their interdependence with one 
another, and invent new political horizons from there, direly 
needed after the destruction of the welfare state and the 
subsequent rise of neoliberal individualism and nationalist 
racism. Any new ‘social contract’ today must build on 
both commons and the public, on both autonomy and 
heteronomy as principles, and on caretizenship . Indeed, as 
I have suggested, these should be key terms when thinking 
about the commons. Too much time has been spent trying 
to show their tragedy and immunity respectively, with little 
attention given to the ways in which commons always 
necessarily involve both tendencies of interdependence 
and autonomy.
458
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
Finally, I have pointed to subjectivity as key sphere within 
which the above plays out. Feminism and municipalism can 
affect relationality and subjectivities within institutions, parties, movements as well as in everyday life, in ways whereby subjectivity, rather than ideology (Guattari and 
Rolnik, 2007) , is what most profoundly and durably shapes 
social and political cultures. We cannot think transformation without thinking subjectivity, and micropolitics is a vehicle for that. Micropolitics leads us to think the rhythms, structures, patterns, temporalities, tonalities and textures of the political. For municipalism, this has meant challenges such as the individualization of responsibility as well as professionalization in institutions and parties, or the meaninglessness of participation when it is reduced to a formula. Public-commons governance shows itself to be a matter of experimentation, openness and listening, as then-councillor Claudia Delso of A Coruña said:
These projects [of co-designing policy and spaces] helped us to listen. They contributed to the learning process of the institution, a machine designed to prevent change. After all, the institution can also learn, and we have learned to allow the institutions (and ourselves) to experiment, to change how things are done and also to make mistakes. Nobody can expect to know or control everything (Delso and Traviesas Mendez, 2019).
In this sense, commoning, and instances of commons municipalism, can be traced as processes of confronting the ghosts of individualism, paternalism, competition, supremacy, racism, sexism, and other -isms that we all have internalized. To realize that no one can expect to know and control everything, but rather thinks and speaks from an embodied and situated place, implies a radical recognition of limits (Kallis, 2019) and vulnerability (Pérez 
Orozco 2022; Gil, 2011). Two facts that we as humans and 
societies have to urgently live up to, in the face of rampant capitalism and neoliberalist exploitation, and its twin climate and ecological breakdown.
NOTES
1 Amongst other things, this article draws on research done in 
the context of the Heteropolitics research project on commons (heteropolitics.net), which has received funding from the European 
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement 724692).
2 Garrett Hardin’s notion of ‘lifeboat ethics’ is deeply Mathusian, suggesting our contemporary crises are due to overpopulation (by implication, black and brown people in the global South) rather than extractivist-toxic capitalism and global injustice (that favour white people). Hardin’s argument, that there are limited spaces on our rich nation’s lifeboats and that we shouldn’t help ‘the poor’, is a favourite of eco-fascist argumentation. See also Kallis, 2019.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I remain deeply grateful to all my co-researchers and 
fellow activists who accompanied the initial research this text draws on. From the mamas of Poble Sec to the people working for transformative commons within and beyond Barcelona en Comú, to Alexandros Kioupkiolis of the Heteropolitics research project, via my long term fellow 
traveller Bue R übner Hansen, to ex-councillor and avid 
thinker-feeler Claudia Delso, and so on. All of the intuitions and conclusions above are nourished by collective intelligence, debate, process, organizing and care – there would be little to report without these.
FUNDING INFORMATION
Amongst other things, this article draws on research done in the context of the Heteropolitics research project on commons (heteropolitics.net), which has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement 724692).
COMPETING INTERESTS
The author has no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Manuela Zechner  orcid.org/0000-0002-3860-7698 
FSU Jena, DE
REFERENCES
Ayuntamiento de Barcelona. (2019a). Bienes comunes. Hacia 
el uso y la gesti ón comunitaria de lo p úblico. Ayuntamiento 
de Barcelona Website, https://ajuntament.barcelona.
cat/participaciociutadana/sites/default/files/documents/bienes_comunes._hacia_el_uso_y_la_gestion_comunitaria_de_lo_publico.pdf, accessed 01/07/2020.
Ayuntamiento de Barcelona. (2019b). Approval to grant 
the use of Can Battl ó to a self-managed community 
organization. Ayuntamiento de Barcelona Website, https://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/participaciociutadana/en/noticia/approval-to-grant-the-use-of-can-batllo-to-a-self-managed-community-association_790268, accessed 01/07/2020.
Baraza, M. (2022). Mas de 3000 familias se quedaran sin plaza 
en las Escuales Bressol en Barcelona. El Periodico online 
459
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
newspaper , published 24 may 2022, https://www. elperiodico.
com/es/barcelona/20220524/familias-plazas-preinscripcion-
nuevas-escoles- bressol-barcelona-13700416  retrieved 
19/092023.
Barcelona en Comú.  (2017). Dos Anys Despr és. Video, Barcelona 
en Comú Website, https://barcelonaencomu.cat /ca/video/
les-lluites-dos-anys-despres , retrieved 01/07/2019.
Bollier, D., & Helfrich, S.  (2015). Patterns of Commoning. The 
Commons Strategies Group in cooperation with Off the 
Common Books: Amherst, Massachusetts.
Bollier, D.,  & Helfrich, S.  (2019). Free, Fair and Alive: the Insurgent 
Power of the Commons.  British Columbia: New Society 
Publishers.
Bartels, K.  (2022). Experiential learning: a relational approach to 
sustaining community-led social innovation. Innovation: The 
European Journal of Social Science Research . DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1080/13511610.2022.2121268
Capra, F.,  & Mattei, U.  (2015). The Ecology of Law. Toward a Legal 
System in Tune with Nature and Community. San Francisco: 
Berrett-Kohler Publishers.
Dalla Costa, M.,  & James, S.  (1972). The Power of Women and 
the Subversion of Community. Libcom, https://libcom.org/
library/power-women-subversion-community-della-costa-
selma-james , accessed 1/04/2020.
Delso Carreira, C.,  & Traviesas-Mendez, C.  (2019). Conversations 
about the Little Things. Minim Municipalist Webplatform, 
https://minim-municipalism.org/magazine/conversations-
about-the-little-things , accessed 11/04/2020.
Casas Cortes, M.  (2009). Social Movements as Sites of Knowledge 
Production: Precarious Work, the Fate of Care and Activist 
Research in a Globalizing Spain. PhD dissertation, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Deleuze, G.,  & Guattari, F.  (1983). Anti Oedipus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Dosse, F.  (2011). Intersecting Lives: Gilles Deleuze and Félix 
Guattari . Columbia: Columbia University Press.
Eroles, I.  (2011). La recuperación de la fábrica de Can 
Battló. Periodico Diagonal, 24/08/2011, https://www.
diagonalperiodico.net/movimientos/la-recuperacion-la-
fabrica- can-batllo.html , retrieved 05/06/2019.
España Naveira, K.  (2019). Por una suavidad agujerante. 
Transversal Webjournal , https://transversal.at/blog/ por-una-
suavidad-agujereante , retrieved 05/05/2018.
Ezquerra, S.  (2013). Hacía una reorganización de los Cuidados: 
¿Entre lo Público y lo Común? Viento Sur, N.130 , November 
2013.
Federici, S.  (2004). Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and 
Primitive Accumulation. New York: Autonomedia.
Galindo, M.,  & García-Linera, Á.  (2014). Maria Galindo entrevista 
a Álvaro García Linera: Gobernar es un acto de mentir. La 
Vaca , 17/07/2014, https:// www.lavaca.org/notas/maria-galindo-alvaro-garcia-linera-gobernar- acto-de-mentir/ , 
retrieved 18/06/2020.
Galindo, M.,  & Brunner, E.  (2019). Entrevista a Maria Galindo, 
anarcofeminista Boliviana. Periódico Libertario, http://
periodicoellibertario.blogspot.com/2019/03/entrevista-
maria-galindo.html  retrieved 24/10/2023.
Gil, S.  (2011). Nuevos Feminismos. Sentidos Comunes en la 
Dispersión.  Madrid: Traficantes de Sueños.
Guattari, F.  (2000 [1989]). The Three Ecologies . London: Athlone 
Press.
Guattari, F.  (2003 [1964]). Psychanalyse et Transversalit é: Essais 
d’Analyse Institutionelle.  Paris: La Découverte.
Guattari, F.,  & Rolnik, S.  (2007). Micropolitics: Molecular Revolution 
in Brazil.  London: MIT Press.
Guattari, F.  (2012). De Leros à La Borde . Fécamp: Éditions Lignes.
Gutiérrez Aguilar, R. (2008). Los Ritmos del Pachakuti. 
Movilización y levantamiento indigena-popular en Bolivia, 
Buenos Aires: Tinta Limón.
Gutierrez Aguilar, R.  (2010). Épocas históricas y tradiciones de 
lucha en México.  Document for discussion. México: CEAM-
Casa de Ondas.
Gutiérrez Aguilar, R.  (2017). Raquel Gutiérrez en Barcelona. 
Audio recording of 11/03/2017, https ://soundcloud.com/
fundaciondeloscomunes/raquel-gutierrez-en-barcelona , 
retrieved 03/07/2020.
Gutiérrez Aguilar, R.  (2017a). Entrevista con Raquel Gutiérrez, 
por Pikara Magazine. Pikara Magazine , https://www.
pikaramagazine.com/2017/05/raquel -gutierrez-aguilar/ , 
retrieved 18/06/2020.
Gutiérrez Aguilar, R.  & Lugano, R.  (2014). María y Alvaro: la fuerza 
de las luchas; la fuerza de la maniobra. Anarquía Coronada , 
http://anarquiacoronada.blogspot .com/2014/07/maria-y-
alvaro-la-fuerza-de-las-luchas .html , retrieved 18/06/2020.
Haraway, D.  (1988). Situated Knowledges: The Science Question 
in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective. 
Feminist Studies , 14(3), 575–599. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.2307/3178066
Hardt, M.,  & Negri, T.  (2004). Multitude. War and Democracy 
in the Age of Empire.  London/New York: Penguin Random 
House.
Harney, S.,  & Moten, F.  (2013). The undercommons: fugitive 
planning & black study.  London: Minor Compositions.
Helfrich, S,  et al. (2012). Sorge tragen : Commons und Gender. 
Resumé of the interdisciplinary political salon ‘Zeit f ür 
Allmende’. published on the commonsblog https://
commonsblog.files.wordpress.com/2008/04/doku-gender-
commons-def1 .pdf retrieved 19/09/2023.
Holmes, B.  (2002). The flexible personality. Transversal 
Webjournal 2002, Issue on Machines and Subjectivation.  
https://transversal.at/transversal/1106/holmes/en  retrieved 
24/10/2023.
460
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
Institut Diversitas and Barcelona en Comu. ́ (2018). Informe de 
Género de BComú: Resúmen , https://barcelonaencomu.cat/
sites/default/files /document/informe-diagnosi-genere.pdf  
retrieved 18/06/2020.
Kallis, G.  (2019). Limits: Why Malthus Was Wrong and Why 
Environmentalists Should Care . Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9781503611566
Keller Garganté, C.  (2015). Grupos de Crianza Compartida.  Master 
Thesis. Barcelona: Instituto Interuniversitario de Estudios de 
Género.
Kim, E. T.  (2015). Organizing the Unorganizable. Dissent Magazine,  
Spring 2015. https://www.dissentmagazine.org/article/
worker -centers-immigrant-organizing  retrieved 16/05/2023. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1353/dss.2015.0033
La Hidra Cooperativa.  (2021). Patrimoni Ciutadà: un marc per a la 
col·laboració públic-comunit ària. Report. https://lahidra .net/
wp-content/uploads/2021/04/informePatrimoni.pdf  retrieved 
01/03/2021.
Lugano and Gutiérrez.  (2016). Gobernar es un acto de mentir. 
In P. Cartoneras (Eds.), Devenir Casta.  Barcelona: Pensar é 
Cartoneras.
Malo de Molina, M.  (2007). ‘Nociones Comunes, parte 2: del 
análisis institutional a experiencias contemporaneas entre 
investigacion y militancia’. In: Transversal Webjournal , 
Issue on Instituent Practices, https://transversal.at /
transversal/0707/malo-de-molina/es
Matheney, A., Garcia-Lamarca, M., Calderón-Argelich, A., 
Alfandari, N.,  & Papillon, D.  (2023). ‘A space of possibilities: 
Situated Research from/with La Casa dels Futurs.’ Antipode 
Journal, may 2023.
Mies, M.  (2014). No Commons without a Community. Community 
Development Journal , 49(1), 106–117. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1093/cdj/bsu007
Milburn, K.,  & Russel, B.  (2019). Public-Commons 
partnerships: building new circuits of collective ownership. 
Common-Wealth Blog, https ://common-wealth.co.uk/Public-
common-partnerships.html , retrieved 01/07/2020.
Milkman, R.  (2006). Organizing the Unorganizable. Boston Review.  
https:// www.bostonreview.net/articles/ruth-milkman-the-
rebirth-of-organized- labor/  accessed 16/05/2023.
Mustersprache Commoning Wiki.  (undated) Wiki page with 
Commons Terminology by Silke Helfrich and David Bollier 
http://mustersprache. commoning.wiki/view/welcome-visitors
Nociones Comunes.  (2013). ‘El ADN de la Vida: crianza, cuida- dos 
y comunidad’. Nociones Comunes course website https://
nocionescomunes.wordpress.com/2013/02/11/el-adn-de- la-
vida-crianza-cuidados-y-comunidad/
Pérez Orozco, A.  (2022). The Feminist Subversion of the Economy . 
New York: Common Notions.
Precarias a la Deriva.  (2003). Por la Deriva en los Circuitos de la 
Precariedad Feminina.  Madrid: Traficantes de Sueños.Precarias a la Deriva.  (2010). Precarious Lexicon. Caring Labour 
Blog . https://caringlabor.wordpress.com/2010/12/14/
precarias-a-la-deriva-precarious-lexicon/ .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M.  (2015). Making time for soil: 
Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social 
Studies of Science , 45(5), 691–716. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851
Radio Reina Sofia.  (2011). ‘Towards institutions of the common: 
and interview with Raúl Sanchez Cedillo and Carlos 
Prieto del Campo,’ Reina Sofia Website, https://radio.
museoreinasofia.es/en/towards -institutions-common , 
retrieved 01/07/2020.
Rodrigo, J.,  & Iberika.  (2020). ‘Schools as Spaces of Conflict’. 
Another Roadmap School Glossary , https://another-roadmap.
net/articles/0003/4891/schools-as-spaces- of-conflict.pdf , 
accessed 15/05/2023.
Rolnik, S.  (2019). Esferas de la Insurreción . Buenos Aires: Tinta 
Limón.
Roth, L.,  & Shea Baird, K.  (2017a). ‘Municipalism and the 
feminization of politics.’ ROAR Magazine , 6, https:// roarmag.
org/magazine/municipalism-feminization-urban-politics/ , 
accessed 01/07/2020.
Roth, L.,  & Shea Baird, K.  (2017b). ‘Left-wing populism and the 
feminization of politics.’ ROAR Magazine , 13, https://roarmag.
org/essays/left- populism-feminization-politics/ , accessed 
01/07/2020.
Rubio-Pueyo, V.  (2017). Municipalism in Spain: From Barcelona 
to Madrid, and beyond.  New York: Rosa Luxemburg 
Stiftung.
Rübner-Hansen, B., & Zechner, M.  (2015). Building Power in a 
Crisis of Social reproduction. Roar Magazine , Issue 1.
Russell, B., Milburn, K.,  & Heron, K.  (2022). ‘Strategies for a 
new municipalism: Public–common partnerships against 
the new enclosures.’ Urban Studies . DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/00420980221094700
Stengers, I.,  & Gutwirth, S.  (2016). ‘Le droit à l’épreuve 
de la r ésurgence des commons.’ Revue Juridique de 
l’Environnement , 2016 (2): 306–343. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.3406/rjenv.2016.6987
Transversal.  (2007). Instituent Practices.  Issue 07/07 of the 
Webjournal.
Tronto, J.  (1994). Moral Boundaries: a political argument for an 
ethics of care.  New York: Routledge.
Vega Solis, C., Martínez Buján, R.,  & Paredes Chaua, M.  (2018). 
Cuidado, comunidad y común.  Madrid: Traficantes de 
Sueños.
Vercauteren, D., Crabbé, O.,  & Mueller, T.  (2007). Micropolitique 
des groupes.  Paris : HB Éditions.
Zechner, M.  (2013). The world we desire is one we can create and 
care for together. Phd Thesis, London: Queen Mary University 
London.
461
Zechner International Journal of the Commons DOI: 10.5334/ijc.1232
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Zechner, M. (2023). No Commons Without Micropolitics. Learning with Feminist and Municipalist Movements in Spain. International Journal 
of the Commons, 17(1), pp. 447– 461. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/ijc.1232
Submitted: 03 November 2022     Accepted: 15 November 2023     Published: 20 December 2023
COPYRIGHT:
© 2023 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
International Journal of the Commons is a peer-reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press.Zechner, M. (2016). ‘Let’s Play? Citizenship, Subjectivity and 
Becoming in Municipalism.’ Transversal Webjournal 09/16.
Zechner, M. (2021). Commoning Care and Collective Power: 
Childcare Commons and the Micropolitics of Municipalism in 
Barcelona. 
Vienna/Z ürich/M álag a: Transversal Texts.Zechner, M. (2022a). ‘To Care as We Would Like To: Socio-Ecological 
Crisis and our Impasse of Care.’ Gropius Journal 2022.
Zechner, M. (2022b). ‘Childcare commons: of feminist subversions 
of community and commune in Barcelona.’ Ephemera Journal, Vol 22. Number 2.
