
i
TEACHING GENDER
Teaching Gender: Feminist Pedagogy and Responsibility in Times of Political 
Crisis addresses the neoliberalization of the university, what this means in 
real terms, and strategic pedagogical responses to teaching within this context 
across disciplines and region.
Inspired by bell hooks’ “transgressive school” and Donna Haraway’s 
“responsibility”,  this collection promotes a politics of care within the classroom 
through new forms of organizational practices. It engages with the challenges 
and possibilities of teaching students about women and gender by examining 
the multiple pedagogical, theoretical, and political dimensions of feminist 
learning.
The book revisits how we can reconfigure a feminist politics of responsibility  
that is able to respond to or engage with contemporary crises. It also concep-
tualizes crisis and explains how it is transforming contemporary societies 
and affecting individual vulnerabilities and institutional structures. Finally, it 
offers practical cases from different European locations, in which crisis and 
responsibility have served to reformulate contemporary feminist pedagogies, 
altering curriculums, reframing institutions, and affecting the process of 
teaching and learning.
Beatriz Revelles- Benavente  is a Juan de la Cierva post-doctoral researcher at 
Universidad de Barcelona.
Ana M. González Ramos  is a senior researcher at the Internet Interdisci-
plinary Institute in the Open University of Catalonia.   
iiii

iii
iiTEACHING GENDER
Feminist Pedagogy and 
Responsibility in Times of 
Political Crisis
Edited by Beatriz Revelles- Benavente and
Ana M. González Ramos  
iv
First published 2017
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 selection and editorial matter, Beatriz Revelles- Benavente and  
Ana M. González Ramos; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Beatriz Revelles- Benavente and Ana M. González Ramos to be  
identified as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their  
individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of  
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or  
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now  
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in  
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing  
from the publishers.
Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or  
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation  
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN: 978- 1- 138- 70122- 9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978- 1- 138- 70123- 6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978- 1- 315- 20416- 1 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabon
by Out of House Publishing  
v
CONTENTS
List of figures  vii
List of contributors  viii
  Introduction  1
Beatriz Revelles-  Benavente and  
Ana M. González Ramos
 1 Sharing vulnerabilities: searching for “unruly edges” in 
times of the neoliberal academy  11
Monika Rogowska-  Stangret
 2 Knowmadic knowledge production in times of crisis  25
Olga Cielemecka and Beatriz Revelles-  Benavente
 3 (No) time for care and responsibility: from neoliberal 
practices in academia to collective responsibility in  
times of crisis  42
Ester Conesa Carpintero
 4 “It’s a hell of a responsibility to be yourself”: troubling  
the personal and the political in feminist pedagogy  64
Esther Sánchez-  Pardo
 5 Feminist science literacy as a political and pedagogical 
challenge: insights from a high school research project  81
Rosa Costa and Iris Mendel  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi Contents
vivi
 6 Screening feminisms: approaches for teaching sex and 
gender in film  99
Felicity Colman and Erin K. Stapleton
 7 Doubt, excitement, pleasure: feminist practices of  
teaching and learning in art and education  117
Barbara Mahlknecht
 8 Feminist ethics of responsibility and art therapy: Spanish 
art therapy as a case in point  131
Ángela Harris Sánchez and Adelina Sánchez Espinosa
 9 (Fostering) princesses that can stand on their own two 
feet: using wonder tale narratives to change teenage 
gendered stereotypes in Portuguese EFL classrooms  146
Alexandra Cheira
 10 The case of Tumblr: young people’s mediatised responses  
to the crisis of learning about gender at school  163
Jessie Bustillos
 11 On the road: feminist alliances across Europe  178
Verònica Gisbert Gracia
Index  193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vii
viFIGURES
5.1 Students playing a game  87
5.2 Group discussion  87
5.3 Students presenting a group work on gender stereotypes  88
5.4 Changing the setting  91
5.5 Creating a different atmosphere  92
5.6 Schedule of our work with the students  95
10.1 Danielle’s Tumblr post on her identity, November 2015  173
10.2 Danielle’s Tumblr online profile, January 2016  174
11.1 The route of the Feminist Caravan  179
11.2 Feminist activists in Ahmetler  185
11.3 Meeting with members of “Vulturilor 50”  186
11.4 Feminist from Vienna playing a song in Mauthausen  187
11.5 Kampüs Cadilari’s poster  189  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viiiviii
CONTRIBUTORS
Jessie Bustillos  is Senior Lecturer in Education Studies at London 
Metropolitan University, UK. She is currently interested in looking at the 
theoretical, philosophical, and sociological intersections between education, 
culture, and new technologies. This teaching feeds into her current research 
which is an online ethnography exploring young people’s experiences as 
networked public on various social media.
Alexandra Cheira  is a researcher at the University of Lisbon Centre for 
English Studies, Portugal. Her current areas of research include contem -
porary women’s writing, women’s studies, and, particularly, gender issues 
and wonder tales in A.  S. Byatt’s fiction. She has taught Portuguese and 
English as a Foreign Language in secondary schools and polytechnic colleges 
since 1995.
Olga Cielemecka  is a postdoctorate at the Unit of Gender Studies, 
Department of Thematic Studies, Linköping University in Sweden. She holds 
a PhD in philosophy. She brings together research within the domains of 
contemporary philosophy, feminist theory, and posthumanism, in an effort 
to rethink the concepts of the subject, community, and collaboration in 
times of advanced capitalism and environmental change.
Felicity Colman  is Professor of Film and Media Arts at Manchester 
Metropolitan University, UK. She is the author of Film Theory: Creating 
a Cinematic Grammar  (2014), Deleuze and Cinema  (2011), editor of 
Film, Theory and Philosophy: The Key Thinkers  (2009), and co- editor of 
Sensorium: Aesthetics, Art, Life  (2007).  
Contributors ix
viiiix
Ester Conesa Carpintero  is a PhD candidate (Universitat Oberta de 
Catalunya) working on gender and scientific careers in the GENERA Project. 
She previously worked as a research assistant on gender and technology 
(Universitat Rovira i Virgili) and studied Research on Social Psychology 
(MA, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona).
Rosa Costa  is a historian, youth worker, trainer in adult education, and 
activist in Vienna. She teaches at different Austrian universities on topics 
such as gender- reflective pedagogy and feminist critique of science. She is 
currently working at the Department of Political Science at the University 
of Vienna.
Verònica Gisbert Gracia  is a PhD student at the Department of Sociology 
and Social Anthropology at the University of Valencia. She completed 
the GEMMA Erasmus Mundus master’s degree in Women’s and Gender 
Studies at the University of Granada (Spain) and Utrecht (Netherlands) and 
a master’s in Human Rights, Democracy, and International Justice at the 
University of Valencia.
Ángela Harris Sánchez  holds a BA in Art History (University of Granada) 
and an MPhil in Art Therapy (Complutense University, Madrid). She is Initial 
Research Fellow at the University of Granada and has also contributed to 
Art Therapy programmes in spaces of social inclusion such as the Gypsy 
Secretariat Foundation, RAIS Foundation for the Homelesss, and Ventillarte 
Association for immigrant children in Madrid.
Barbara Mahlknecht  is a researcher, curator, and art educator. She is cur -
rently a lecturer at the Academy of Fine Arts, Vienna. Her work in research, 
curating, and art education strongly relates to feminist curatorial practices, 
socially /politically engaged art, the exhibition as performative space, and 
critical art education.
Iris Mendel  is a social scientist and philosopher based in Graz, Austria. Her 
research interests include materialist feminism, feminist theories of know-
ledge production, and critical pedagogy. She is currently working at the 
Department of Political Science at the University of Vienna.
Monika Rogowska- Stangret  is a lecturer and postdoctoral researcher at the 
University of Warsaw. She is the author of Ciało: poza Inno ściąi Tożsamo ścią. 
Trzy figury ciała w filozofii współczesnej  [The Body: Beyond Otherness and 
Sameness. Three Figures of the Body in Contemporary Philosophy]  (2016) 
and “Of Other Spaces, of Other Times: Towards New Materialist Politics of 
Squatting” in Avant  (2015).
x Contributors
xx
Adelina Sánchez Espinosa  is Senior Lecturer in English Literature and 
Gender Studies at the University of Granada. She is currently Scientific 
Coordinator for the Erasmus Mundus joint master’s degree in Women’s 
Studies and Gender in Europe and Principal Investigator at the University of 
Granada for the Gender and Cultures of Equality in Europe, a Marie Curie 
H2020 research and development project. Her current research focuses on 
textual and visual cultures of equality in Europe.
Esther Sánchez- Pardo  is Professor of English at the Universidad Com-
plutense, Madrid. She has published in feminist theory and comparative 
literature, with volumes including Cultures of the Death Drive: Melanie 
Klein and Modernist Melancholia  (2003), and has co- edited Women, 
Identities and Poetry  (1999), Feeling the Worlds  (2001), Ophelia’s Legacy  
(2001), and L’Écriture Désirante: Marguerite Duras  (2015).
Erin K.  Stapleton  is Honorary Fellow in the School of Historical and 
Philosophical Studies at the University of Melbourne, where she also teaches 
Gender Studies. She completed her PhD at the London Graduate School at 
Kingston University in 2014.newgenprepdf
1
xINTRODUCTION
Beatriz Revelles- Benavente and  
Ana M. González Ramos
In Dispossession: The Performative in the Political , Judith Butler and Athena 
Athanasiou (2013) critique contemporary society as predicated on a form of 
neoliberal crisis management which controls subjects based on economic and 
political premises, as well as moralistic ones. To disrupt this organizational 
structure, contextualized via universities, philosophical approaches, social 
movements (and other layers), Butler and Athanasiou propose dispossession 
as a way to critique recognition and the sovereign subject. Looking through 
different mass media such as television, internet, and newspapers, we can see 
many different examples of how this form of neoliberal crisis management 
is controlling and affecting subjects across the world. If we reflect upon the 
“flaring” migrant crisis in the Mediterranean (so described by the New York 
Times1), during which twenty migrants a day are killed while trying to cross 
from their country of origin to various points in Europe,2 we can see a clear 
example of neoliberal world ordering marked by managerial practices con -
trolling human bodies across frontiers. The number of women and children 
involved in the migration drama in the Mediterranean is rising gradually, 
at the same time that the urgency of war, violence, and poverty in their 
origin countries is growing. This ongoing and intensifying crisis of human 
migration places women’s bodies in the center of the whirlpool: they are 
the object of trafficking, of harassment during migration, and sometimes of 
sexual slavery imposed by those who are smuggling them. The migrant crisis 
also leads to an ecological crisis, since this migration directly contributes  
to an erosion of coastlines and significant environmental deterioration.3 On 
this occasion, the fact that a third of the world’s population is migrating 
across one specific area and destroying habitat there is not a strong enough 
reason to implement regulatory mechanisms. The addition and overlapping 
of various types of crisis around our environment provokes what Butler and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Revelles-Benavente and González Ramos
22
Athanasiou (2013) have defined as the acclimatization of a population to 
insecurity and precarization related to vulnerability, anxiety, and illness.
This is just one of the many manifestations that contemporary crisis is 
materializing, and a very brief overview of just one specific case of neoliberal  
regulatory practice. An increasing political orientation to the extreme right 
in Europe is being enhanced, which only reinforces the aforementioned  
crisis that transversally affects politics, economics, the environment, feminist 
values, and education (to mention just a few of the many layers involved). 
Feminist theory and practice have been fighting against all of these injustices 
during their entire history; nevertheless, this change in the way knowledge is  
created and circulated, together with the ways in which hierarchical structures  
of power are permeating our socio- cultural material discourses, calls for new 
political strategies that can have an impact on the process while it is being 
materially enacted and before the results are manifested (Grosz, 2005). In a 
new era in which the capitaloscene (Haraway, 2016) is the controlling force 
of subjects (as controlled by the circulation of neoliberal capital), we need 
to find alternatives to work in and out of the system. bell hooks (1994) pro -
motes the school as the beginning point for installing what we considered 
“lost” feminist values. With this book, the editors want to follow that prem -
ise in order to engage society with theory and teaching with learning, thus 
producing new forms of organizational practices both intergenerational and 
interdisciplinary, forms that become radically “response- able” (Haraway, 
2008; Barad, 2010) through a politics of care for each other. New feminist 
approaches are emerging in order to promote a more horizontal approach 
to teaching, one in which teacher and students are decentralized to promote 
a co- creation of knowledge. Some examples of these approaches are femi -
nist materialist teaching (Hinton and Teusch, 2015) or affective pedagogies 
(Hickey- Moody, 2016), approaches inspired by bell hook’s transgressive 
teaching or education for freedom (hooks, 1994). The classroom has his -
torically been a space of rebellion for students and teacher when they are 
mutually involved in the learning process, but at the same time teaching is 
often constructed through the reproduction of certain values that at times 
make it hard to materialize resistance.
The contributors to this volume follow a similar premise: they conceive 
of education as a central tool for freeing the subject from this neoliberal 
managerial crisis, and they follow this decentralizing notion of the process 
of teaching– learning in order to configure a gender pedagogy, or, as the title 
of the book announces, in order to begin teaching with a feminist poli -
tics of responsibility. The Teaching with Gender book series addresses the  
challenges and possibilities of teaching students about women and gender by 
discussing the pedagogical, theoretical, and political dimensions of learning 
and teaching. Teaching a feminist politics of responsibility nowadays means 
at the same time radically questioning racialized and sexualized epistemol -
ogies (Butler and Athanasiou, 2013) and acting against new conservative  
 
 
  
 
Introduction 3
23
“rationality”. This book aims to shed light upon three particular dimen -
sions of the topic that will structure the book: first, by revisiting how we can 
reconfigure a feminist politics of responsibility “able to respond” (Haraway, 
2008; Barad, 2007) or engage with contemporary crises; second, by concep -
tualizing crisis and explaining how it is transforming contemporary societies  
and affecting individual vulnerabilities and institutional structures; and 
third, by offering practical cases from different European locations in which 
crisis and responsibility have served to reformulate contemporary feminist 
pedagogies, altering curriculums, reframing institutions, and affecting the 
process of teaching and learning. The relevance of the topic cuts across 
many of the established feminist journals with recent special issues includ -
ing “Gender and Crisis in Global Politics” ( International Feminist Journal 
of Politics , 2013); “Responsibility and Identity Global Justice” ( Hypatia , 
2011); and “Feminism and the Politics of Austerity” ( Feminist Review , 
2015). Nevertheless, this volume asks: what kinds of feminist response are 
emerging in classrooms?
The editors of this book pursue the analysis of the challenges and look 
for the possibilities of teaching about women and gender through discussing 
the pedagogical, theoretical, and political dimensions of learning and teach -
ing. We believe that in times of political crisis (as well as of environmental, 
of moral, economical, and of other kinds of crisis) a feminist intervention 
becomes essential to ensure social change and the preservation of women’s 
rights. All in all, this book constitutes a plea for acknowledging not only the 
multiplicity present in the required areas of knowledge, as well as the necessity   
to produce relational patterns between them, but also for acknowledging 
the plethora of scholars defining the different approaches that might be 
taken into account when engaging theoretically and practically with femi -
nism. Thus, the editors have decided to leave the book without conclusions 
in order to foster the debate that is being created and enhance the multiplic -
ity that inhabits any act of resistance as an open door to different possibili -
ties created by the contributors. Their chapters stir our reflection on political 
crisis, neoliberalism in the university, work discipline in intellectual profes -
sions, gender identity and technology management, and the use of resistance 
methodology in the classroom so that the fruitful debate that feminism is 
proposing can be highlighted.
Gathering the twelve chapters that compose this book, we consider that 
we have achieved a very useful feminist pedagogy for classrooms at the pri -
mary and secondary level as well as for spaces outside classrooms, in places 
like university departments or collective actions. We foresee our proposal 
as a very open one which can be reworked iteratively and opened up to 
explore new possibilities and strategies. Beginning from Donna Haraway’s 
situated knowledges (1988), we believe this pedagogical knowledge is sit -
uated, and thus different chapters explore different countries (the United 
Kingdom, Spain, Poland, Portugal, and Austria), different types of crisis   
4 Revelles-Benavente and González Ramos
44
(economic crisis, neoliberal crisis in the universities, political crisis), and the 
context in which situated knowledges are being applied (universities, high 
schools, feminist collectives, or even different disciplines). Relying upon 
the situatedness of each context of study means orientating our research 
object and recognizing our non- innocent gaze, or as Olga Cielemecka and 
Beatriz Revelles- Benavente state, it means we must “depart from our own 
backyard” (Cielemecka and Revelles- Benavente, Chapter 2 ). Situating our 
pedagogical strategy prevents us from universalizing feminist ideologies 
and conceptualizations of gender and allows us to move towards a feminist 
politics of multiplicity, of openness, and of situatedness by focusing on local 
problems while retaining a global perspective.
Regardless of what we consider to be progress or regression in universi -
ties, hegemonic discourses, or normative cultures, what this book wants to 
demonstrate is how a feminist politics can be response- able for and with 
contemporary society in times of crisis, with these concepts differing accord -
ing to each chapter. Far from pointing towards a relative definition of both, 
what the authors in this compilation show is the importance of contextual -
izing, or in Haraway’s words situating , our work and concerns in order to 
find “provisional” solutions to urgent problems (Lykke, 2010). Thinking 
through solidarity and relationality, the contributors to this book aim at 
engaging with differing feminist pedagogies to pursue a multiple truth- 
reclaiming knowledge through different disciplines (film studies, feminist 
science studies at the high school level, feminist philosophy, art therapy, 
English as a foreign language, and arts). At the same time, this book is rein -
forcing the need to create independent studies of gender beginning with dif -
fering pedagogies. This will provoke tensions around what we mean by sex, 
gender, and inequalities by promoting an engaged confrontation with biased 
gender knowledge.
As previously stated, feminist researchers in this book adopt a situated 
position, which consequently means that most of the chapters are inspired 
by the work of Donna Haraway. However, the authors diffract (as in Barad’s 
words of reading with each other instead of opposing each other) different 
approaches to Haraway’s thought in the current state of permanent political 
crisis and from varied geographical European regions. According to one of 
our contributors, this diffraction is “[b] ased on the premise that the local and 
the global are not defined in terms of physical geography but exist simulta -
neously and constitute one another” (Sánchez- Pardo, Chapter 4 ). Globality 
and locality need to be mutually dependent on each other and intra- act-
ing relationally, which is why one of the premises of this book, in basing 
chapters in different geographical locations in Europe, was to demonstrate 
a common need and a common premise that can be oriented despite the 
multiplicity of contexts that the book shows. Additionally, when in neolib -
eral times, the kind of subject engaged with these concerns is a knowmadic 
cognitive force (in Cielemecka’s and Revelles- Benavente’s words, Chapter 2 )  
 
 
 
Introduction 5
45
which traverses geo- political frameworks. Opening up this multiplicity with 
the variety of chapters encourages the need to observe problems locally; 
nevertheless, it does not prevent orientating our political strategies around 
a common goal, which is what gives our book its title: finding gender peda -
gogies able to produce a responsible answer for a political crisis from a 
feminist perspective. This is, following again Haraway’s premise to avoid the 
“God Trick”, in order to produce situated and, we would like to add here, 
feminist  knowledges (a concept that is further explored in Cielemecka and 
Revelles- Benavente’s Chapter 2 ).
The tools proposed by the contributors of this book comprise a wide 
diversity including negotiation, responsibility, relationships between dif -
fering women, sorority, alliances, and resistances to normative concepts  
such as the neoliberal “failure” which favors a free- labor market in aca -
demia. As Esther Sánchez- Pardo warns us in Chapter 4 , feminism is not 
a secure ground, which means that moving towards a fixed identity can 
collapse its force. Thus, she looks into a pedagogy that enhances dialogue 
or allows for the co- creation of knowledges and curriculums in a con -
text of high precarity, introducing concepts unknown in other regions 
of Europe such as “zero- hours contracts”. These contracts manifest, at 
times, the precarity at public universities in which temporary contracts 
with a low charge of hours are favored above permanent contracts or 
positions, which not only promotes instability but also the difficulty of 
advancing in your academic career; something geographically situated but 
also expressed by Monika Rogowska- Stangret ( Chapter 1 ), Ester Conesa 
Carpintero ( Chapter 3 ), and Olga Cielemecka and Beatriz Revelles-  
Benavente ( Chapter 2 ).
This book shows the complexity of the contemporary crisis, with its var -
ied layers and manners of response and resistance: pedagogy, human val -
ues, solidarity, and the inclusion of new themes and identities. This crisis 
has encouraged feminist research to pursue a wide and varied vocabulary 
in order to build up a different political strategy able to face an anthro -
pocentric society like our present one. This vocabulary has problematized 
not only issues such as the relation between teacher and student, but also 
the tension between the self and society (situated in universities and other 
areas of research) that often results in human illnesses such as anxiety (as 
Rogowska- Stangret and Conesa Carpintero reflect, in Chapters  1  and 3, 
respectively), as well as the conceptualization of affects as relational forces 
that make visible things initially appearing materially invisible, as expressed 
by Barbara Mahlknecht ( Chapter 7 ) and Ángela Harris Sánchez and Adelina 
Sánchez Espinosa ( Chapter 8 ).
As a consequence, at times the self relating with society as it is presented 
in this book is a vulnerable one, in Rogowska- Stangret’s words ( Chapter 1 ). 
Focusing on the vulnerability of the self in these neoliberal times, Rogowska- 
Stangret presents a relational subject who needs to share vulnerabilities in  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
6 Revelles-Benavente and González Ramos
66
order to find companionship with others and survival in the accelerated 
academy, and argues through her definition of the ethics of this self via four 
“unruly edges” that will “reveal its relational character” that vulnerability 
is the basis for necessary feminist alliances (Rogowska- Stangret, Chapter 1 ). 
These unruly edges or movements towards unpacking the notion of the self 
have to do with its identity, its normativization and classification, the neces -
sity to situate the self in time and space, and the self’s recognition of social, 
political, economic, and environmental entanglements, all of which contrib -
ute to what the authors have identified as the spinal bones of a contem -
porary feminist pedagogy which are crisis, political strategy, responsibility, 
precarity, and care.
The importance of affects for the book is directly or indirectly related in all 
the chapters for two primary reasons. The first, as will be further explained 
later, is that care is one of the most important tools for our envisioned politi -
cal strategy. We consider care as an intra- action that needs to be present in 
every feminist alliance as a strategic device helping feminist researchers and 
activists to practice generosity as part of our own development. According to 
Mahlknecht ( Chapter 7 ), affects are appropriated by capitalism in order to use 
and abuse researchers, students, and all the actors partaking in contemporary 
society. Thus, reinforcing the politics of care explained by Conesa Carpintero 
(Chapter 3 ) serves as our material and discursive resource to fight contem -
porary social injustices. The second, already introduced by Mahlknecht’s 
approach ( Chapter 7 ), shows how affects are “a central aspect of contempo -
rary culture and society”, so they need to be approached “as a generic subject 
of study” (Mahlknecht, Chapter 7 ). If reconsidered in this way affects can be 
articulated as “the breaking apart from the way they have gradually become 
a socially accepted means of oppression and the empowerment of the very 
act of questioning them” (Harris Sánchez and Sánchez Espinosa, Chapter 8 ).
In addition, the editors of this volume consider affects to be (in)visible 
forces that materially relate different discourses of oppression that, when 
conceptualized within this pedagogical framework, can help to disrupt hier -
archies of power. In this volume we are interested in the classroom because 
from primary school (as in Alexandra Cheira, Chapter 9 ) to postgraduate 
school and beyond, the classroom is one platform that enables political  
agitation and the learning and co- creating of knowledge. One of these 
invisible affective forces is the affect that relates teachers and students, 
and this book asks how bringing up the tension between teacher and stu -
dents (already explored in other volumes of this series, e.g. “Teaching with 
Feminist Materialisms”) might decentralize the role of the teacher and the 
position of the students as something other than containers of theory (as 
stated by Rosa Costa and Iris Mendel, Chapter 5 ).
Mahlknecht ( Chapter 7 ) argues that education offers tools and meth -
ods to provoke “good” feelings and to channel “bad” feelings, a strategy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 7
67
that is also followed, though it is conceptualized differently, by Colman and 
Stapleton ( Chapter 6 ). They conceive the classroom as a “safe space” and a 
“test laboratory” insomuch as teachers, together with students, co- create the 
type of knowledge that is being enhanced in the classroom. Focusing on stu -
dents’ feelings allows the creation of safe spaces in the classroom so that stu -
dents can express their opinion freely and teachers can promote the generic 
skill of critical thinking without producing affective vulnerabilities in the 
classroom. Yet, in another vein, Harris Sánchez and Sánchez Espinosa in 
Chapter 8  focus on a relational approach to Ahmed’s concept of happiness  
in order to reconstruct “knowledges from different positions and the role 
played in this process by a politic of social responsibility”. Likewise, offering 
a multidimensional approach via three interviews with art therapy teachers, 
Harris Sánchez and Sánchez Espinosa ( Chapter 8 ) look for an ethical gesture 
towards the other that implies an affective approach to the boundaries cre -
ated within the classroom.
Bearing in mind how gender pedagogies need to be theorized in creative 
and innovative ways in order to engage with the complexity of the con -
temporary crisis (as stated above), some other chapters provide the analy -
sis of feminist collectives (as in Verònica Gisbert Gracia, in Chapter 11 ) 
which could be considered exemplary for a classroom on social movements. 
Another example that can be used in the classroom that would decentralize 
the roles of teachers and students is Jessie Bustillos’ analysis of self- presenta -
tion in social networking sites ( Chapter 10 ). She describes how a student in 
the UK uses technology to resist surveillance of her gender identity, defining 
response- ability (Haraway, 2008; Barad, 2010) through social- networking 
sites by learning about sexuality, homophobia, and sexism in ways unavail -
able to her at school.
Regarding the position of the student, Colman and Stapleton ( Chapter 
6) offer a movement towards an appeal to the student’s potentiality for 
consciousness of the political conditions of the screen media site; through 
the examination of the situation, the inhabitants of the screen, and their 
mediation the pedagogic screen narrative enables students to take up a 
responsive analysis in the first instance. Depending on the type and style of 
screen media experienced, the classroom can then diffract this reading into 
as many different possible positions as are conceivable within the medium’s 
contextual and technological frameworks. This argues for the management 
of students’ silences and opinions, which coincides with Alexandra Cheira’s 
plea in Chapter 9  on deconstructing stereotypes (also in Esther Sánchez- 
Pardo, Chapter 4 ) to create safer spaces in which different opinions can be 
discussed. For instance, Cheira offers a reflection upon romantic ideas of 
relationships between Portuguese teens and shows how this can prompt a 
gendered type of dating violence against which she fights through a feminist 
elaboration of wonder tales in her classroom. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
8 Revelles-Benavente and González Ramos
88
The political strategy that engages with the toolbox that is presented in 
this volume as a feminist pedagogy implies that “thinking- with, interrela -
tionality, solidarity, and comparative cross- cultural analysis of power and 
oppression come to be major categories of analysis in any feminist- informed 
curriculum for today, in our current times of crisis” (Sánchez- Pardo, Chapter 
4). Or, from the point of view of social movements, this political strategy has 
to do with women’s alliances (as Verònica Gisbert Gracia, in Chapter 11), 
or with lived social relations (as Bustillo, in Chapter 11). Using Costa and 
Mendel’s words ( Chapter 5 ) we understand crisis as a “congestion of ongo -
ing social contradictions, as contested processes that allow for new forms 
of domination as well as for new forms of critique and resistance”. This is 
not a nostalgic or glorifying move towards a distant past (or in their words, 
a “golden past” of democracy or science, let alone of gender relations). It is 
rather the pursuit of relations instead of separations, entanglements between 
past, presents, and imagined futures, relations capable of breaking through 
crises with tools of care and of fighting precarity with feminist responsibility.  
In Conesa Carpintero’s words, we would like to see the book as offering “the 
potential to engage with the connections between the exclusionary neoliberal 
scientific model and the well- being of academics and science itself, promoting 
the necessary debate around time and care, to create resistances and spaces 
that sustain life collectively in local and broader senses” ( Chapter 3 ).
This book is conceptualized as a conglomerate of perspectives offering 
the reader many points of view and reflection to be used in classrooms with 
undergraduate and postgraduate students that move beyond their research 
topics. Contextualizing the chapters through time and space, disciplinary 
background, differing positions within and outside the academy, and differ -
ing –  at times even contradictory –  feminist stances, we endeavor to enact 
gender pedagogies able to respond to contemporary political crises. We invite 
our readers to engage with us in the adventurous enterprise of being a femi -
nist researcher and to reinvent this book by putting it into practice, thanks 
to the suggested assignments that our contributors have kindly offered in 
order to present tentative curricula for gender pedagogical strategies. With 
this, we aim at fighting the precarity installed by the contemporary neolib -
eralism which “defines our existences, although always in articulation with 
social and political implications which redistribute unequal and differen -
tiated strategies of precarity  that are at once a material and a perceptual 
issue” (Gisbert Gracia, Chapter 11 ). Understanding teaching and learning 
as a precarious movement, these contributors depart from the school as a 
political site to encourage reflection upon the differences between realities 
and stereotypes.
To conclude, the editors of Teaching Gender:  Feminist Pedagogy 
and Responsibility in Times of Political Crisis  would like to thank 
ATGENDER, the European Association for Gender Research, Education 
and Documentation for their help during the process of editing and  
 
 
 
Introduction  9
89
publishing this volume, as well as their confidence in us and their will -
ingness when choosing this important topic. Thanks are especially due 
to Dasa Duhacek, Sara de Jong, Giovanna Vingelli, Adriano J.  Habed, 
and Sveva Magaraggia for their invaluable help assisting with the pro -
cess of making this book. Also, to the publisher, Routledge, many thanks 
for believing in our project from the beginning and for publishing this 
“Teaching with Gender” series for ATGENDER. Additionally, we would 
also like to thank Thomas Spitzer-  Hanks for his labor as assistant editor 
during the first round of reviews, relieving our managerial tasks but also 
offering very valuable comments to improve the content of our book. We 
would like to thank the contributors of the book for their amazing chap -
ters and their generosity with deadlines, suggestions, and many other parts 
of the process. Their promptness has been extremely helpful in carrying 
out this project. And, dear reader, please: help us to rework the contribu -
tions here in light of a different and hopeful future with social justice and 
responsible understanding.
Notes
 1 www.nytimes.com/  2016/  05/  30/  world/  europe/  migrants-  deaths-  mediterranean-  
libya-  italy.html?_  r=0 (accessed October 9, 2016).
 2 www.dailymail.co.uk/  news/  article-  3703186/  Dying-  new-  start-  West-  20-  migrants-  
day- killed-  crossing-  Med-  3-  000-  lives-  lost-  year-  250-  000-  complete-  trip.html  
(accessed October 9, 2016).
 3 www.greenpeace.org/  international/  en/  news/  features/  concrete-  stranglehold/   
(accessed October 9, 2016).
References
Barad, Karen, 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the 
Entanglement of Matter and Meaning . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Barad, Karen, 2010. “Quantum Entanglements and Hauntological Relations of 
Inheritance:  Dis/  continuities, SpaceTime Enfoldings, and Justice-  to-  Come”. 
Derrida Today , 3 (2), 240–  68.
Butler, Judith and Athena Athanasiou, 2013. Dispossession: The Performative in the 
Political: Conversations with Athena Athanasiou . Cambridge: Polity Press.
Grosz, Elisabeth, 2005. Time Travels: Feminism, Nature, Power . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Haraway, Donna, 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question of Feminism 
and the Privilege of Partial Persepctive”. Feminist Sudies , 14 (3), 575–  99.
Haraway, Donna, 2008. When Species Meet . Minneapolis:  University of 
Minnesota Press.
Haraway, Donna, 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hickey-  Moody, Anna, 2016. “Affect as Method: Feelings, Aesthetics and Affective 
Pedagogy”. In: Rebecca Coleman and Jessica Ringrose, eds, Deleuze and Research 
Methodologies . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 79–  95. 
   
 
  
10 Revelles-Benavente and González Ramos
1010
Hinton, Peta and Pat Treusch, eds, 2015. Teaching with Feminist Materialisms: 
Teaching with Gender. European Women’s Studies in International and 
Interdisciplinary Classrooms . Utrecht: ATGENDER.
hooks, bell, 1994. Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom . 
London: Routledge.
Lykke, Nina, 2010. “Introduction”. In: Nina Lykke, ed., Feminist Studies: A Guide 
to Intersectional Theory, Methodology and Writing . New York: Routledge, i– xii.
Introduction 
Barad, Karen , 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Barad, Karen , 2010. “Quantum Entanglements and Hauntological Relations of Inheritance:
Dis/continuities, SpaceTime Enfoldings, and Justice-to-Come”. Derrida Today, 3 (2), 240–268. 
Butler, Judith and Athena Athanasiou , 2013. Dispossession: The Performative in the Political:
Conversations with Athena Athanasiou. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Grosz, Elisabeth , 2005. Time Travels: Feminism, Nature, Power. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press. 
Haraway, Donna , 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question of Feminism and the
Privilege of Partial Persepctive”. Feminist Sudies, 14 (3), 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna , 2008. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Haraway, Donna , 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. 
Hickey-Moody, Anna , 2016. “Affect as Method: Feelings, Aesthetics and Affective Pedagogy”.
In: Rebecca Coleman and Jessica Ringrose , eds, Deleuze and Research Methodologies.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 79–95. 
Hinton, Peta and Pat Treusch , eds, 2015. Teaching with Feminist Materialisms: Teaching with
Gender. European Women’s Studies in International and Interdisciplinary Classrooms. Utrecht:
ATGENDER. 
hooks, bell , 1994. Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. London:
Routledge. 
Lykke, Nina , 2010. “Introduction”. In: Nina Lykke , ed., Feminist Studies: A Guide to
Intersectional Theory, Methodology and Writing. New York: Routledge, i–xii. 
 
Sharing vulnerabilities 
Ahmed, S. (2014), Selfcare as Warfare, http://feministkilljoys.com/2014/08/25/selfcare-as-
warfare/. 
Ahmed, S. (2015), Against Students, New Inquiry, June 29,
http://thenewinquiry.com/essays/against-students/. 
Alaimo, S. (2010), Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material Self, Indiana
University Press, Bloomington. 
Barad, K. (2012), Intra-active Entanglements: An Interview with Karen Barad by Malou
Juelskjaer and Nete Schwennesen, Kvinder, Køn & Forskning, 1–2: 10–23. 
Bauman, Z. (2007), Liquid Times: Living in an Age of Uncertainty, Polity Press, Cambridge. 
Beck, U. (1992 [1986]), Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity, transl. by M. Ritter , Sage, Los
Angeles. 
Berg, M. and B. K. Seeber (2016), The Slow Professor: Challenging the Culture of Speed in the
Academy, University of Toronto Press, Toronto. 
Braidotti, R. (2006), The Ethics of Becoming Imperceptible, in: Deleuze and Philosophy, ed. by
Constantin Boundas , Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh: 133–159. 
Butler, J. (2009), Frames of War: When Is Life Grievable, Verso, New York. 
Butler, J. and A. Athanasiou (2013), Dispossession: The Performative in the Political, Polity
Press, Cambridge. 
Cielemecka, O. and M. Rogowska-Stangret (2015), Stigmergy as a Collective Research
Practice, in: Imagine There Were No Humanities … Transdisciplinary Perspectives, ed. by I.
Ackermann , K. Chruszczewska , E. R. Janion , Á. Máté , and N. Obukowicz , Wydawnictwo
DiG, Warsaw: 51–58. 
Collini, S. (2012), What Are Universities For? Penguin, London. 
Cȏté, J. E. and A. L. Allahar (2007), Ivory Tower Blues: A University System in Crises,
University of Toronto Press, Toronto. 
Cȏté, J. E. and A. L. Allahar (2011), Lowering Higher Education: The Rise of Corporate
Universities and the Fall of Liberal Education, University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Crary, J. (2013), 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep, Verso, London. 
Debord, G. (2000 [1967]), The Society of the Spectacle, Black & Red, Kalamazoo, MI. 
Deleuze, G. (1995 [1990]), Negotiations 1972–1990, transl. by M. Joughin , Columbia University
Press: New York. 
Deleuze, G. and M. Foucault (1977), Intellectuals and Power: A Conversation between Michel
Foucault and Gilles Deleuze, in: M. Foucault , Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected
Essays and Interviews, ed. by Donald F. Bouchard . Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY:
205–217. 
Eagleton, T. (2015), The Slow Death of the University, Chronicle of Higher Education, April 6,
www.chronicle.com/article/The-Slow-Death-of-the/228991/#disqus_thread. 
Foucault, M. (1983), The Subject and Power, in: H. L. Dreyfus and P. Rabinow , Michel
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago:
208–226. 
Foucault, M. (1988 [1984]), The Care of the Self. Volume 3 of The History of Sexuality, transl.
by R. Hurley , Vintage Books, Random House: New York. 
Foucault, M. (2003), Society Must Be Defended. Lectures at the Collège de France 1975–76,
ed. by M. Bertani , A. Fontana , transl. by D. Macey , Picador, Palgrave Macmillan, New York. 
Foucault, M. (2008 [2004]), The Birth of Biopolitics. Lectures at the Collège de France 1978–79,
ed. by M. Senellart , transl. by G. Burchell , Picador, Palgrave Macmillan, New York. 
Freud, S. (1923), The Ego and the Id, many editions. 
Gill, R. (2009), Breaking the Silence: The Hidden Injuries of Neo-liberal Academia, in: Secrecy
and Silence in the Research Process: Feminist Reflections, ed. R. Flood and R. Gill ,
Routledge, London. 
Gilligan, C. (1982), In Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s Development, many
editions. 
Goffman, E. (1986), Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity, Touchstone, New
York. 
Grosz, E. (2004), The Nick of Time: Politics, Evolution, and the Untimely, Duke University
Press, Durham, NC. 
Grosz, E. (2011), Becoming Undone: Darwinian Reflections on Life, Politics, and Art, Duke
University Press, Durham, NC. 
Haraway, D. (1991), Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege 
of Partial Perspective  , in: D. Haraway , Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of 
Nature, Free Association Books, London: 183–201. 
Haraway, D. (2003), The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
Otherness, Prickly Paradigm Press, Chicago. 
Hornblow, M. (2015), A Sahara in the Head: The Problem of Landing, Inflexions, 8,
http://inflexions.org/radicalpedagogy/main.html#Hornblow. 
Kristeva, J. (1991), Strangers to Ourselves, transl. by L. S. Roudiez , Columbia University
Press, New York. 
Lawson, V. (2009), Instead of Radical Geography, How about Caring Geography? Antipode, 41
(1): 210–213. 
Massumi, B. (2014), What Animals Teach Us about Politics, Duke University Press, Durham,
NC. 
Mountz, A. , A. Bonds , B. Mansfield et al. (2015), For Slow Scholarship: A Feminist Politics of
Resistance through Collective Action in the Neoliberal University, ACME, International E-journal
for Critical Geographies, 14 (4): 125–1235. 
Nussbaum, M. C. (2010), Not for Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Pocklington, T. C. and A. Tupper (2002), No Place to Learn: Why Universities Aren’t Working,
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver. 
Reading, B. (1996), The University in Ruins, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Rose, D. (2013), Slowly ~ Writing into the Anthropocene, TEXT Special Issue 20: Writing
Creates Ecology: Ecology Creates Writing, ed. by Martin Harrison , Deborah Bird Rose ,
Lorraine Shannon , and Kim Satchell , October 2013,
www.textjournal.com.au/speciss/issue20/content.htm. 
Slaughter, S. and L. L. Leslie (1997), Academic Capitalism: Politics, Policies, and the
Entrepreneurial University, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Stengers, I. (2011), Another Science Is Possible! A Plea for Slow Science,
http://we.vub.ac.be/aphy/sites/default/files/stengers2011_pleaslowscience.pdf. 
Sullivan, N. (2015), Somatechnics of Swallowing, keynote lecture at the conference Open
Embodiments: Locating Somatechnics in Tucson, University of Arizona, Tucson, April 15–18. 
Tsing, A. (2012), Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species, Environmental
Humanities, 1: 141–154. 
van der Tuin, I. (2015), Classifixation in Feminist Theory, in: Generational Feminism: New
Materialist Introduction to a Generative Approach, Lexington Books, Lanham, MD: 19–38. 
von Uexküll, J. (2010), A Theory of Meaning, in: J. von Uexküll, A Foray into the Worlds of
Animals and Humans, transl. by J. D. O’Neil , University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. 
Wilson, E. (2004), Gut Feminism, Differences, Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 15 (3):
66–94. 
 
Knowmadic knowledge production in times of crisis 
Academic Anonymous Higher Education Blog Series , 2014. “There is a culture of acceptance
around mental health issues in academia”, 1 March. Available from:
www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/mar/01/mental- health-issue-phd-
research-university [Accessed 1 September 2015 ]. 
Barad, Karen , 2007. Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Barad, Karen , 2010. “Quantum Entanglements and Hauntological Relations of Inheritance:
Dis/continuities, SpaceTime Enfoldings, and Justice-to-Come”. Derrida Today, 3 (2), 240–268. 
Berardi, Franco (Bifo), 2005. “What Does Cognitariat Mean?” Cultural Studies Review, 11 (2),
57–63. 
Berg, Maggie and Barbara K. Seeber , 2016. The Slow Professor: Challenging the Culture of
Speed in the Academy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Berlant, Lauren , 2011. Cruel Optimism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Bird Rose, Deborah , 2013. “Slowly ~ writing into the Anthropocene”. TEXT  Special Issue 20: 
Writing Creates Ecology and Ecology Creates Writing, eds. Martin Harrison, Deborah Bird
Rose, Lorraine Shannon, and Kim Satchell. Available from:
www.textjournal.com.au/speciss/issue20/Rose.pdf [Accessed 7 July 2016 ]. 
Braidotti, Rosi , 2011. Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in Contemporary
Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Butler, Judith , 1999. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York:
Routledge Press. 
Butler, Judith , 2004. Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence. London: Verso. 
Butler, Judith and Athena Athanasiou , 2013. Dispossession: The Performative in the Political:
Conversations with Athena Athanasiou. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Cixous, Hélène , 1976. “The Laugh of the Medusa”. Transl. K. Cohen and P. Cohen . Signs, 1
(4), 875–893. 
Colman, Felicity , 2010. “Notes on the Feminist Manifesto: The Strategic Use of Hope”. Journal
for Cultural Research, 14 (4), 375–392. 
Data on Success Rate in Spanish Scholarships , 2016. Blog, 20 June. Available from:
https://juandelaciencia.wordpress.com/2016/06/20/algunos-datos-y-estadisticas- de-los-jdc-y-
ryc/#more-1770 [Accessed 23 June 2016 ]. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari , 1987. A Thousand Plateaus. Transl. B. Massumi .
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Economic Crisis Increases Doctoral Thesis , 2015. Press article, 5 June. Available from:
www.20minutos.es/noticia/2481236/0/tesis-doctorales/aumentan-desde-inicio/crisis-economica/
[Accessed 23 June 2016 ]. 
Grabowska, Magdalena , 2013. Between Gender Studies and Gender Ideology. Gender
Education in Poland. Warsaw: Heinrich Boell Stiftung. Available from:
https://pl.boell.org/sites/default/files/downloads/Magda_Grabowska_gender_education.pdf
[Accessed 6 September 2016 ].
Halberstam, Judith/Jack, 2011. Queer Art of Failure. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Haraway, Donna , 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism”. Feminist
Studies, 14 (3), 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna , 1991. “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism”.
In: D. Haraway , Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York:
Routledge, 149– 81. 
Haraway, Donna , 1992. “ Ecce Homo , Ain’t (Aren’t) I a Woman, and Inappropriate/d Others: 
The Human in a Post-Humanist Landscape”. In: Judith Butler and Joan Wallach Scott , eds,
Feminists Theorize the Political. New York: Routledge, 81–101. 
Haraway, Donna , 2000. How Like a Leaf: An Interview with Thyrza Nichols Goodeve. New
York: Routledge, 135–138. 
Haraway, Donna , 2008. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Haushofer, Johannes , date unknown. CV of Failures. Available from:
www.princeton.edu/haushofer/Johannes_Haushofer_CV_of_Failures.pdf [Accessed 1 June
2016 ]. 
Hemmings, Clare , Mia Liinason , and Katrine Smiet , 2015. “Survival Kit for Young
Researchers: Getting Funded, Getting Published”. Roundtable discussion in 9th Feminist 
European Research Conference: Sex and Capital , 5 June, University of Lapland University of 
Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland. 
Michalak, Dominika , 2013. “Studia doktoranckie w Polsce – łatwo zacząć, trudniej skończyć”.
11 March. Available from: https://noweotwarcie.org/tag/ uniwersytet/ [Accessed 6 June 2016 ]. 
Moravec, John , 2013. “Knowmad Society: The ‘New’ Work and Education”. On the Horizon, 21
(2), 79–83. 
Mountz, Alison , Anne Bonds , Becky Mansfield et al., 2015. “For Slow Scholarship: A Feminist
Politics of Resistance through Collective Action in the Neoliberal University”. ACME: An
International E-Journal for Critical Geographies. Available from:
www.academia.edu/12192676/For_Slow_Scholarship_A_Feminist_Politics_of_Resistance_thro
ugh_Collective_Action_in_the_Neoliberal_University [Accessed 1 March 2016 ]. 
Pascual, Alfredo , 2012. “La secretaría de: ía de Estado de Investigación: ʻEn España sobran
científicos’”. Press article, 7 June. Available from: www.elconfidencial.com/sociedad/2012-06-
07/la-secretaria-de-estado-de-investigacion-en-espana-sobran-cientificos_253768/ [Accessed 1
March 2016 ]. 
Pyke, Karen , 2011. “Service and Gender Inequity among Faculty”. Political Science and
Politics, 44 (1), 85–87. 
Readings, Bill , 1997. The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Revelles-Benavente, Beatriz , forthcoming. “Affecting Feminist Pedagogies: Performing Critical
Thinking in the Relation between Social Networking Sites and Contemporary Literature”. In:
Edyta Just and Wera Grahn , eds, Adventurous Encounters. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars
Publishing. 
Schostak, John and Jill Schostak , 2008. Radical Research: Designing, Developing and Writing
Research to Make a Difference. London: Routledge. 
Slow Science Academy , 2010. “Slow Science Manifesto”. Available from: http://slow-
science.org/slow-science-manifesto.pdf [Accessed 1 June 2016 ]. 
Standing, Guy , 2011. The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class. London: Bloomsbury
Academic. 
Stengers, Isabelle , 2011. “Another Science Is Possible! A Plea for Slow Science”. A public
lecture delivered at Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 13
December. Available from:
https://threerottenpotatoes.files.wordpress.com/2011/06/stengers2011_pleaslowscience.pdf
[Accessed 1 January 2016 ]. 
Sullivan, Nikki , 2015. “The Somatechnics  of Swallowing”, lecture delivered at the 
Somatechnics: Open Embodiments: Locating Somatechnics in Tucson  conference, 17 April, 
University of Arizona, Tucson. 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt , 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of
Life in Capitalist Ruins. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Tuin, Iris van der , 2015. Generational Feminism: New Materialist Introduction to a Generative
Approach. London: Lexington.
Williams, Jeffrey J. , 2012. “Deconstructing Academe: The Birth of Critical University Studies”.
Chronicle of Higher Education, 19 February. Available from: http://chronicle.com/article/An-
Emerging-Field-Deconstructs/130791/ [Accessed 1 April 2016 ]. 
 
(No) time for care and responsibility 
Acker, Sandra and Armenti, Carmen . “Sleepless in academia”. Gender and Education, 16, 1
(2004): 3–24. Retrieved from http://doi.org/10.1080/0954025032000170309. 
Alleva, Lisa . “Taking time to savour the rewards of slow science”. Nature, 443 (2006): 271.
Retrieved from www.nature.com/nature/journal/v443/n7109/full/443271e.html. 
Baker, Maureen. “Career confidence and gendered expectations of academic promotion”.
Journal of Sociology , 46, 3 (2010): 317–34. Retrieved from 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1440783310371402. 
Barad, Karen . “Posthumanist performativity: Toward an understanding of how matter comes to
matter”. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 23, 3 (2003): 801–831. 
Barker, Kristin K. The Fibromyalgia Story: Medical Authority and Women Worlds of Pain.
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 2005. 
Barker, Kristin K. “Listening to Lyrica: Contested illnesses and pharmaceutical determinism”.
Social Science and Medicine, 73 (2011): 833–842. 
Carrigan, Mark . “Life in the Accelerated Academy: Anxiety thrives, demands intensify and
metrics hold the tangled web together”. Impact Blog, Accelerated Academy. London: London
School of Economics, 2015. Retrieved from
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/04/07/life-in-the-accelerated-academy-
carrigan/. 
Carrigan, Mark and Vostal, Filip . “Not so fast! A critique of the Slow Professor”. University
Affaires, posted 22 April 2016. Retrieved from www.universityaffairs.ca/opinion/in-my-
opinion/not-so-fast-a-critique-of-the-slow-professor/#comments. 
Clarke, Caroline A. and Knights, David . “Careering through academia: Securing identities or
engaging ethical subjectivities?” Human Relations, 68, 12 (2015): 185–1868. 
Deem, Rosemary . “Globalisation, new managerialism, academic capitalism and
entrepreneurialism in universities: Is the local dimension still important?” Comparative
Education, 37, 1 (2001): 7–20. 
Deem, Rosemary and Ozga, Jennifer T. “Transforming post-compulsory education? Femocrats
at work in the academy”. Women’s Studies International Forum, 23, 2 (2000): 153–166.
Retrieved from http://doi.org/10.1016/S0277-5395(00)00070-4. 
Fisher, Berenice and Tronto, Joan . “Toward a feminist theory of care”, in Circles of Care: Work
and Identity in Women’s Lives, ed. Emily Abel and Margaret Nelson . Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1991. 
Garfield, Eugene . “Essays of an information scientist: Science reviews”. Journalism
Inventiveness and Other Essays, 14 (1991): 380. Retrieved from
www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/essays/v14p380y1991.pdf. 
Gijsbers Van Wijk, Cecile M. T. , Van Vliet, Katja P. , and Kolk, Annemarie M. “Gender
perspectives and quality of care: Towards appropriate and adequate health care for women”.
Social Sciences and Medicine, 43, 5 (1996): 707–720. 
Gill, Rosalind . “Breaking the silence: The hidden injuries of neo-liberal academia”, in Secrecy
and Silence in the Research Process: Feminist Reflections, ed. R. Flood and R. Gill . London:
Routledge, 2009. 
Gómez, Lucía and Jódar, Francisco . “Ética y política en la universidad española: La evaluación
de la investigación como tecnología de la subjetividad”. Athenea Digital, 13, 1 (2013): 81–98. 
González, Ana María . “Inclusion of women in science. Long-term strategies for alone or with
partners’ women”. GÉNEROS: Multidisciplinary Journal of Gender Studies, 3 (2014): 459–482. 
González, Ana María and Vergés, Núria , “International mobility of women in S&T careers:
Shaping plans for personal and professional purposes”. Gender Place and Culture: A Journal of
Feminist Geography, 5 (2013): 613–629. 
Gosselain, Olivier P . “Slow science. La desexcellence”. Uzance, 1 (2011): 128–140. Retrieved
from www.patrimoineculturel.cfwb.be/index.php?id=uzance1.
Hanisch, Carol . “The personal is political”, Notes from the Second Year, ed. Shulie Firestone
and Anne Koedt (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1969). Retrieved from
www.carolhanisch.org/CHwritings/PersonalisPol.pdf. 
Inzlicht, Michael and Kang, Sonia K. “Stereotype threat spillover: How coping with threats to
social identity affects aggression, eating, decision making, and attention”. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 99, 3 (2010): 467–481. 
Lutz, Jean-François . “Slow science”. Nature Chemistry, 4, 8 (2012): 588–589. Retrieved from
http://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.1415. 
Martell, Luke . “The slow university: Inequality, power and alternatives”. Forum Qualitative
Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 15, 3, Art. 10 (2014). Retrieved from
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs1403102. 
Meissner, Hanna . “Opening spaces: The politics of feminist materialisms as challenge to the
entrepreneurial university”, in Teaching with Feminist Materialisms, ed., Peta Hinton and Pat
Treusch , 123–140. Utrecht: ATGENDER, 2015. 
Menzies, Heather and Newson, Janice . “No time to think. Academics’ life in the globally wired
university. Time and Society, 16, 1 (2007): 83–98. 
Menzies, Heather and Newson, Janice . “Time, stress and intellectual engagement in academic
work: Exploring gender difference”. Gender, Work and Organization, 15, 5 (2008): 504–522. 
Ministerio de Educación . “Cultura y Deporte, Datos y Cifras del sistema universitario español.
Curso 2014/2015”. Secretaría General Técnica, 2015. 
Morley, Louise . “The micropolitics of quality”. Critical Quarterly, 47, 1–2 (2005): 83–95. 
Mountz, Alison , Bonds, Anne , Mansfield, Beckye , Loyd, Jenna , Hyndman, Jennifer , Walton-
Roberts, Margaret , Basu, Ranu , Whitson, Risa , Hawkins, Roberta , Hamilton, Trina , and
Curran, Winnifred . “For slow scholarship: A feminist politics of resistance through collective
action in the neoliberal university”. ACME, International E-Journal for Cultural Geographies, 14,
4 (2015): 125–1235. Retrieved from http://ojs.unbc.ca/index.php/acme/article/view/1058. 
O’Brien, Rosaleen , Hart, Graham J. , and Hung, Kate . “‘Standing out from the herd’: Men
renegotiating masculinity in relation to their experience of illness”. International Journal of Men’s
Health, 6, 3 (2007): 178–200. 
O’Neill, Maggie . “The slow university: Time, work and well-being”. Forum Qualitative
Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 15, 3 (2014). Retrieved from
www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/2226/3696. 
Pérez Orozco, Amaia . Subversión feminista de la economía. Apuntes para un debate sobre el
conflicto capital-vida. Madrid: Traficantes de sueños, 2014. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, María . “Nothing comes without its world: Thinking with care”. Sociological
Review, 60, 2 (2012): 197–215. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, María . “Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of
care”. Social Studies of Science, 45, 5 (2015): 691–716. 
Pujal, Margot and Mora, Enrico . “Dolor, trabajo y su diagnóstico psicosocial de género: Un
ejemplo”. Universitas Psychologica, 12, 4 (2013): 111–1189. 
Pujal, Margot and Mora, Enrico . “Subjectivity, health and gender: an approach to chronified
pain through the Psychosocial Gender Diagnostic methodology / Subjetividad, salud y género:
una aproximación al dolor cronificado mediante la metodología del Diagnóstico Psicosocial de
Género”. Estudios de Psicología, 35, 2 (2014): 212–238. 
Pujal, Margot , Albertín, Pilar , and Mora, Enrico . “Discursos Científicos sobre el dolor
cronificado sin-causa-orgánica. Incorporando una mirada de género para resignificar-repolitizar
el dolor”. Política y Sociedad, 52, 3 (2015): 921–948. 
Revelles, Beatriz . “Materializing Feminist Theory: The Classroom as an Act of Resistance”, in
Teaching with Feminist Materialisms, ed. P. Hinton and P. Treusch , 53–65. Utrecht:
ATGENDER, 2015. 
Rosa, Hartmut. Social Acceleration. New York: Columbia University Press, 2013. 
Schulte, Brigid . Overwhelmed: Work, Love and Play When No One Has the Time. New York:
Sarah Crichton Books, 2014. 
Shahjahan, Riyad A. “Being “Lazy” and Slowing Down: Toward Decolonizing Time, Our Body,
and Pedagogy”. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 47, 5 (2015): 488–501. 
Slaugther, Sheila and Rhoades, Gary . “The Neo-liberal University”. New Labor Forum, 6
(2000): 73–79.
Slow Science Academy . “The Slow Science Manifesto” (2010). Retrieved from http://slow-
science.org/slow-science-manifesto.pdf. 
Sparkes, Andrew . “Embodiment, Academics, and the Audit Culture: A Story Seeking
Consideration”. Qualitative Research, 7, 4 (2007): 521–550. 
Spencer, Steven J. , Steele, Claude M. , and Quinn, Diane M. “Stereotype threat and women’s
math performance”. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35 (1999), 4–28. 
Stengers, Isabelle . “Another Science Is Possible! A Plea for Slow Science”, 13 December
2011, inaugural lecture Chair Willy Calewaert 2011–12. Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres,
Université Libre de Bruxelles. Retrieved from
http://we.vub.ac.be/aphy/sites/default/files/stengers2011_pleaslowscience.pdf. 
Stuifbergen, Alexa K. , Phillips, Lorraine , Voelmeck, Wayne , and Browder, Renee . “Illness
Perceptions and Related Outcomes among Women with Fibromyalgia Syndrome”. Women’s
Health Issues, 16 (2006): 353–360. 
Tronto, Joan . Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care. New York:
Routledge, 1993. 
Vallespín, Ivanna and Silió, Elisa . “Las universidades pierden 1.400 millones en tres años”. El
País, 6 March 2014. Retrieved from
http://sociedad.elpais.com/sociedad/2014/03/06/actualidad/1394132046_611684.html. 
Valls-Llobet, Carme . Mujeres, salud y poder. Madrid: Cátedra Feminismos, 2009. 
Van den Brink , Marieke and Benschop, Yvonne . “Gender practices in the construction of
academic excellence: Sheep with five legs”, Organization, 19, (2012): 507–524. 
Vázquez, Susana and Elston, Mary Ann . “Gender and Academic Career Trajectories in Spain:
From Gendered Passion to Consecration in a Sistema Endogámico?” Employee Relations, 28,
6 (2006): 588–603. 
Vostal, Filip . “Academic Life in the Fast Lane: The Experience of Time and Speed in British
Academia”. Time and Society, 24, 1 (2015): 71–95. 
Vostal, Filip . “Speed Kills, Speed Thrills: Constraining and Enabling Accelerations in Academic
Work-Life”. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 13, 3 (2015): 295–314. 
Walker, Judith . “Time as the Fourth Dimension in the Globalization of Higher Education”.
Journal of Higher Education, 80, 5 (2009): 483–509. Retrieved from
http://doi.org/10.1353/jhe.0.0061. 
Wolfe, Frederick and Walitt, Brian . “Culture, Science and the Changing Nature of
Fibromyalgia”. Nature Reviews Rheumatology, 9 (2013): 751–755. 
 
“It’s a hell of a responsibility to be yourself” 
Ahmed, Sara , Jane Kilby , Celia Lury , Maureen McNeil , and Beverley Skeggs , eds.
Transformations: Thinking through Feminism. London: Routledge, 2000. 
Allen, Amy . The Politics of Our Selves: Power, Autonomy and Gender in Contemporary Critical
Theory. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008. 
Bauman, Zygmunt . Postmodern Ethics. London: Wiley-Blackwell, 1993. 
Bourdieu, Pierre . Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1984. 
Braidotti, Rosi . The Posthuman. London: Blackwell, 2013. 
Butler, Judith . The Psychic Life of Power. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1997. 
Butler, Judith . Giving an Account of Oneself. New York: Fordham University Press, 2005. 
Caputi, Susan . Feminism and Power: The Need for Critical Theory. Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books, 2013. 
De Certeau, Michel . L’Invention du Quotidien, vol. 1 Arts de faire. Paris: Gallimard, 1980. 
Fraser, Nancy and Axel Honneth . Redistribution or Recognition? A Political-Philosophical
Exchange. London: Verso, 2003. 
Freire, Paolo . Teachers as Cultural Workers: Letters to Those Who Dare Teach. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 2005. 
Frosh, Stephen and Lisa Baraitser . “Thinking, recognition and otherness”. Psychoanalytic
Review 90 (2003): 771–789.
Green, Celia . Letters from Exile: Observations on a Culture in Decline. Oxford: Oxford Forum,
2004. 
Grosz, Elizabeth A. Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1994. 
Haraway, Donna . “Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism as a site of
discourse on the privilege of partial perspective”. Feminist Studies 14, 3 (1988): 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna . Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York:
Routledge, 1991. 
Haraway, Donna . The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
Otherness. Chicago, IL: Prickly Paradigm Press, 2003. 
Haraway, Donna . When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
hooks, bell . Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. London:
Routledge, 1994. 
Jaggar, Alison M. , ed. Living with Contradictions: Controversies in Feminist Social Ethics.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994. 
Levinas, Emmanuel . Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority. Trans. Alphonso Lingis .
Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press, 1969 [1961]. 
Lorde, Audre . “The master’s tools will never dismantle the master’s house”. In Sister Outsider:
Essays and Speeches, 114–117. Berkeley, CA: Crossing Press, 1984. 
Lorraine, Tamsin . Deleuze and Guattari’s Immanent Ethics. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2011. 
Luke, Carmen and Jennifer Gore , eds. Feminisms and Critical Pedagogy. New York:
Routledge, 1992. 
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade . Feminism without Borders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing
Solidarity. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003. 
Mouffe, Chantal . “Feminism, Citizenship and Radical Democratic Politics”. In Feminists
Theorize the Political, edited by Judith Butler and Joan W. Scott , 369–384. London: Routledge,
1992. 
Nietzsche, Friedrich . On the Genealogy of Morality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2007. 
Nitis, Maya . “Feminist Materialisms in Class: Learning without Masters”. In Teaching with
Feminism Materialisms, edited by Peta Hinton and Pat Treusch , 111–122. Utrecht:
ATGENDER, 2015. 
Oksala, Johanna . Foucault on Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
Oleski, Elzbieta H. , ed. Intimate Citizenships: Gender, Sexualities, Politics. London: Routledge,
2009. 
Peterson, Christopher and Martin E. P. Seligman . Character Strengths and Virtues. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2004. 
Plath, Sylvia . The Unabridged Journals of Sylvia Plath, edited by Karen V. Kukil . New York:
Anchor, 2000. 
Riley, Denise . Selected Poems. London: Reality Street, 2000. 
Rorty, Richard . An Ethics for Today: Finding Common Ground between Philosophy and
Religion. New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. 
Young, Julian . Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2010. 
 
Feminist science literacy as a political and pedagogical challenge 
Costa, Rosa and Mendel, Iris (2016). Zwischen Anpassung und Widerstand. Critical Science
Literacy in der Wissensgesellschaft. In: Magazin erwachsenenbildung.at, 28. Vienna. Online:
http://erwachsenenbildung.at/magazin/archiv.php?mid=9928 (15/09/16). 
Dewey, John (1929). Democracy and Education. New York: Macmillan Company. 
Dück, Julia (2014). Krise und Geschlecht. Überlegungen zu einem feministisch-
materialistischen Krisenverständnis. In: Prokla, 174, pp. 53–70. 
Faulstich, Peter and Trumann, Jana (2016). Wissenschaftsvermittlung, Popularisierung und
kollektive Wissensproduktion. In: Magazin erwachsenenbildung.at, 27. Vienna. Online:
http://erwachsenenbildung.at/magazin/16–27/meb16-27.pdf (15/09/16). 
Fine, Cordelia (2010). Delusions of Gender: How Our Minds, Society, and Neurosexism Create
Difference. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Fleck, Ludwik (1980 [1935]). Die Entstehung und Entwicklung einer wissenschaftlichen
Tatsache. Einführung in die Lehre vom Denkstil und Denkkollektiv. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp. 
Foucault, Michel (2006). Die Geburt der Biopolitik. Geschichte der Gouvern-ementalität II.
Vorlesung am Collège de France 1978–1979. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp. 
Freire, Paulo (1973). Pädagogik der Unterdrü ckten. Bildung als Praxis der Freiheit. Reinbek:
Hamburg. 
Freire, Paulo (1985). Reading the World and Reading the Word: An Interview with Paulo Freire.
In: Language Arts, 62(1), pp. 15–21. 
Götz, Judith (2014) (Re-)Naturalisierungen der Geschlechterordnung. Anmerkungen zur
Geschlechterblindheit der (österreichischen) Rechtsextremismusforschung. In: FIPU (ed.):
Rechtsextremismus 1. Entwicklungen und Analysen. Vienna: Mandelbaum, pp. 40–68. 
Gramsci, Antonio (2003). Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci. Ed. Quintin
Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith . London: Lawrence and Wishart. 
Haraway, Donna , J. (1988). Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
Privilege of Partial Perspective. In: Feminist Studies, 14(3), pp. 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna J. (1991). Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New
York: Routledge. 
Harding, Sandra (2006). Science and Social Inequality: Feminist and Postcolonial Issues.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
Haug, Frigga (2003). Lernverhältnisse. Selbstbewegungen und Selbstblockierungen. Hamburg:
Argument. 
Hodson, Derek (1999). Going beyond Cultural Pluralism: Science Education for Sociopolitical
Action. In: Science Education, 83, pp. 775–796. 
hooks, bell (1989). Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black. Boston, MA: South End
Press. 
hooks, bell (1994). Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. New York:
Routledge. 
hooks, bell (2010). Teaching Critical Teaching: Practical Wisdom. New York: Routledge. 
Höppner, Grit and Schmitz, Sigrid (2014). Neurofeminism and Feminist Neuro-sciences: A
Critical Review of Contemporary Brain Research. In: Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8.
Online: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00546/full (17/05/2014). 
Hurlbert, Anya and Ling, Yahzu (2007). Biological Components of Sex Differences in Color
Preference. In: Current Biology, 17(16), pp. R623–R625. 
Jantz, Olaf and Rauw, Regina , eds (2001). Perspektiven geschlechtsbezogener Pädagogik.
Impulse und Reflexionen zwischen Gender, Politik und Bildungsarbeit. Wiesbaden: Springer. 
Jörke, Dirk (2011). Bürgerbeteiligung in der Postdemokratie. In: Postdemokratie? Aus Politik
und Zeitgeschichte (APuZ 1–2/2011). Online: www.bpb.de/apuz/33562/postdemokratie
(15/09/16). 
McRobbie, Angela (2009). The Aftermath of Feminism: Gender, Culture and Social Change.
Los Angeles: SAGE. 
Mayer, Stefanie and Sauer, Birgit (forthcoming). “Gender Ideology” as an Empty Signifier:
Political Discourse and Networking in Austria. In: David Paternotte and Roman Kuhar (eds),
Anti-Gender Crusades in Europe: Mobilizations against Equality. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield. 
Mendel, Iris (2015). WiderStandPunkte. Umkämpftes Wissen, feministische Wissenschaftskritik
und kritische Sozialwissenschaften. Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot. 
Onnen, Corinna (2015). Studying Gender to Teach Gender. Zur Vermittlung von Gender-
Kompetenzen. In: Juliette Wedl and Annette Bartsch (eds), Teaching Gender? Zum reflektierten
Umgang mit Geschlecht im Schulunterricht und in der Lehramtsausbildung. Bielefeld:
Transkript, pp. 83–102. 
Oudshoorn, Nelly (1990). The Birth of Sex Hormones. In: Journal of the History of Biology,
23(2), pp. 42–83. 
Pease, Allan and Pease, Barbara (2000). Why Men Don’t Listen and Women Can’t Read Maps.
New York: Wellcome Rain.
Rajal, Elke and Schiedel, Heribert (2016). Rechtsextremismusprävention in der Schule. Ein
ambitioniertes Programm. In: FIPU (ed.), Rechtsextremismus 2. Prävention und politische
Bildung. Vienna: Mandelbaum, pp. 85–136. 
Revelles-Benavente, Beatriz (2015). Materializing Feminist Theory: The Classroom as an Act of
Resistance. In: Peta Hinton and Pat Treusch (eds), Teaching with Feminist Materialism:
Teaching with Gender: European Women’s Studies in International and Interdisciplinary
Classrooms. Utrecht: ATGENDER. Online:
http://atgender.eu/files/2015/12/Teaching_with_Feminist_Materialisms.pdf. 
Rose, Hilary and Rose, Steven , eds (2001). Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments against
Evolutionary Psychology. London: Vintage. 
Ruck, Nora (2014). Schönheit als Zeugnis. Evolutionspsychologische Schönheitsforschung und
Geschlechterungleichheit. Wiesbaden: Springer VS. 
Schiebinger, Londa (1993). Nature’s Body: Gender in the Making of Modern Science. Boston,
MA: Beacon Press. 
Singer, Mona (2005). Geteilte Wahrheit. Feministische Epistemologie, Wissensso-ziologie und
Cultural Studies. Vienna: Löcker. 
Sullivan, Shannon and Tuana, Nancy , eds (2007). Race and Epistemologies of Ignorance.
Albany, NY: Suny Press. 
Wagner, Thomas (2013). Die Mitmachfalle. Bürgerbeteiligung als Herrschaftsinstrument. Köln:
PapyRossa. 
 
Screening feminisms 
Ahmed, Sara . Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2006. 
Ahmed, Sara . On Being Included: Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2012. 
Angerer, Marie-Luise . Desire after Affect. Translated by Nicholas Grindell . London: Rowman
and Littlefield, 2015 [2007]. 
Barad, Karen . “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes
to Matter”. Signs, 28, 3, 2003, 801–831. 
Barad, Karen . Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007. 
Beugnet, Martine and Mulvey, Laura . “Feminist Perspective”. In Feminisms: Diversity,
Difference and Multiplicity in Contemporary Film Cultures, edited by Laura Mulvey and Anna
Backman Rogers , 187–202. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2015. 
Braidotti, Rosi . Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming. Cambridge: Polity
Press, 2002. 
Braidotti, Rosi . “Interview with Rosi Braidotti: ‘The Notion of the Univocity of Being or Single
Matter Positions Difference as a Verb or Process of Becoming at the Heart of the Matter’”. In
New Materialism: Interviews and Cartographies, edited by Rick Dolphijn and Iris van der Tuin ,
19–37. Ann Arbor, MI: Open Humanities Press, 2012. 
Braidotti, Rosi . The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013. 
Braidotti, Rosi . “Posthuman Affirmative Politics”. In Resisting Biopolitics: Philosophical, Political
and Performative Strategies, edited by S. E. Wilmer and Audrone Zukauskite , 30–56. London:
Routledge, 2016. 
Brinkema, Eugenie . “Celluloid is Sticky: Sex, Death, Materiality, Metaphysics (in Some Films by
Catherine Breillat)”. Women: A Cultural Review, 17, 2, 2006. 
Brown, Wendy . Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2015. 
Butler, Judith . Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of Sex. New York: Routledge, 1993. 
Colebrook, Claire . “Norm Wars”. In Revisiting Normativity with Deleuze, edited by Rosi Braidotti
and Patricia Pisters , 81–97. London: Bloomsbury, 2012. 
Dargis, Manohla . “Seeing You Seeing Me: The Trouble with ‘Blue Is the Warmest Color’”. New
York Times, 25 October 2013. Retrieved from www.nytimes.com/2013/10/27/movies/the-
trouble-with-blue-is-the-warmest-color.html?_r=0.
Doane, Mary Ann . “Film and the Masquerade: Theorizing the Female Spectator”. In Film and
Theory: An Anthology, edited by Robert Stam and Toby Miller , 495–509. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers, 2000. 
Downing, Lisa and Saxton, Libby . Film and Ethics: Foreclosed Encounters. Abingdon:
Routledge, 2010. 
Foucault, Michel . The History of Sexuality, Vol. 3: The Care of the Self, translated by Robert
Hurley . New York: Vintage Books, 1988 [1986]. 
Gaines, Jane . “White Privilege and Looking Relations: Race and Gender in Feminist Film
Theory [1988]”. In Feminism and Film, edited by E. A. Kaplan , 336–355. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000. 
Hanisch, Carol . “The Personal Is Political”. In Radical Feminism, edited by Anne Koedt , Ellen
Levin , and Anita Rapone , 113. New York: Quadrangle Books, 1973. 
Haraway, Donna . “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege
of Partial Perspective”. Feminist Studies, 14, 3, 1988, 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna . Modest−Witness@Second−Millennium:
FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouse™: Feminism and Technoscience. London: Routledge, 1997. 
Hayward, Susan . Cinema Studies: The Key Concepts. London: Routledge, 2000. 
Hickey-Moody, Anna and Mary Lou Rasmussen . “The Sexed Subject in-between Deleuze and
Butler”. Deleuze and Queer Theory, edited by Chrysanthi Nigianni and Merl Storr , 37–53.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005. 
Hinton, Peta and Treusch, Pat . “Introduction: Teaching with Feminist Materialisms”. In
Teaching with Feminist Materialisms, edited by Peta Hinton and Pat Treusch , 1–22. Utrecht:
ATGENDER, 2015. 
Hongisto, Ilona . Soul of the Documentary: Framing, Expression, Ethics. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press, 2015. 
hooks, bell . Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. New York:
Routledge: 1994. 
hooks, bell . Reel to Reel: Race, Sex, and Class at the Movies. London: Routledge, 1996. 
hooks, bell . “The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators”. In Film and Theory: An
Anthology, edited by Robert Stam and Toby Miller , 510–523. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishers, 2000. 
Irigaray, Luce . “Women on the Market”. In This Sex Which Is Not One, translated by Catherine
Porter , 170–191. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985 [1978]. 
Koivunen, Anu . “The Promise of Touch: Turns to Affect in Feminist Film Theory”. In Feminisms:
Diversity, Difference and Multiplicity in Contemporary Film Cultures, edited by Laura Mulvey and
Anna Backman Rogers , 97–110. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2015. 
Kuhn, Annette . The Power of the Image: Essays on Representation and Sexuality. London:
Routledge, 1985. 
Latour, Bruno . Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2007. 
MacCormack, Patricia . Posthuman Ethics: Embodiment and Cultural Theory. London:
Routledge, 2012. 
Mayer, Sophie . Political Animals: The New Feminist Cinema. London: I. B.Tauris, 2016. 
Mies, Maria . Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women in the International
Division of Labour. London: Zed, 1998 [1986]. 
Mulvey, Laura . “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema”. In Film Theory and Criticism:
Introductory Readings, edited by Leo Braudy and Marshall Cohen , 833–844. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999. 
Ramsay, Karen . “Women: Mothers and Others: Discourses of Women and Motherhood in
Three Academic Departments”. In Challenges and Negotiations for Women in Higher
Education, edited by Pamela Cotterill , Sue Jackson , and Gayle Letherby , 48–49. Dordrecht:
Springer, 2007. 
Saraswati, L. Ayu . “Wikisexuality: Rethinking Sexuality in Cyberspace”. Sexualities 16, 5/6,
2013, 587–603. 
Smelik, A. And the Mirror Cracked: Feminist Cinema and Film Theory. London: MacMillan,
1998. 
Trinh, T. Minh-ha . Cinema Interval. London: Routledge, 1999.
van der Tuin, Iris . Generational Feminism: New Materialist Introduction to a Generative
Approach. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2015. 
Williams, Linda . Screening Sex. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008. 
 
Doubt, excitement, pleasure 
Ahmed, Sara . “Happy Objects”. In The Affect Theory Reader, edited by Melissa Gregg and
Gregory J. Seigworth . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010. 
Ahmed, Sara . The Cultural Politics of Emotion. New York: Routledge, 2014. 
Amsler, Sarah S. The Education of Radical Democracy. London: Routledge, 2015. 
Baier, Angelika , Binswanger, Christa , Häberlein, Jana et al. Affekt und Geschlecht. Eine
einführende Anthologie. Vienna: Zaglossus, 2014, 20–22. 
Berlant, Lauren . “Nearly Utopian, Nearly Normal: Post-Fordist Affect in La Promesse and
Rosetta”. Public Culture 19:2, 2007, 272–301. 
Berlant, Lauren . Cruel Optimism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011. 
Bishop, Claire . “The Social Turn: Collaboration and Its Discontents”. Artforum, February 2006. 
Cannatella, Howard . Why We Need Arts Education: Revealing the Common Good: Making
Theory and Practice Work Better. Rotterdam: Sense Publishers, 2015. 
Cvetkovich, Anne . “Public Feelings”. South Atlantic Quarterly 106:3, Summer 2007. 
Cvetkovich, Anne . Depression: A Public Feeling. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012. 
Deepwell, Katy . “Feminist Pedagogies”. n.paradoxa. International Feminist Art Journal 26, July
2010. 
Handwerker Küchenhoff, Barbara . Spinoza’s Theorie der Affekte: Kohärenz und Konflikt.
Würzburg: Verlag Königshausen und Neumann GmbH, 2006. 
Harvey, David . A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
Haug, Frigga . Erinnerungsarbeit. Hamburg: Argument Verlag, 2001. 
Haug, Frigga . Selbstbewegungen und Selbstblockierungen. Hamburg: Argument, 2003. 
hooks, bell . Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. New York:
Routledge, 1994. 
Karppi, Tero , Laukkanen, Anu , Mannevuo, Mona , Pajala, Mari , and Sihvonen, Tanja , eds.
“Affective Capitalism”. Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization, forthcoming. 
Lazzarato, Maurizio . “Immaterial Labor”, translated by P. Colilli and E. Emery . In Radical
Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics, edited by Michael Hardt and Paolo Virno . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1995, 133–147. 
Massumi, Brian . “The Autonomy of Affect”. Cultural Critique 31, Autumn 1995, 83–109. 
Negri, Antonio and Hardt, Michael . “Value and Affect”. Boundary 2 26:2, Summer 1999, 77–88. 
Sauer, Birgit and Penz, Otto . Affektives Kapital: Die Ökonomisierung der Gefühle im
Arbeitsleben. Frankfurt: Campus, 2016. 
Settele, Bernadette . Mitteilen, was trifft. Diskurse, Affekte und das Wirken von Kunst in der
Kunstvermittlung. Verband Schweiter Lehrerinnen and Lehrer Bildnerische Gestaltung I, March
2014. 
Sturm, Eva . Im Engpass der Worte. Sprechen über moderne und zeitgenössische Kunst.
Frankfurt am Main: Reimer, 1996. 
Tsianos, Vassilis and Papadopoulos, Dimitris . Precarity: A Savage Journey to the Heart of
Embodied Capitalism, 2006, http://eipcp.net/transversal/1106/tsianospapadopoulos/en. 
UNESCO . Roadmap for Arts Education. Lisbon, 2006. 
 
Feminist ethics of responsibility and art therapy 
Ahmed, Sara . “Multiculturalism and the Promise of Happiness”. New Formations, 63 (2007),
121–137. 
Ahmed, Sara , Jane Kilby , Celia Lury , Maureen Mcneil , and Beverley Skeggs , eds,
“Introduction: Thinking through Feminism”, in Ahmed et al., Transformations: Thinking through
Feminism (London: Routledge, 2000), 1–23. 
Foucault, M. , G. Deleuze , “Intellectuals and power: A conversation between Michel Foucault
and Gilles Deleuze”, in Donald F. Bouchard (ed.), M. Foucault, Language, Counter-Memory,
Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 1977). 
Haraway, Donna . Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York:
Routledge, 1991). 
López Fernández-Cao, Marian . “Aplicando metodologías feministas para analizar la creación:
propuestas en educación artística desde la experiencia de las mujeres”. Dossiers Feministes,
19 (2014), 31–55. 
McAlister, Faber , “Donna J. Haraway”, in Jon Simons (ed.), From Agamben to Zizek:
Contemporary Critical Theorists (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2010), 127–143. 
Massumi, Brian . “The Autonomy of Affect”. Cultural Critique, 31 (1995), 83–109. 
 
(Fostering) princesses that can stand on their own two feet 
Associação Portuguesa de Apoio à Vítima (APAV) . “Estatísticas APAV: Crianças e Jovens
Vítimas de Crime (2000–2012)”.
www.apav.pt/apav_v3/images/pdf/CriancasJovensVCV_2000_2012.pdf (accessed 11 April
2016 ). 
Associação Portuguesa de Apoio à Vítima (APAV) . Campaign: “Corta com a Violência: Quem
não te respeita não te merece”. Uploaded on 10 January 2012. https://youtu.be/b8vXfb80gF4
(accessed 11 April 2016 ). 
Auerbach, Nina and U.C. Knoepflmacher , eds. Forbidden Journeys: Fairy Tales and Fantasies
by Victorian Women Writers. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992. 
Belsey, Catherine and Jane Moore , eds. The Feminist Reader: Essays in Gender and the
Politics of Literary Criticism. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1989. 
Berkel, L. , Vandiver, B. , and Bahner, A. “Gender Role Attitudes, Religion and Spirituality as
Predictors of Domestic Violence Attitudes in White College Students”. Journal of College
Student Development 45 (2) (2004): 119–133. 
Borges, Rita . A prevenção da violência de género em jovens e em contexto escolar: um olhar
sobre a intervenção da CIG. Mestrado em Psicologia. Universidade de Lisboa: Faculdade de
Psicologia, 2011. 
Butler, Judith . “Sex and Gender in Simone de Beauvoir’s Second Sex”. Yale French Studies 72
(1986): 35–49. 
Byatt, A. S. The Djinn in the Nightingale’s Eye: Five Fairy Stories. London: Vintage, 1995. 
Byatt, A. S. Elementals: Stories of Fire and Ice. London: Vintage, 1999. 
Byatt, A. S. “Fairy Stories: The Djinn in the Nightingale’s Eye”. In Essays by A. S. Byatt, 1999.
www.asbyatt.com/Onherself.aspx (accessed 14 July 2014 ). 
Carter, Angela . The Bloody Chamber. London: Vintage, 1995. 
Comissão para a Cidadania e Igualdade de Género (CIG) . Campaign: “Namoro Violento não é
Amor”. 2008. https://youtube/BAdPTsXrRNA (accessed 11 April 2016 ). 
Dahl, Roald . “Little Red Riding Hood and the Wolf”. In Revolting Rhymes, 47–54. London:
Jonathan Cape, 1982. 
Desy, Jeanne . “The Princess who Stood on Her Own Two Feet”. In Don’t Bet on the Prince:
Contemporary Feminist Fairy Tales in North America and England, edited by Jack Zipes ,
39–47. New York: Routledge, 1986. 
Fernandes, Ana Filipa . Programas de sensibilização de violência no namoro. Impacto nos
jovens. Mestrado em Psicocriminologia. Lisboa: ISPA, 2013. 
Figueira, Teresa , trans. A Minha Versão da História: Branca de Neve / A Rainha. Rio de
Mouro: Everest Editora, 2006.
Giddens, Anthony , ed. The Polity Reader in Gender Studies. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994. 
Hekman, Susan . “The Feminist Critique of Rationality”. In The Polity Reader in Gender Studies,
edited by Anthony Giddens et al., 50–61. Cambridge: Polity Press, 1994. 
Hickman, L. , Jaycox, L. , and Aronoff, J. “Dating Violence among Adolescents: Prevalence,
Gender Distribution, and Prevention Program Effectiveness”. Trauma, Violence and Abuse 5 (2)
(2004): 123–142. 
Matos, Marlene et al. “Prevenção da Violência nas Relações de Namoro: Intervenção com
Jovens em Contexto Escolar”. Psicologia: Teoria e Prática 8 (1) (2006): 55–75. 
Mullender, A. La violencia doméstica. Una nueva visión de un viejo problema. Barcelona:
Paidós, 2000. 
Nesbit, E. “Melisande, or Long and Short Division”. In Forbidden Journeys: Fairy Tales and
Fantasies by Victorian Women Writers, edited by Nina Auerbach and U.C. Knoepflmacher ,
177–191. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992. 
Oliveira, Joana Andrade . Violência no Namoro Adaptação de um Programa de Prevenção em
Jovens Universitárias. Mestrado em Psicologia Clínica e da Saúde. Universidade da Beira
Interior: Faculdade de Ciências Sociais e Humanas, 2013. 
Straus, M. A. “Prevalence of Violence against Dating Partners by Male and Female University
Students Worldwide”. Violence against Women 10 (7) (2004): 790–811. 
Teten, A. et al. “Considerations for the Definition, Measurement, Consequences, and
Prevention of Dating Violence Victimization among Adolescent Girls”. Journal of Women’s
Health, 18 (7) (2009): 923–927. 
Thurber, James . “The Little Girl and the Wolf”. In Fables of Our Time, 3. New York: Harper &
Row, 1983. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. The Lord of the Rings. London: Harper Collins Publishers, 1993. 
Torres, Anália . “Portuguese Women Stand Up for the Family in Times of Crisis”. Interview with
Mario Queiroz. Interpress Service , 22 March 2013.  
Veríssimo, Cristina et al. Prevenir a Violência no Namoro: (N)amo(o) (Im)perfeito – Fazer
Diferente para Fazer a Diferença. Coimbra: Escola Superior de Enfermagem, 2013. 
Warner, Marina , ed. Wonder Tales: Six Stories of Enchantment. London: Vintage, 1996. 
Warner, Marina . Once Upon a Time: A Short History of Fairy Tale. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2014. 
White, J. W. “A Gender Approach to Adolescent Dating Violence: Conceptual and
Methodological Issues”. Psychology of Women Quarterly 33 (2009): 1–15. 
Zipes, Jack . Breaking the Magic Spell: Radical Theories of Folk and Fairy Tales. Lexington:
University Press of Kentucky, 1979. 
Zipes, Jack , ed. Don’t Bet on the Prince: Contemporary Feminist Fairy Tales in North America
and England. New York: Routledge, 1986. 
Zipes, Jack . Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales, Children, and the Culture Industry. New York:
Routledge, 1997. 
Zurbriggen, E. L. “Understanding and Preventing Adolescent Dating Violence: The Importance
of Developmental, Sociocultural, and Gendered Perspectives”. Psychology of Women Quarterly
33 (2009): 30–33. 
 
The case of Tumblr 
boyd, danah . It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2014. 
Calvert, Sandra and Wilson, Barbara . The Handbook of Children, Media, and Development.
Chichester: Wiley Blackwell, 2008. 
Coleman, Rebecca and Ringrose, Jessica . Deleuze and Research Methodologies. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 2013. 
Corriero, Jennifer and O’Doherty, Liam . “Digital Expressions and Networks Shape Intercultural
Opportunities for Youth”, Intercultural Education 24 (2013): 493–497. 
Couldry, Nick . “Mediatization or Mediation? Alternative Understandings of the Emergent Space
of Digital Storytelling”, New Media and Society 10 (2008): 373–391.
Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Félix . Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
Fornäs, Johan . “Mediatization of Popular Culture”. In Mediatization of Communication:
Handbooks of Communication Science, vol. 21, edited by Knut Lundby . Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton, 2014. 
Gross, Michael . “What Makes people Click?”, Current Biology 23 (2013): 1–4. 
Kofoed, Jette and Ringrose, Jessica . “Travelling and Sticky Affects: Exploring Teens and
Sexualized Cyberbullying through a Butlerian-Deleuzian-Guattarian Lens”, Discourse: Studies in
the Cultural Politics of Education 33 (2012): 5–20. 
Lunt, Peter and Livingstone, Sonia . “Is ‘Mediatization’ the New Paradigm for Our Field? A
Commentary on Deacon and Stanyer (2014, 2015) and Hepp, Harvard and Lundby (2015)”,
Media, Culture & Society 38 (2016): 462–470. 
McNay, Lois . “Agency and Experience: Gender as a Lived Relation”. In Feminism after
Bourdieu, edited by Lisa Adkins and Beverley Skeggs . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2004. 
Papacharissi, Zizi . “The Virtual Geographies of Social Networks: A Comparative Analysis of
Facebook, LinkedIn and ASmallWorld”, New Media and Society 11 (2009): 199–220. 
Pink, Sarah . Situating Everyday Life. London: Sage, 2012. 
Ringrose, Jessica . “Beyond Discourse? Using Deleuze and Guattari’s Schizoanalysis to
Explore Affective Assemblages, Heterosexually Striated Space, and Lines of Flight Online and
at School”, Educational Philosophy and Theory 43 (2011): 598–618. 
Schulz, W. “Reconstructing Mediatization as an Analytical Concept”, European Journal of
Communication 19 (2004): 87–101. 
Tamboukou, Maria . “Machinic Assemblages: Women, Art Education and Space”, Discourse 29
(2008): 359–375. 
Tan, Elaine . “Informal Learning on ‘YouTube’: Exploring Digital Literacy in Independent Online
Learning”, Learning, Media and Technology 38 (2013): 463–477. 
Trottier, David . “Interpersonal Surveillance on Social Media”, Canadian Journal of
Communication 37 (2012): 319–332. 
Trottier, David . Social Media as Surveillance: Rethinking Visibility in a Converging World.
Farnham: Ashgate, 2012. 
Ünlüsoy, Asli , De Haan, Mariëtte , Leander, Kevin , and Volker, Beate . “Learning Potential in
Youth’s Online Networks: A Multilevel Approach”, Computers and Education 68 (2013):
522–533. 
Van Doorn, Niels . “Digital Spaces, Material Traces: How Matter Comes to Matter in Online
Performances of Gender, Sexuality and Embodiment”, Media, Culture and Society 33 (2011):
531–547. 
 
On the road 
Butler, Judith . Frames of War: When Is Life Grievable? London: Verso, 2009. 
Butler, Judith . “Bodies in Alliance and the Politics of the Street”. European Institute for
Progressive Cultural Politicies, 2011. Available at: www.eipcp.net/transversal/1011/butler/en
(accessed 22 June 2016 ). 
Butler, Judith . “Bodily Vulnerability, Coalitions and Street Politics”. In Differences in common:
Gender, Vulnerability, and Community, edited by Joana Sabadell-Nieto and Marta Segarra ,
99–120. New York: Rodopi Publishing, 2014. 
Butler, Judith . Preface to Estado de inseguridad. Gobernar la precariedad, by Isabell Lorey ,
13–16. 1st ed. Madrid: Traficantes de Sueños, 2016. Available at:
www.traficantes.net/libros/estado-de-inseguridad (accessed 23 May 2016 ). 
Butler, Judith and Athanasiou, Athena . Dispossession: The Performative in the Political.
Cambridge: Polity Press, 2013. 
Caravana Feminista . “Women Struggles in Europe”, 2015. Available at:
www.caravanafeminista.net/ (accessed 3 April 2016 ). 
Gil, Silvi L. “Debates en la teoría feminista contemporánea: sujeto, ética y vida en común”.
Quaderns de Psicologia, 16 (1) (2014). Available at:
www.quadernsdepsicologia.cat/article/view/v16-n1-lgil (accessed 25 June 2016 ).
Holloway, John . Change the World without Taking Power: The Meaning of Revolution Today.
London: Pluto Press, 2002. 
Latouche, Serge . “Pour une société de décroissance”. Le Monde Diplomatique, November
2003. 
Lorey, Isabell . “Becoming Common: Precarization as Political Constituting”. e-flux Journal 17
(June–August 2010). Available at: www.e-flux.com/journal/becoming-common-precarization-as-
political-constituting/ (accessed 19 June 2016 ). 
Lorey, Isabell . Estado de inseguridad. Gobernar la precariedad. 1st ed. Madrid: Traficantes de
Sueños, 2016. Available at: www.traficantes.net/libros/estado-de-inseguridad (accessed 23 May
2016 ). 
 
