Eternal Care
Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy
by Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm *
In this article, we examine how human interactions with nuclear waste, with special
regard to responsibilities and temporalities, have changed over time. Based primarily
on historical and contemporary accounts, including interviews, we trace the history of
how radioactive residue has been conceptualized and handled in Soviet and post-
Soviet Russia and Sweden, from the Second World War to the present. By juxtaposing
the practices and perspectives of dumping, management and care, our aim is to
contribute to current efforts to make sense of waste in the Anthropocene. We conclude
that to acknowledge a need for eternal care is to accentuate the interdependence of
historical and geological temporalities.
The inconspicuous drinking water fountain stands in a corner, close to where
we just entered the underground nuclear waste storage facility. Upon question,the guide tells with a little laugh that here we can try what 7,000 year old watertastes like, as the fountain gathers water from the surrounding granite bedrock,containing pockets of water originating from the Littorina period of the BalticSea. She adds that it might not taste very good, though, since it is rather salty.At a later visit to the underground storage, the water fountain has beenremoved. The guide explains that they decided to take it away since tests hadshown that the water from the bedrock was not really 7,000 years old, butmostly mixed up with much younger sources of water. In addition, the plasticpipes tended to clog and give the water a brownish, unsavory appearance,which tempted few visitors.
1
The invitation to drink the old, or not exactly that old, water surrounding thenuclear waste storage facility might be understood primarily as a way toconvey trust. As visitors to the final repository for short-lived radioactivewaste in Sweden, located in caverns blasted into the Baltic Sea seabed, we aresupposed to feel confident in the chosen technology to store the radioactivematerials safely. Ultimately, we are to rely on the performance of the bedrock tobe a stable container, not only for water but also for toxic residues, into distantfutures. Moreover, the invitation to drink the water is a possibility forcontemporary bodily interaction with the deep time of the bedrock, in an
* The authors want to thank Jonas Anshelm, Mark Elam, Paul Josephson, Egle ˙
Rindzevic ˇiu¯te., the editors of the special issue and two anonymous reviewers for
valuable comments on earlier versions of this text.
1 Notes from author fieldwork at Slutfçrvaret fçr kortlivat radioaktivt avfall (SFR) in
Forsmark in the municipality of /C214sthammar, Sweden, 12. 12.2016 and 23.5. 2019.
Geschichte und Gesellschaft 46. 2020, S. 682 – 705
/C23 Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht GmbH & Co. KG, Gçttingen 2020 [2021] 
ISSN (Printausgabe): 0340-613X, ISSN (online): 2196-9000
Open-Access-Publikation im Sinne der CC-Lizenz BY-NC-ND 4.0 -
https://doi.org/10.13109/gege.2020.46.4.682

extraordinarily articulated nexus between geological and historical tempo-
ralities.2
The decision whether or not to perform this nexus is most probably dependenton the water’s visual appearance and smell – does it seem to be clean or dirty? –but also on deliberations around potential future consequences. Could thiswater make me sick, in spite of reassuring statements from our guide? And ifso, could such sickness, including elusive and frightening radiation diseases,remain in my body and possibly be inherited by my children? The bedrock andthe human body, the past and the future, water and waste, reliance and risk –the possible sip in the underground cavern exposes a multitude of intricatelinkages.The radioactive leftovers from nuclear activities will stay with us for a longtime. The most toxic substances will be dangerous for humans and other biotafor about 100,000 years, and in many places of the world this industrial andenvironmental legacy is currently collected, sorted, classified, transported andstored with the aim to create its permanent isolation from living entities.
3The
imagined trajectory of these leftovers is to be moved out of sight, secluded fromunintentional physical encounters and intentional misuses while, at the sametime, critical information about their existence and characteristics is to bepassed on from generation to generation. This double mission, to keep thetoxic matter isolated and still remember where and what it is, makes up one ofthe most fundamental challenges of our time. Waste can indeed be regarded,Gabrielle Hecht suggests, as the “apotheosis of the Anthropocene,” because ofthe unprecedented quantity, toxicity and durability of human-created residuesand the slow violence they produce, unevenly affecting environments,communities and bodies.
4
In this article, we will examine the belief in technological fixes to manage thedanger of radioactive waste, including the logics of industrial and state nuclearorganizations in relation to the vulnerability of humans and other livingentitites exposed to radiation in the past, present and potentially in the future.How have different actors classified and physically handled nuclear residuesfrom the end of World War II up to this day? What have been the underlyingassumptions guiding their understandings and actions? And how have thewider implications of this human interaction with radioactive leftovers, withspecial regard to responsibilities and temporalities, changed over time? We willargue that the history of human interaction with nuclear waste reveals anecessity to approach radioactive residue not as something that can be moved
2 On deep time see Dan Wormald, Deep Time. A Public Engagement Literature Review,
London 2017.
3 Nuclear waste produces radiation that causes damage when penetrating into any other
matter. The higher the number of unstable nuclei contained in the waste and the higher
the rate at which they decay, the more radioactive is the waste.
4 Gabrielle Hecht, Interscalar Vehicles for an African Anthropocene. On Waste, Tempo-
rality, and Violence, in: Cultural Anthropology 33. 2018, pp. 109– 141, here pp. 111 f.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 683

out of sight and disappear, but instead as an anthropogenic wound or scar of
our shared living environment that we have to care about.
I. Caring for Waste
Two main practices have for a long time dominated the handling of waste:dumping and management. At first sight, they might seem poles apart.Dumping, on the one hand, is a way to get rid of unwanted entities in more orless haphazard ways, creating geographies of dumpsites, sinks and sacrificezones.
5The “ultimate sink” is a potent figure connoting a remote and isolated
place, imagined suitable for dumping – like supposedly empty tundra,abandoned mining areas or urban wastelands.
6Management, on the other
hand, can be described, as Sebastian Ureta does, as “technology-based top-down actions for waste whose ultimate aim is to make it disappear bothphysically […] and politically by eliminating it as a matter of concern.”
7
However, the desired disappearance of waste seldomly works, either bydumping, or through management. Instead, waste is “apt to return, for systemsof disposal are rarely perfect and matter is often more difficult to eradicatethan imagined.”
8In fact, the envisaged ultimate sink is not providing some
metabolic closure but is rather to be seen as a space of transformation andchange. The dumpsites, haphazard as well as managed storages, invariablyresist exclusion and assert to be an integrated part of the system ofcontinuously moving matter.
9Consequently, a key deficit of waste manage-
ment practices is not that they are inherently bad or incorrect, but that the
5 For the first use of the term “ultimate sink” see Joel A. Tarr, The Search for the Ultimate
Sink. Urban Air, Land, and Water Pollution in Historical Perspective, in: Records of the
Columbia Historical Society 51. 1984, pp. 1–29. See also Jennifer Gabrys, Sink. The Dirt
of Systems, in: Environment and Planning D. Society and Space 27. 2009, pp. 666– 681;
Danielle Endres, Sacred Land or National Sacrifice Zone. The Role of Values in the Yucca
Mountain Participation Process, in: Environmental Communication 6. 2012,
pp. 328– 345.
6 Gabrys, Sink, p. 669; John Sandlos and Arn Keeling, Toxic Legacies, Slow Violence, and
Environmental Injustice at Giant Mine, Northwest Territories, in: Northern Review
42. 2016, pp. 7–21, here p. 8; Matthew Gandy, Marginalia. Aesthetics, Ecology, and
Urban Wastelands, in: Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103. 2013,
pp. 1301–1316.
7 Sebastian Ureta, Caring for Waste. Handling Tailings in a Chilean Copper Mine, in:
Environment and Planning A. Economy and Space 48. 2016, pp. 1532–1548, here
p. 1532.
8 Tim Edensor, Waste Matter. The Debris of Industrial Ruins and the Disordering of the
Material World, in: Journal of Material Culture 3. 2005, pp. 311 –332, here p. 314 quoted
in Duane Jethro, Liberated Waste. Heritage and Materiality at Robben Island and
Constitution Hill, South Africa, in: International Journal of Heritage Studies 25. 2019,
pp. 259– 276, here p. 263.
9 Gabrys, Sink, p. 670.684 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

underlying assumption that waste can be managed at all is misplaced.10
Ambitions to lock waste in “ever more sophisticated containers, in the hope
that they will remain there forever” can therefore be regarded as “managerialfantasies of total rational control.”
11
Thus, waste is coming back, either as environmental menace or, perhapssurprisingly and provocatively, as a resource for reuse with new values. Whatwas once discarded may turn out to be, if not a treasure, then something at leastwith value like, for example, scrap metal.
12Similarly, as our empirical cases will
demonstrate, the most highly radioactive leftovers from nuclear energyproduction, the spent nuclear fuel, have in many places and periods beenunderstood as a precious resource for potential future generations of nuclearreactors, and have not at all been considered as waste. Nevertheless, thisprincipally cyclic perspective on waste in general and radioactive matter inparticular suffers from the same risk as adhering to the general assumption ofrational managerial control, namely that the whole issue becomes apoliticaland that non-technical actors are being excluded from the process.To engage with more inclusive practices, complementing existing wastemanagement rationalities, some recent studies propose “care” as a way to dealwith, and even live with waste, in “material, ethical and political terms.”
13
Caitlynn Beckett and Arn Keeling, for example, pinpoint how waste manage-ment practices like remediation are pushed “beyond the act of cleaning uptoxic and degraded landscapes, towards a focus on the ongoing processes oftrust building, reconciliation, and perpetual care for humans, animals andenvironments alike.”
14Along the same vein, Jennifer Gabrys notes how also
“our bodies [are] sinks, collectors and amplifiers of pollutants, a role we sharewith all the plants and animals in the biosphere.”
15Care is here seen as
simultaneously ethical and practical, intimate and global. It comes with apotential to reconcile broken material and social relationships, and to healwounds into scars that are possible to live with.
16
Y et, care practices, like managerial practices, may turn out unethical as well.Care can become a means of governance, sometimes resembling colonialregimes, where justice for some can become discrimination of others.
17
10 Ureta, Caring for Waste, p. 1533.
11 Ibid., p. 1533 and p. 1546.
12 Bjçrn Wallsten et al., The Economic Conditions for Urban Infrastructure Mining. Using
GIS to Prospect Hibernating Copper Stocks, in: Resources, Conservation & Recycling
103. 2015, pp. 85–97.
13 Ureta, Caring for Waste, p. 1532.
14 Caitlynn Beckett and Arn Keeling, Rethinking Remediation. Mine Reclamation,
Environmental Justice, and Relations of Care, in: Local Environment 24. 2019,
pp. 216– 230, here p. 217.
15 Gabrys, Sink, p. 667.
16 Anna Storm, Post-Industrial Landscape Scars, New Y ork 2014.
17 Aryn Martin et al., The Politics of Care in Technoscience, in: Social Studies of Science
45. 2015, pp. 625– 641, here p. 627.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 685

Sometimes it can even “perpetuate, rather than repair the social and
environmental injustices associated with the original development.”18Meta-
phorically speaking, scars may conceal infected tissue and wounds mayreopen.
19Nevertheless, in spite of these risks with care’s darker and unethical
sides, caring about waste means that we “do not allow it to became invisiblenor do we easily delegate it to automatic systems and experts.”
20Care is
therefore not about goodness but the only possible approach to waste, that is,to let waste move from being a “matter out of place” into a “matter of care,” areadiness to respond and take responsibility.
21Maria Puig de la Bellacasa
suggests we talk about “care time” which is dedicated to “reproduction,maintenance and repair” and so create possibilities for “alternative, livablerelationalities.”
22
Hence, in addition to the more empirical enquiries previously outlined, wewant to address the question of how the trisection of dumping, managementand care might contribute to efforts to make sense of waste in theAnthropocene.
II. Previous Work on Radioactive Waste and Choice of
Empirical Cases
Nuclear waste issues have attracted scholarly attention since the late 1970s.
Social scientists, especially in the field of science and technology studies, havefocused mostly on attempts to site high-level waste repositories, exploringsuch issues as risk perception, public trust, ethics, and local, national andinternational politics and conflicts.
23It has been shown, for instance, that such
siting processes are not mainly technical and scientific, but social andpolitical.
24There is a pronounced lack of research on this topic, though, with a
18 Beckett and Keeling, Rethinking Remediation, pp. 222 f.
19 Storm, Post-Industrial Landscape Scars.
20 Ureta, Caring for Waste, p. 1546.
21 Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger. An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo,
London 1966, p. 36; Maria Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care in Technoscience.
Assembling Neglected Things, in: Social Studies of Science 41. 2011, pp. 85–106, here
p. 86; Martin, Politics of Care, p. 634.
22 Puig de la Bellacasa, Making Time for Soil. Technoscientific Futurity Pace of Care, in:
Social Studies of Science 5. 2015, pp. 691–716, here p. 692 and p. 708 quoted in Martin,
Politics of Care, p. 634.
23 Barry D. Solomon et al., Three Decades of Social Science Research on High-Level
Nuclear Waste. Achievements and Future Challenges, in: Risk, Hazards & Crisis in
Public Policy 1. 2010, no. 4, pp. 13– 47.
24 See for example Yannick Barthe, Le pouvoir d’ind/C216cision. La mise en politique des
d/C216chets nucl/C216aires, Paris 2006; Gçran Sundqvist and Mark Elam, Public Involvement
Designed to Circumvent Public Concern? The “Participatory Turn” in European Nuclear
Activities, in: Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy 1. 2010, no. 4, pp. 203–229;
Markku Lehtonen, Deliberative Decision-Making on Radioactive Waste Management in686 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

geographical focus outside Western democracies.25In addition, as Karena
Kalmbach points out, there are surprisingly few historians working on nuclearwaste.
26As one of these few historians, Gabrielle Hecht has recently
conceptualized radioactive waste as one of many other toxic residues thatare obvious manifestations of the Anthropocene and its unequal effects ondifferent societies and geographical areas.
27Among other historical works are
Jacob Hamblin’s study of international science and politics of radioactivewaste disposal into the sea from the 1950s to the early 1970s, and Peter Galisonand Robb Moss’ documentary film “Containment.”
28
Inspired by these approaches, we want to scrutinize the history of attempts tomake radioactive waste disappear through dumping or management, as itunfolded in Soviet and post-Soviet Russia and Sweden. Based on interviewswith industry representatives and activists, historical and contemporaryaccounts and reports from nuclear organizations, NGOs and the media, sitevisits, participation in stakeholder meetings and a limited body of previousstudies, we will extract practices and perspectives with bearing on techno-logical choices, calculation of risks, distribution of responsibilities and voicingof temporalities.The two countries can be described as contrasting cases with regard to howearly and how thoroughly radioactive residue was addressed by theirrespective governments and industries. Soviet and post-Soviet Russia waslate and superficial while Sweden was exemplary early in taking the issuesseriously, although there are certainly nuances to this depiction.
29Strong
Finland, France and the UK. Influence of Mixed Forms of Deliberation in the Macro
Discursive Context, in: Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences 7. 2010,
pp. 175– 196; Sophie Kuppler, From Government to Governance? (Non-) Effects of
Deliberation on Decision-Making Structures for Nuclear Waste Management in
Germany and Switzerland, in: Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences 9. 2012,
pp. 103– 122; Anne Bergmans et al., The Participatory Turn in Radioactive Waste
Management. Deliberation and the Social Technical Divide, in: Journal of Risk Research
18. 2015, pp. 347–363.
25 See though Achim Brunnengr/C228ber et al. (eds.), Nuclear Waste Governance. An
International Comparison, Wiesbaden 2015; Achim Brunnengr/C228ber et al. (eds.),
Challenges of Nuclear Waste Governance. An International Comparison, vol. 2,
Wiesbaden 2018.
26 Karena Kalmbach, Revisiting the Nuclear Age. State of the Art Research in Nuclear
History, in: Neue Politische Literatur 62. 2017, pp. 49– 69, here pp. 65 f.
27 Hecht, Interscalar Vehicles; Gabrielle Hecht, Residue, in: Somatosphere, 8.1. 2018,
http://somatosphere.net/2018/residue.html/.
28 Jacob D. Hamblin, Poison in the Well. Radioactive Waste in the Oceans at the Dawn of the
Nuclear Age, New Brunswick 2009; Peter Galison and Robb Moss (directors),
Containment, USA 2015.
29 Kathleen M. Maloney-Dunn, Russia’s Nuclear Waste Law. A Response to the Legacy of
Environmental Abuse in the Former Soviet Union, in: Arizona Journal of International
and Comparative Law 10. 1993, pp. 365–430; Felix Jaitner, A Profitable Business
Strategy? Spent Nuclear Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management in Russia, in: Achim
Brunnengr/C228ber et al. (eds.), Challenges of Nuclear Waste Governance. An InternationalNuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 687

differences in political and economic systems account for much of the
variation in the approaches. In the authoritarian Russian system, civil societyhas, with a few exceptions, been either inexistent or weak, a condition that isfurther emphasized by the long-standing and tight interdependency betweenthe state and the nuclear industry.
30In the democratic Swedish system,
environmental concerns were generally possible to voice, and translated intoconcrete policies and strengthened independent oversight of the indus-try.
31
Our ambition, however, is not primarily to compare the two countries, but toexplore more principally how key actors in different time periods haveconceptualized and treated the leftovers from civil and military nuclearapplications. Thus, the choice of Soviet and post-Soviet Russia and Sweden israther motivated by their historically substantial involvement with nuclearmatters, both materially and symbolically, as well as by their definingdifferences with regard to political system and geopolitical impact, providingus with a rich palette of waste handling practices and perspectives.
III. Soviet and Post-Soviet Russia – A Story of National-Military
Primacy
1. Early Dumping and Uncontrolled Contamination
At the dawn of the nuclear age, the 1940s and 1950s, the focus of attentionwithin the military-oriented Soviet nuclear industry was certainly not on theresidue it produced, but on the scientific and industrial arms race. In general,unwanted leftovers were disposed of in simple waste dumps or dischargeddirectly into water bodies. One relatively well-documented human andenvironmental disaster of this period centers on the first Soviet plutonium
Comparison, vol. 2, Wiesbaden 2018, pp. 51 –72; Mark Elam and Gçran Sundqvist,
Meddling in Swedish Success in Nuclear Waste Management, in: Environmental Politics
20. 2011, pp. 246–263.
30 Maloney-Dunn, Russia’s Nuclear Waste Law; Jane I. Dawson, Eco-Nationalism. Anti-
Nuclear Activism and National Identity in Russia, Lithuania, and Ukraine, Durham, NC
1996, ch. 5: “Russia. The Demand for Local Self-Determination,” pp. 99 –123; Tatiana
Kasperski, Nuclear Dreams and Realities in Contemporary Russia and Ukraine, in:
History and Technology 31. 2015, pp. 55–80.
31 Herbert P. Kitschelt, Political Opportunity Structures and Political Protest. Anti-Nuclear
Movements in Four Democracies, in: British Journal of Political Science 16. 1986,
pp. 57– 85; Rolf Lidskog, The Politics of Radwaste Management in Sweden. Civil Society,
the Economy and the State, in: Acta Sociologica 37. 1994, pp. 55–73; Sçren Holmberg
and Per Hedberg, The Will of the People? Swedish Nuclear Power Policy, in: Wolfgang
C. M/C252ller and Paul W. Thurner (eds.), The Politics of Nuclear Energy in Western Europe,
Oxford 2017, pp. 235–258.688 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

production facility Mayak in the Southern Urals.32Between 1949 and 1956, an
estimated 76 million cubic meters of liquid radioactive waste was let out intothe nearby Techa River, causing severe irradiation of the population of dozensof villages downstream.
33
After that, high-level waste at Mayak began to be stored in tanks. In 1957 a tankexploded and waste particles spread over 20,000 square kilometers, contami-nating the land of more than a quarter of a million people.
34Information about
the non-sensible radioactive danger was not given to the affected population,nor to a wider public, but was kept as a military secret. Similar dumping andlikely accidents also took place at other military facilities of the Soviet Union,for example in the regions of Krasnoyarsk, Tomsk and in the Arctic.
35
Apart from military activities, radioactive waste was produced by researchinstitutions, power plants and users of ionizing sources in medicine andagriculture. Many of these facilities were located in densely populated cities,like Moscow, and the residue was normally dumped in the closest neigh-borhood or in the outskirts of the cities, sometimes used as backfill with noinformation attached about its origin and composition.
36
In the late 1950s, with a growing understanding of radioactivity being toxic topeople and the environment, Soviet authorities created a specifically dedicatedinstitution named Enterprise no. 808. It was later followed by 34 similarenterprises within the union, forming a system called Radon. The task of theRadon enterprises was to collect, transport, store and dispose of radioactivewaste from medical and research institutions, but not, notably, the wasteproduced within the realms of energy production or the military. That is, theRadon organization covered the whole union, but did not address the by farlargest bulk of radioactive waste produced.In the international arena, Soviet officials and scientists at this time vigorouslycriticized the Western countries, especially Britain and the US, for polluting
32 Zhores Medvedev, Nuclear Disaster in the Urals, New Y ork 1980; Kate Brown, Plutopia.
Nuclear Families, Atomic Cities, and the Great Soviet and American Plutonium
Disasters, Oxford 2012.
33 Thomas Cochran et al., Radioactive Contamination at Chelyabinsk-65, Russia, in:
Annual Review of Energy Environment 18. 1993, pp. 507–528, here p. 511.
34 A. V . Akleyev et al., Consequences of the Radiation Accident at the Mayak Production
Association in 1957 (the “Kyshtym Accident”), in: Journal of Radiological Protection
37. 2017, pp. R19– R42.
35 Nikolai N. Egorov et al. (eds.), The Radiation Legacy of the Soviet Nuclear Complex. An
Analytical Overview, London 2000.
36 Maria Nadezhkina, Therapy in Terms of Radioecology, in: Bezopasnost’ iadernykh
tekhnologii i okruzhaiushchei sredy/Nuclear and Environmental Safety 1. 2006,
pp. 14– 17, here pp. 14 f.; V .A. Salikov and V .G. Safronov, Cleaning Up the City, in:
Bezopasnost’ iadernykh tekhnologii i okruzhaiushchei sredy 1. 2006, pp. 18–23; Alena
Iakovleva, Petr Neveikin, “New Law Will Herald the Beginning of a New Era in Radwaste
Management,” in: Bezopasnost’ iadernykh tekhnologii i okruzhaiushchei sredy 2. 2011,
pp. 80– 82, here p. 81.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 689

the oceans through their disposal of radioactive waste directly into the water.
For example, at international meetings such as the International Conferenceon the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy in Geneva in 1958, Soviet delegates wereunlikely allies of Western oceanographers and health physicists in their effortto demonstrate how environmental damage caused by the radioactive wastethreatened all of humanity.
37However, this did not prevent the Soviet nuclear
industry, including some of those very actors, to approve and practice wastedumping into the Arctic Sea and the Pacific Ocean. In addition, a new chapterwas before long written in the history of Mayak, this time at Lake Karachai,about twenty kilometers south of the plutonium facility, which had been usedas an open-air waste storage. In 1967, the lake partially dried out andradioactive dust from its bed was blown into the air and spread, affectingnumerous nearby villages.
38Nor this time was any information revealed to the
inhabitants or the general public.
2. Industrial Expansion and International Debate
The 1970s and 1980s were marked by the massive expansion of nuclear energyin many countries, including several Soviet republics. Towards the end of itsexistence, the Soviet Union housed close to fifty large electricity-producingreactors on its territory, with almost thirty of them in Russia.
39The waste
produced by these reactors was stored on-site at the nuclear power plants withlittle if any treatment to physically stabilize it or reduce its volume. Among thetypes of contaminated solid objects were, for example, process equipment,tools and clothing, while the liquid waste consisted of, for example, emulsionsused in the reactor circuits and during decontamination of equipment.International exchange of ideas on radioactive waste management continuedin this environment of expansion of the industry. In 1972, the Convention onthe Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter,the so-called London Convention, was signed by more than eighty states, asone of the first international agreements that touched upon nuclear wastematters.
40It was strongly supported by Soviet officials and scientists. However,
only high-level radioactive waste was listed in the convention’s register ofmaterials that should not be disposed at sea. Moreover, it focused on deliberate
37 Hamblin, Poison in the Well, pp. 126– 134, pp. 163–165 and pp. 172 f.
38 Cochran, Radioactive Contamination at Chelyabinsk-65, pp. 518 f.
39 B.A. Bezrukov et al., Nuclear Power Plants, in: Egorov, Radiation Legacy of the Soviet
Nuclear Complex, pp. 51–84, here pp. 51 –54.
40 Seventeen states began drafting the convention in May 1972 to report to the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in June 1972 in Stockholm, leading to
the London Convention at which 82 states of the International Maritime Organization
were represented.690 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

disposal from vessels and aircraft, and did not cover land-based sources of
waste or accidental discharges.41
Soviet specialists also regularly participated in seminars and meetings,arranged among other institutions by the International Atomic Energy Agency(IAEA) and Euratom, and afterwards they reported about the discussions inSoviet scientific journals such as Atomnaia Energiia.
42For example, in a report
from a symposium in Paris 1972, US plans for waste disposal in space or intothe Antarctic ice were heavily criticized and contrasted with the supposedlymore reliable and much cheaper Soviet technology of vitrification, a method tocast waste into glass, in order to make it more stable and easy to handle.
43
Nevertheless, the impact on actual waste management practices at the moreand more numerous nuclear power plants, military nuclear facilities, miningsites, enrichment and fuel fabrication facilities in the union was delayed. Forinstance, vitrification did not start at Mayak before the late 1980s. Instead,temporary storage in tanks was continuously used, along with a practice toinject liquid waste directly into the ground, three to four hundred meters belowsurface.
44
3. Public and International Pressure Leading to Institutional ChangesThe situation started to change dramatically in the late 1980s and early 1990s,due both to the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 and the liberalization of the Sovietpolitical regime. For example, the Radon enterprise in Moscow started ageological exploration to map forgotten and abandoned radioactive wastedumps in the city, followed by the cleanup of more than a thousand of suchcontaminated sites.
45However, many identified dumps remained, in spite of
their proximity to sources for drinking water and other vital resources, as theywere deemed too risky and expensive to clean.
46Another important change
was the 1988 establishment of the Nuclear Safety Institute (IBRAE) within the
41 Olav Schram Stokke, Beyond Dumping? The Effectiveness of the London Convention, in:
Helge Ole Bergesen et al. (eds.), Y earbook of International Cooperation on Environment
and Development 1998/99, London 1998, pp. 39 –50.
42 We use the term “specialists” because Soviet delegations virtually always included a
combination of scientists, government officials and even KGB agents to monitor the
delegations.
43 N. V . Krylova and A.N. Kondrat’ev, Simposium po obrashcheniiu s otkhodami ot
pererabotki obluchennogo iadergono goriuchego, in: Atomnaia Energiia 34. 1973, no. 4,
pp. 316 f. The vitrification was not an exclusively Soviet technology, but developed and
applied in the US and France as well. Ian L. Pegg, Turning Nuclear Waste into Glass, in:
Physics Today 68. 2015, no. 2, pp. 33–39.
44 V .F. Peretroukhine and C.H. Delegard, Some Comparisons of Plutonium-Bearing
Radwaste Management in the USA and Russia, in: Thomas E. Baca and Tadeusz
Florkowski (eds.), The Environmental Challenges of Nuclear Disarmament, Boston
2000, pp. 13 –23, here pp. 17 f.
45 Nadezhkina, Therapy in Terms of Radioecology, pp. 14 f.
46 Ibid.; Evan Gershkovich, Will a Road Through a Nuclear Dumping Ground Result in
“Moscow’s Chernobyl”?, in: The Moscow Times, 16.7. 2019.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 691

Soviet Academy of Sciences. Initially, the institute was dedicated to managing
the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, but later its mission broadened toinclude the inventorying and remediation of accumulated radioactive wasteduring Soviet time more generally.
47From 1989, also the Mayak disasters were,
finally, officially acknowledged.48
Overall, the weakening of censorship at this time allowed for greater publicitywhich in turn fueled a strong domestic anti-nuclear mobilization as well asinternational collaboration and international pressure.
49Taken together, they
pushed institutional changes. For example, in 1991, on the eve of the Sovietcollapse, the newly elected Congress of People’s Deputies of the Russian SovietRepublic adopted a resolution that required the development of a stateprogram for the management of radioactive waste and to take “immediatemeasures for the improvement of the radio-ecological situation.”
50However, it
took significant time before these ambitions materialized within a legalframework. As another example, it was revealed that Russia had been dumpinghighly radioactive waste in the Arctic. This provoked an international outcryas it was a violation of the abovementioned London Convention, and inresponse, Russia created a government commission that in 1993 made publican inventory of submarine reactors, spent fuel, and other radioactive wastedumped between 1959 and 1992.
51
Overall, such disclosures triggered extensive international scrutiny across theArctic and beyond, involving such international organizations as the IAEA andEU, NGOs, including Greenpeace and the Norwegian Bellona Foundation, aswell as individual states. These organizations and states financially supportedresearch and remediation projects focusing on waste dumps in the ArcticOcean but also on contaminated areas and hazardous waste storage facilitiesaround Mayak site.
52From the early 2000s the Russian government itself began
more actively to support, and, indeed, fund the work of scientists, industryorganizations, and national and international NGOs dealing with radioactive
47 L. A. Bolshov et al., K 30-letiiu IBRAE RAN. Osnovnye itogi deiatel’nosti v oblasti
obrashcheniia s RAO, in: Radioaktivye otkhody 2. 2018, pp. 7 –15.
48 B.V . Nikipelov et al., Ob avarii na Iuzhnom Urale 29 sentiabria 1957 g., in: Informa-
tsionnyi biulleten’ TsNII Atominform, 30.6.1989, pp. 1–11.
49 See for example A. A. Iskra et al., The Evolution and Perfection of the “Radleg-Radinfo”
Radioecological Information System, in: International Symposium INSINUME. In Situ
Nuclear Metrology as a Tool of Radioecology. Radioprotection of the Environment,
Albena, Bulgaria, 27.– 30.9.2004.
50 Bolshov, K 30-letiiu IBRAE, in: International Nuclear Information System (INIS),
no. 35106149, p. 8. Unless stated otherwise all translations by TK and AS.
51 Spent fuel was not officially considered as waste but sometimes still treated as such.
Aleksei Yablokov, Radioactive Waste Disposal in Seas adjacent to the Territory of the
Russian Federation, in: Marine Pollution Bulletin 43. 2001, no. 1 –6, pp. 8– 18.
52 Tatiana Kasperski, From Legacy to Heritage. The Changing Political and Symbolic
Status of Military Nuclear Waste in Russia, in: Cahiers du Monde Russe 60. 2019,
pp. 517– 538.692 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

waste, which lead to three state programs on nuclear and radiation safety, the
third of which is still ongoing.53
4. Emerging New Understandings of Radioactive ResidueParallel to these endeavors, nuclear waste began to be reframed in two mainways, which significantly changed its symbolic and political status. First,starting from the 2000s, the waste was transformed from an unwantedradiation “legacy” whose disclosure tarnished the national image, into a“heritage” from the glorious Soviet history of atomic weapons production.
54
For example, in a volume on “Nuclear Legacy and the Ways of Its Remediation”published by the IBRAE Institute, the reader is reminded of the atmosphere ofurgency and of the expectation of an imminent nuclear attack from theUS:
The elimination of the US monopoly on the possession of nuclear weapons, and then the
achievement of nuclear parity became the main objective of the thousands of scientists,
engineers and organizers of domestic production. The priority of achieving this goal
overshadowed other conditions, including those related to safety.55
The waste thus became more positively loaded because it was connected to the
nation’s scientific and military achievements which in turn were seen to justifypast practices of mismanagement.
56
Second, what had been characterized previously as “simplified schemes forthe management of radioactive waste” in the context of “an acute shortage ofresources and time” was now replaced by legal frameworks and newinstitutional actors.
57Based on a 2011 law, a new National Operator for
Radioactive Waste Management begun a national inventory of radioactivewaste sites, including the energy and military sectors. It also initiated
53 The official names of the programs were: Federal’naia tselevaia programma “Iadernaia
i radiatsionnaia bezopasnost’ Rossii na 2000 – 2006 gody” (Federal target program
“Nuclear and radiation safety of Russia for 2000 – 2006”); Federal’naia tselevaia
programma “Obespechenie iadernoi i radiatsionnoi bezopasnosti na 2008 god i na
period do 2015 goda” (Federal Target Program “Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation
Safety for 2008 and for the Period until 2015”); Federal’naia tselevaia programma
“Obespechenie iadernoi i radiatsionnoi bezopasnosti na 2016– 2020 gody i na period
do 2030 goda” (Federal Target Program “Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation Safety for
2016 – 2020 and for the Period until 2030”). See the website of the last and still ongoing
program: http://xn–-2030-bwe0hj7au5h.xn–p1ai/.
54 Kasperski, From Legacy th Heritage, pp. 517 –538.
55 E.V . Evstratov et al., Problemy iadernogo naslediia i puti ikh resheniia, vol. 1, Moscow
2012, ch. 2: “Posledstviia realizatsii nachal’nykh etapov iadernykh oboronnykh pro-
gramm”, pp. 78– 191, here p. 79.
56 Anna Storm et al., Urban Nuclear Reactors and the Security Theatre. The Making of
Atomic Heritage in Chicago, Moscow and Stockholm, in: Heike Oevermann and Eszter
Gantner (eds.), Securing Urban Heritage. Agents, Access, and Securitization, New Y ork
2019, pp. 111– 129.
57 Evstratov, Problemy iadernogo naslediia, p. 96.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 693

processes of siting for new storage facilities, where “final isolation”
(okonchatelnaia isoliatsiia) was envisaged.58In an interview, its director
confided how difficult it was to carry out a licensing process for a repositorydesigned to last for 300 years: “This is a great responsibility for the regulator:we are talking about centuries, and th ey have never issued licenses for such
terms. It is a very serious decision for them.”
59Thus, by the 2010s, the
understandings of waste as a positive heritage in the present was comple-mented by views of the waste as having an impact also on the long-termfuture.In this reorientation, nuclear residue was divided into new categories of“special” (osobye othody) and “removable” (udaliaemye othody) waste, where
the first signified waste that was too difficult and too costly to be removedsafely, while the latter was obviously movable.
60Counterintuitively, however,
the special waste amounted to more than 82 percent by volume of the solidradioactive waste and more than 99.9 percent of all accumulated liquidradioactive waste.
61This implies that a vast majority of the radioactive waste
management in today’s Russia is focused on adaptation of already existingplaces of storage. It is also important to note that neither in Soviet time, nor inpost-Soviet Russia was spent nuclear fuel considered as waste but instead as areserve of raw materials for new types of nuclear reactors.
62Spent fuel
therefore does not exist as a category of nuclear waste in Russia.Furthermore, existing storage places of what counts as special waste have latelybegun to be transformed from sites of so-called “placement” (razmeshenie)
into sites of “conservation” (konservatsia) and, if deemed sufficiently stable for
the entire period of the waste toxicity, they can become “disposal facilities”(punkt zakhoronenia).
63In this process, reliance on “natural” repositories is
key. For example, the previously established practice to inject liquid radioac-tive waste into deep underground geological formations continues (currentlyin three places in Russia) and is approved by the new national legalframework.
64It is clearly articulated that this practice is supposed to mimic the
depositions of natural resources:
58 State Duma of the Russian Federation, Federal law no. 190-FZ: Ob obrashchenii s
radioaktivnymi otkhodami i o vnesenii izmeneniy v otdel’nyye zakonodatel’nyye akty
Rossiyskoy Federatsii, 11. 7.2011.
59 In comparison, interim storages were expected to last about thirty years. Ekaterina
Tripoten’, Planiruem na sto let i bol’she, in: Atomnyi Expert 6. 2015, pp. 38 –45, here
p. 41.
60 Public Council of the State Corporation Rosatom, Radioaktivnye otkhody. Ot
obrazovaniia do izoliatsii, Moscow 2013, p. 23.
61 I.I. Linge (ed.), Osobyye radioaktivnyye otkhody, Moscow 2015, p. 3.
62 Per Hçgselius, The Decay of Communism. Managing Spent Nuclear Fuel in the Soviet
Union, 1937–1991, in: Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy 1. 2010, no. 4, pp. 83– 109.
63 State Duma of the Russian Federation, Federal law no. 190-FZ, art. 3.
64 The practice is not approved, however, by the IAEA. Jaap Hoek, Deep-Well Injection of
Radioactive Waste in Russia, in: Michael J. Stenhouse and Vladimir I. Kirko (eds.),694 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

The main idea behind the storage or burial of waste in the geological environment is to create
man-made objects in the ground that are similar to mineral deposits in terms of their
isolation […] in the ground for long periods of time. Creating such objects, we try to repeat
the natural processes of formation of accumulations of substances in the geological
environment.65
The “returning to nature” vision of radioactive waste disposal is also
prominent in the public discussions about two final repositories one of whichis currently under construction and the other being discussed. In one of thelargest mainstream weeklies in Russia, Argumenty i Fakty, a journalist
commented:
What to do with wastes of different hazard classes accumulated in enormous amounts? The
answer is obvious: to return them to nature from which they were taken. Not just to throw
them in the landfill however, but to hide them safely for hundreds of years.66
Thus, at the turn of the 2020s, responsibility for taking care of waste for a
protracted period into the future was finally publicly articulated.67
IV. Sweden – A Story of Industrial-Environmental Politics
1. From Non-Waste to Dangerous MatterDespite being a small country, Sweden’s activities in research and developmentof both civil and military nuclear applications after World War II were notablyambitious.
68This early period was marked by enthusiasm and confidence, and
nuclear residues were not considered a problem – if considered at all.69In spite
of a general awareness of radiation being dangerous, no one discussed half-lives of radioactive substances, that is, for how long these materials andsubstances would stay toxic to living biota. Among the few ideas articulatedabout how to treat the unwanted leftovers that nevertheless materialized were,
Defence Nuclear Waste Disposal in Russia. International Perspective, Dordrecht 1996,
pp. 219– 230; A.N. Dorofeev et al., Evolyutsiia obosnovaniia dolgovremennoy bez-
opasnosti PGZ ZhRO, in: Radioaktivye otkhody 1. 2017, pp. 54 –63.
65 P.M. Vereshchagin et al., Ideologiia, prakticheskie i nauchnye rezul’taty 50-letnego
opyta glubinnogo zakhoroneniia zhidkikh radioaktivnykh otkhodov i nera-
dioaktivnykh promstokov predpriiatii atomnoi promyshlennosti, in: Vestnik Rossiiskoi
akademii estestvennykh nauk 2. 2017, pp. 12– 23, here p. 12.
66 Tatiana Forsova, Izoliatsiia RAO na sotni let. V Rossii nakopilos’ 500 mln kubometrov
otkhodov, in: Argymenty i Fakty, 24.12.2018.
67 Nikolai Trokhov, “Takikh ob’ektov bol’she net.” Vse o stroitel’stve podzemnoi
issledovatel’skoi laboratorii pod Zheleznogorskom, in: Newslab, 12. 12.2018.
68 Arne Kaijser, From Tile Stoves to Nuclear Plants. The Historical Development of Swedish
Energy Systems, in: Semida Silveira (ed.), Building Sustainable Energy Systems. Swedish
Experiences, Stockholm 2001, pp. 57– 93.
69 Jonas Anshelm and Vasilis Galis, The Politics of High-Level Nuclear Waste Management
in Sweden. Confined Research versus Research in the Wild, in: Environmental Policy
and Governance 19. 2009, pp. 269– 280, here p. 273.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 695

for example, to cast them in concrete and sink them into the ocean or put them
in abandoned mines.70
At the beginning of the 1960s, however, the time horizon for how long nuclearwaste needed safe storage changed drastically. Initial estimations of twenty,thirty years were replaced, first by hundreds of years, then by thousands ofyears, and then – with regard to plutonium – to hundreds of thousands ofyears.
71Y et, none of these drastic changes triggered any notable public debates
and when the large-scale expansion of commercial nuclear power took offtowards the end of the 1960s, the waste issue was principally non-existing tothe politicians involved in the decisions.
72Instead, the question was how to get
hold of enough spent fuel from the first generation of nuclear reactors to beused for the expected next generation.
73Obviously, this meant that spent fuel
was not regarded as waste but as a valuable resource.74
Y et some radioactive waste began to be acknowledged and talked about as, forexample, “atomic garbage” (atomsopor) and “atomic ashes” (atomaska). With
the new understanding of much longer time horizons, storage possibilities thatwere discussed at this time included vitrification, followed by storage in steelcapsules in the bedrock, in old oil drilling holes or in closed salt mines. Swedishbedrock was also said to be geologically stable and therefore most suitable forwaste storage. Other more spectacular suggestions were to bury the waste inthe polar ice or send it into space by rocket.
75
During the 1970s, as the anti-nuclear movement along with the generalenvironmental movement grew in Sweden, as in many other countries, themanagement of nuclear waste turned into the most debated environmentalquestion of all.
76The debate did not concern whether radioactive waste was
dangerous or not – everyone agreed that it was dangerous indeed – but rather ifit could be stored safely. The physicist and Nobel Prize winner Hannes Alfv/C216n,for example, expressed serious concerns and envisioned that radioactive wastecould “poison the earth and jeopardize the future of humanity.”
77Similar
worries were articulated by other leading critics using expressions such as
70 Jonas Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem. Fr/C229gan om k/C228rnavfallets
hantering i det offentliga samtalet i Sverige, 1950–2002, SKB Rapport R-06–113,
Stockholm 2006, pp. 15 –19.
71 Ibid., p. 17.
72 Gçran Sundqvist, The Bedrock of Opinion. Science, Technology and Society in the
Siting of High-Level Nuclear Waste, Dordrecht 2002, pp. 57 f.
73 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 20.
74 Sundqvist, Bedrock of Opinion, pp. 57 f.
75 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 34 and p. 17.
76 Jonas Anshelm and Vasilis Galis, (Re-)Constructing Nuclear Waste Management in
Sweden. The Involvement of Concerned Groups, 1970– 2010, in: Linkçping Studies in
Technology and Social Change. Socio-Technical Perspectives on Sustainable Energy
Systems 241. 2015, pp. 401– 430, here p. 408.
77 Cited in Anshelm and Galis, Politics of High-Level Nuclear Waste Management in
Sweden, p. 273.696 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

“playing Russian roulette” or “colonizing” the future, which was seen as
profoundly unethical.78Through the anti-nuclear push, the question of waste
storage thereby moved from a technical to a moral issue with regard to futurehuman generations and the environment. The nuclear industry objected thatthe problem was all about misunderstandings and lack of knowledge, asnuclear power in fact was the most environmentally friendly of all energysources. Furthermore, its representatives stated the branch was betterprepared to take care of its waste than other industries, whose waste wouldcause much bigger environmental damage for future generations, especiallyfossil fuel-based energy production.
79
In 1972, a state-sponsored investigation was initiated, which after four yearsconcluded that Sweden should build reprocessing plants for spent nuclear fuel,and in connection with this, engineer rock caverns for final disposal of high-level waste.
80The critics, including physicists and geologists, questioned the
results and asserted that cracks in the bedrock and especially flowing groundwater made bedrock storage unsafe, which sparked a vivid public discussionamong geologists. In this debate, the proponents of bedrock storage referred toSweden’s long experience in mining, while the critics referred to the bedrock as“a living body” whose movements and reactions could not be predicted.
81The
critical geologists also emphasized that geological models were not at allsuitable to predict the future, and by implication not capable of guaranteeingsafe waste storage for long time periods ahead.
82
2. KBS – A Nuclear Fuel Safety Research ProjectIn 1976, at the same time as the government investigation presented its results,the nuclear industry initiated a financially massive research project calledNuclear Fuel Safety (K/C228rnbr/C228nsles/C228kerhet, KBS), a project given to the SwedishNuclear Fuel Supply Company (Svensk K/C228rnbr/C228nslefçrsçrjning, SKBF). Itsmission was to prove to politicians and the general public that the proposedstorage solutions were feasible.
83This mission became even more crucial to the
78 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, pp. 30 f.
79 Ibid., p. 24 and p. 37.
80 Reprocessing is undertaken to recover valuable materials like uranium 235 and
plutonium for reuse as fuel, and to reduce the volume of the waste. See Steve Fetter and
Frank N. von Hippel, Is US Reprocessing Worth the Risk?, in: Arms Control Today
35. 2005, pp. 6–12; on the Swedish plans for a “plutonium factory” see Evert Vedung,
Det hçgaktiva k/C228rnavfallets v/C228g till den rikspolitiska dagordningen, in: Mats Andr/C216n
and Urban Strandberg (eds.), K/C228rnavfallets politiska utmaningar, Hedemora 2005,
pp. 33– 56; Sundqvist, Bedrock of Opinion, pp. 67 f.
81 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, pp. 40– 42 and pp. 56 f.
82 See Sabine Hçhler and Andrea Westermann’s introduction to this special issue on
geologists beginning to make future predictions in relation to discussions on the
Anthropocene.
83 Lena Andersson-Skog, Fr/C229n ren energi till farligt avfall – k/C228rnkraftsfr/C229gans reglering i
det svenska v/C228lf/C228rdsbyggandet. En ekonomisk-historisk çversikt, in: Andr/C216n andNuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 697

industry in 1977, when the Swedish parliament approved the so-called
“Nuclear Power Stipulation Act,” which implied that the industry had to provethat it could take care of the waste in a completely safe way before any newreactors were allowed to start operating. The government decided to stay out ofthe debate, leading to a situation where the industry in some respects becameits own reviewer. Consequently, radioactive waste retreated from its moralconceptualization into a task for juridical, technical and natural scienceargumentation around specific storage choices.
84
The KBS project soon advanced a general storage principle which could beadapted either reprocessing and thereafter storage (called KBS-1), or to directstorage (called KBS-2). The principle stipulated that the waste was to besurrounded by different technological and natural barriers that should preventleakage such as glass, stainless steel, bentonite clay, storage space deep into theground, and the surrounding bedrock itself.
85Soon, direct storage became
favored as the US decided to say no to all reprocessing of spent nuclear fuelbased on uranium exported from the US, in order to prevent an increase ofplutonium proliferation. From this moment on, all spent fuel in Sweden was tobe considered as waste that needed final storage.
86The industry however
described the total waste quantities as negligibly small, comparable to whatcould be stored in an ordinary villa, office building or oil cistern, forexample.
87
In 1978 the government approved the KBS barrier principle as fully safe. Theengineers behind KBS also emphasized that some referral bodies had found iteven “overly safe” (çvers/C228ker).
88The only missing part to fulfil the “Nuclear
Power Stipulation Act” was to show that there was a geologically suitable placewithin the country, which was not even a vital requirement according to theState Nuclear Energy Inspectorate (Statens k/C228rnkraftsinspektion, SKI).
89At
this point, in 1979, the Three Mile Island accident occurred in the US and theSwedish debate decisively changed focus from the waste problem to the risksfrom reactor accidents. This was also the situation when Sweden carried out areferendum the following year about the future of nuclear energy – thequestion of radioactive waste management had suddenly been moved to themargins of the public debate. Out of the three alternatives for voting in thereferendum, only one even mentioned radioactive waste.
Strandberg, K/C228rnavfallets politiska utmaningar, pp. 16–32, here p. 23; Sundqvist,
Bedrock of Opinion, pp. 77 f.
84 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, pp. 47– 54.
85 For a description of the technical principles of the refined version KBS-3, see Gunnar
Gustafson, De tekniska principerna bakom det svenska slutfçrvaret fçr anv/C228nt
k/C228rnbr/C228nsle – KBS 3, in: Andr/C216n and Strandberg, K/C228rnavfallets politiska utmaningar,
pp. 57– 71.
86 Sundqvist, Bedrock of Opinion, p. 111.
87 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 36.
88 Ibid., p. 58.
89 Ibid., p. 60.698 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

Regardless of this change in public focus, the Swedish government increased
its control by establishing a special fund intended to cover the expected costs ofradioactive waste management and storage.
90Following the polluter pays
principle, the industry was still accountable for the costs, but from now on ithad to pay a certain rate per kilowatt-hour of nuclear electricity produced intothis nuclear waste fund.
91The rate was continuously revised based on the
industry’s own estimates; the regulator’s review of these estimates resulted in arecommendation to the government which made the final decision. The levelshave been steadily increasing as cost estimates have risen along withdiminishing contributions from interest on accumulated funds.
92
3. Local Siting Conflicts and Changing RationalesDetached from the most heated national debates, SKBF, which was laterrenamed the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Company, SKB,began the process to find a suitable geographical location for a storage,especially for the high-level radioactive waste including the spent fuel.Following the result of the referendum and subsequent parliament decision tophase out nuclear power to 2010, it was calculated that the nuclear program inSweden would produce about 8,000 tons of such waste.
93When test drillings
started, however, they were met with intense local resistance. Local commu-nities guarded what they considered their mountain, and spectacular conflictsarose.
94Test drilling was thereafter done at some places without informing the
concerned communities beforehand, which led to even more intense local
90 A model for financing the handling of radioactive waste was proposed by a state
investigation already in 1972, but it was another model that was later implemented in
1981. K/C228rnavfallsr/C229det, Kunskapsl/C228get p/C229 k/C228rnavfallsomr/C229det 2014. Forskningsdebatt,
alternativ och beslutsfattande, Rapport, Statens Offentliga Utredningar SOU 2014:11,
Stockholm 2014, pp. 96 –101; Andersson-Skog, Fr/C229n ren energi till farligt avfall,
pp. 27– 28.
91 The polluter pays principle was first spelled out in 1972 in a recommendations of OECD
of which Sweden was and is a member. It later also became part of the sustainable
development principles contained in the 1992 United Nations “Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development.” In 1987, with the coming into effect of the Single
European Act it became legally binding for the members of the European Union, which
Sweden joined in 1995. By that time however, the principle was already reflected in
Swedish legal norms, such as the “Environmental Protection Act” of 1969 that stated that
any operator (verksamhetsutçvare) take all precautionary measures reasonably required
to prevent or remedy the environmental harm. The same principle is also part of the
“Swedish Environmental Code” that entered into force in 1999. Jonna Carlson,
Principen att fçrorenaren betalar och den svenska miljçbalken, Master thesis Linkç-
pings University 2000. See also Andersson-Skog, Fr/C229n ren energi till farligt avfall, p. 22.
92 Tomas K/C229berger and Johan Swahn, Model or Muddle? Governance and Management of
Radioactive Waste in Sweden, in: Brunnengr/C228ber, Nuclear Waste Governance,
pp. 203– 225, here pp. 220 –222.
93 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 69.
94 On the importance of laypeople in this conflict, see Anshelm and Galis, (Re-)Con-
structing Nuclear Waste Management in Sweden, pp. 401 –430.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 699

resistance, finally involving the police to remove and arrest protesters, and
resulting in court appearances and fines.95A number of different communities
began to cooperate in their resistance and managed to stop test drilling at morethan a dozen places in the country.In parallel, the water basins storing spent fuel at the nuclear power plants werenearly filled, which led to numerous new radioactive waste infrastructurestaking shape during the 1980s. The world’s first interim storage for spentnuclear fuel in the world, Clab, was built close to the Oskarshamn nuclear plantalong with a deep underground laboratory; the aforementioned final reposi-tory for low and medium level waste, SFR, was blasted into the bedrock underthe sea outside the Forsmark nuclear plant; and a specially built ship started totransport the waste between the plants and the storage facilities.
96Public
critique was limited and focused mostly on SFR and especially whether theground water could be affected, but some people were also worried that the bayat Forsmark, due to the continuous ground uplifting, over time would betransformed into a radioactive lake. The industry representatives certainlyrejected this view and emphasized how international experts had found SFR tohave remarkably big safety margins, and claimed that it in fact was a “RollsRoyce solution.”
97In 1984, a third version of KBS, KBS-3, which involved
storage in 4,400 copper capsules, embedded into bentonite clay and bedrock500 meters underground, was presented as an “overly strong system.”
98
However, as the test drillings had been met with such fierce local resistance,SKB now reoriented their position not to find the best geological site for a finalstorage, but a willing hosting community.
99The rationale was that the task for
the bedrock was actually to protect the capsules from people, not the other wayaround.
100In 1992, SKB sent a letter to all 286 municipalities in Sweden about
“deep storage,” as it was called, and asked if they were interested to take part inthis process. Good local employment opportunities were emphasized: a deep
95 Sundqvist, Bedrock of Opinion, p. 109; Olov Holmstrand (ed.), K/C228rnkraftavfall:
Avfallskedjans syn p/C229 den svenska hanteringen, Solna 2001.
96 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 73; Gçran Sundqvist and
Mark Elam, The Swedish KBS Project. A Last Word in Nuclear Fuel Safety Prepares to
Conquer the World?, in: Journal of Risk Research 12. 2009, pp. 969–988, here p. 980;
Mark Elam and Gçran Sundqvist, Stakeholder Involvement in Swedish Nuclear Waste
Management, in: SKI Report 2007. 2, pp. 3 –68, here pp. 22 f.; K/C229berger and Swahn,
Model or Muddle, pp. 213 f.; Rolf Lidskog and Gçran Sundqvist, On the Right Track?
Technology, Geology and Society in Swedish Nuclear Waste Management, in: Journal of
Risk Research 7. 2004, pp. 251–268, here p. 256.
97 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, pp. 75 f.
98 Ibid., p. 78.
99 Sundqvist, Bedrock of Opinion, ch. 5: “No Particular Place to Go,” pp. 109–1142, and
ch. 7: “The Myth of Democracy,” pp. 175– 219.
100 Anshelm and Galis, Politics of High-Level Nuclear Waste Management in Sweden,
p. 277.700 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

storage facility was expected to generate about 350 new jobs for a period of fifty
years.101
Politicians in Sweden’s northern municipalities, with tough unemploymentsituations, first showed interest, but later withdrew due to protests from thelocal populations. Critics on the national level also argued that the northernparts of the country already had been sacrificed enough to help Swedenmodernize, and that the idea to dump nuclear waste on poor municipalitieswas a new form of colonialism.
102Instead, SKB turned to municipalities that
already had nuclear facilities, and where people were expected to be more usedto and also more positive about nuclear facilities. To this, critics ironicallystated that the criteria for a safe storage site had become “high unemployment,sparsely populated and willing politicians.”
103On the contrary, SKB argued
that it was “everybody’s responsibility” to contribute to the care for the nuclearwaste in order to avoid a situation when the next generation had to inherit theproblems. The SKB representatives phrased it as “the duty of our genera-tion.”
104
In the early 2000s, two coastal municipalities in southern Sweden that alreadyhoused nuclear facilities remained on the list of possible sites for final storageof high-level radioactive waste.
105As test drilling started, the two municipal-
ities intensively competed to win the storage localization, in remarkablecontrast to previous local resistance elsewhere. At the same time, meteorolo-gists and hydrologists argued that a coastal location was the absolute worstchoice with regard to ground water flows.
106Y et, in 2009, the municipality
housing the Forsmark plant turned out as the winner.107As of 2020, the
decision to build a final storage for high-level waste based on the KBS-3 barrierprinciple has not yet been taken, but has become a subject for a protractedenvironmental court case. The focus of the deliberations is on the potentialcorrosion of the copper capsules and on the different views on building astorage which could work as a walk-away solution, or as an installation thatwould need continuous human oversight.
108
101 Anshelm, Fr/C229n energiresurs till kvittblivningsproblem, p. 87.
102 Ibid., p. 87 and p. 90.
103 Ibid., p. 89 and p. 91.
104 Ibid., p. 89; Anshelm and Galis, Politics of High-Level Nuclear Waste Management in
Sweden, p. 275.
105 Sundqvist and Elam, The Swedish KBS Project, pp. 982 f.
106 Elam and Sundqvist, Stakeholder involvement, pp. 57 f.
107 K/C229berger and Swahn, Model or Muddle, p. 209.
108 Hannes Lagerlçf et al., Monitoring the Underground. What Role for Repository
Monitoring in the Governance of Geological Disposal for Nuclear Waste?, Modern 2020
Deliverable n 85.1, 27. 3.2018, on the Swedish case pp. 22 f; for a discussion on a “final
solution” vs retrievability, see Yannick Barthe et al., Technological Fix or Divisible
Object of Collective Concern? Histories of Conflict over the Geological Disposal of
Nuclear Waste in Sweden and France, in: Science as Culture 29. 2020, pp. 196– 218.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 701

V. Temporalities and Responsibilities towards Eternal
Care
As our cases demonstrate, the most notable temporality in the history of
radioactive waste is that of linear progress. Despite the critical differences inpolitical systems, and in the possibilities for the public and non-state actors tocriticize and influence nuclear waste management, in both Russia and Swedenthere was a widely shared belief that, based on more and more advancedtechnologies, human society will improve, and all possible side effects will beefficiently dealt with. The practices of haphazard dumping in the SovietRussian context and the non-acknowledgement of waste as a problem in theSwedish context are both early expressions of this confidence in continuousprogress. When radioactive residue was identified as toxic matter – oftentriggered by public critique, but at different times in the two countries –, theconfidence of industrial and partly also state actors was unshaken, and insteadredirected to finding solutions for waste management. As we have seen, thesuggested geographies for isolating radioactive matters from humans closelyfollowed the idea of the ultimate sink, for example, to let the waste seeminglydisappear into the sea, into space or into the deep underground. In thistemporal understanding the nuclear industry stands out as the accountableactor, both in terms of technological development and in terms of financing.The state is however visible in the background, with direct owner interests inthe nuclear industry, and also as regulator, and gradually by increasing itscontrol over the funding of waste management and storage. At the same time,local protesters, especially in Sweden, persistently reminded the state, theindustry and the general public that the potential radioactive waste storageswould affect particular communities and places, no matter the technologyused.The way of relying on natural elements to safely contain waste furthermoreconnects to a certain idea of a cyclic temporality, namely, to return to naturewhat was once extracted through uranium mining. This was perhaps mostclearly expressed in the Russian case where it was explicitly articulated as atechnology of mimicking geological deposits by injections of liquid waste intothe underground; the Swedish reliance on stable granite bedrock and bentoniteclay as a container for very old water next to toxic residue resembles thisview.
109The Swedish focus changed over time, though, from primarily viewing
the bedrock as a container of waste protecting the surroundings from toxicity,to the bedrock as isolating the waste from human interventions. The
109 Anna Storm, When We Have Left the Nuclear Territories. Nonhuman Entanglements
with Radioactive Remains, in: Colin Sterling and Rodney Harrison (eds.), Deterrito-
rializing the Future. Heritage in, of and after the Anthropocene, London 2020,
pp. 318– 343, here pp. 334 f.; see also Anshelm and Galis, Politics of High-Level Nuclear
Waste Management in Sweden, p. 276.702 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

responsibility in this cyclic view was, although often implicitly, associated with
abiotic elements like bedrock and clay, in combination or not with humantechnologies and oversight.Another variant of a cyclic temporality was expressed through differentunderstandings of spent nuclear fuel as a resource. While this understandingfluctuated over time and between actors in the Swedish case, the Russian viewalways favored the cyclic resource perspective. As a resource, spent nuclear fuelwould provide potential new generations of nuclear reactors with valuable fuel,and thus imaginatively close the nuclear cycle by using much more of theenergy content of the uranium and, in principle and according to theproponents, leave no waste behind.
110One consequence of this variant of a
cyclic view is the resistance of some actors towards intended final isolation ofspent nuclear fuel, who instead favor options of retrievable storage in order tolet this resource remain accessible to future human generations.
111
A third significant temporality in the history of nuclear waste centers on theimpacts of the past in the present. The Russian case here offers the moststriking contrasts. On the one hand, the toxic legacies of numerous events ofunintended or just haphazard dumping in the past continue to expose humansto radiation and contaminate the environment in the present, and this is anexample of slow violence which is gradually also becoming publicly known andacknowledged. On the other hand, the recent efforts to acknowledge andhandle the toxic legacies are carried out in parallel to a reframing of nuclearwaste as a sign of past national glory, for example by labelling it as “heritage”with positive connotations. The framing of the leftovers as a sign of necessarysacrifices in the past implies a justification of the hazardous situation in thepresent as something unavoidable and morally respectable. The responsibilityhere is therefore certainly linked to the nuclear industry, but foremost to thestate leadership promoting Russia as a powerful nation.Fourth and finally, we want to highlight a temporality focusing on futureprospects, expectations and even fantasies. If past glory was prominent in theRussian case, future control dominated much of the Swedish deliberations.Whether more short-term, such as in the perspective of one’s grandchildren,or more long-term, such as in the potentialities of movements in the bedrock,the linear progress vision was in many ways extrapolated into the future. Thisfuture vision encompassed a proposed shared responsibility: While thenuclear industry remained centrally accountable for developing “Rolls Royce”waste storages, it also asked the general public to take responsibility by
110 For a description of the principles of transmutation, that is, the change of one substance
into another, see Janne Wallenius, Nyttiggçrande eller kvittblivning – transmutation
eller bara fçrvaring?, in: Andr/C216n and Strandberg, K/C228rnavfallets politiska utmaningar,
pp. 101– 115.
111 See for example Jonas Anshelm and Vasilis Galis, (Re-)Constructing Nuclear Waste
Management in Sweden, p. 420.Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 703

supporting the implementation of the suggested storage technologies. The
move from searching for a geologically optimal site to searching for a sociallyacceptable site is perhaps the most notable expression of this widening view ofaccountability in the Swedish case.While considering these temporalities, we have to remember that they are notabstract visions. As other scholars have pointed out, such temporal categoriesare closely connected to concrete material and historical conditions, andproduced by specific actors using different tools and technologies in order todescribe, control and shape the present and the future.
112The characteristics of
nuclear waste make it an unescapable legacy from the past at the same time asit evokes imaginations of eternity. Lately, nuclear heritage initiatives aregrowing somewhat in numbers and scope, while artistic work exploringradioactive waste themes abounds, for example under such headings as“Perpetual Uncertainty.”
113Furthermore, international nuclear industry or-
ganizations have carried out work to create a toolbox for transferring criticalknowledge to those for whom radioactive waste will be of concern in thefuture.
114As Jennifer Gabrys points out, waste “creeps into the future” as
“stores for unforeseen […] effects,” and local communities living close towaste repositories ask how they should tell coming generations “that thismonster underground is dangerous.”
115
Thus, it is becoming clear that existing waste management practices do notsuffice, that we must move beyond managerial fantasies of total control, andinstead engage with more wide-ranging practices. To care about waste is to bewilling to respond to its constant moving and transformative character, whichrequires us to live with it rather than imagining its disappearance. In this livingwith, or, in the words of Donna Haraway, in this “staying with the trouble,” theintricate entanglements of humans, animals and abiotic elements entailpractices that take into account different ways of being, while acknowledgingthe political nature of care.
116
112 See for example reflections on the “history of the future” approach: Jenny Andersson
and Egle.Rindzevic ˇiu¯te., Introduction. Toward a New History of the Future, in:
Andersson and Rindzevic ˇiu¯te.(eds.), The Struggle for the Long-Term in Transnational
Science and Politics. Forging the Future, New Y ork 2015, pp. 1 –15.
113 Storm, Urban Nuclear Reactors and the Security Theatre; the travelling exhibition
“Perpetual Uncertainty” was curated by Ele Carpenter and shown, for example, at
Bildmuseet in Ume/C229, Sweden 2017.
114 See the final report of the project “Preservation of Records, Knowledge and Memory
across Generations” launched in 2011 by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency’s
Radioactive Waste Management Committee: OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, Preserva-
tion of Records, Knowledge and Memory (RK&M) Across Generations: Final Report of
the RK&M Initiative, Paris 2019.
115 Gabrys, Sink, p. 667 and p. 677; Sandlos and Keeling, Toxic Legacies, p. 17.
116 Donna J. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble. Making Kin in the Chthulucene, Durham
2016, pp. 1 –4.704 Tatiana Kasperski and Anna Storm

Granted, if we want care to become more than an intellectual or ethical
perspective, we need to develop institutions and practices that support localcommunities to live with the waste. Such institutions and practices would haveto go beyond participation in decisions about site selection, as is currentlyoften the case. On a deeper level, care practices should guarantee broader andmore democratic engagement of all concerned actors and communities thatenables continuously evolving understandings of the risks and responsibilitiesthat long-term living with toxic waste entails.
117
We hope to have shown that the palette of historical temporalities at work indealing with radioactive residue has not become obsolete in relation togeologically imagined futures. Instead, we suggest that care is a practice thatresides in the historical time of living beings, and to merge it with a viewtowards eternity – that is, to propose the perspective of eternal care – is toaccentuate an ongoing interdependence of historical and geological tempo-ralities. To insist on caring for waste as a political practice, a manifold oftemporal understandings and their implications are key. Nuclear waste issimultaneously toxic legacy and future fantasy, claiming present powerrelations and uneven geographies, as well as pointing to the generations andspecies that will inherit this anthropogenic wound or scar on their bodies andlandscapes – whether or not through a sip of possibly very old water in anunderground waste storage cavern.
Dr. Tatiana Kasperski, Pompeu Fabra University, Faculty of Humanities,
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25–27, 08005 Barcelona, SpainE-Mail: tkasperski@gmail.com
Prof. Dr. Anna Storm, Linkçping University, Department of Thematic Studies,
Faculty of Arts and Sciences, SE –581 83 Linkçping, SwedenE-Mail: anna.storm@liu.se
117 Tatiana Kasperski and Olga Kuchinskaya, Energy Democracy, Nuclear Power, and
Participatory Knowledge Production about Radiation Risks, in: Leah Sprain et al. (eds.),
Routledge Handbook of Energy Democracy, New Y ork [2021].Nuclear Waste as Toxic Legacy and Future Fantasy 705

