Annals of the American Association of Geographers
ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21
On Disease Conﬁgurations, Black-Grass Blowback,
and Probiotic Pest Management
George Cusworth & Jamie Lorimer
To cite this article: George Cusworth & Jamie Lorimer (2024) On Disease Conﬁgurations,
Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management, Annals of the American Association of
Geographers, 114:3, 462-480, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2023.2289984
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2023.2289984
© 2024 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 06 Feb 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1651
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=raag21
On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback,
and Probiotic Pest Management
George Cusworthaand Jamie Lorimerb
aOxford Martin Program on the Future of Food, University of Oxford, UK;bSchool of Geography and the Environment and
Hertford College, University of Oxford, UK
This article explores approaches to managing pests that are being developed in response to the faltering
effectiveness of antibiotic regimes of chemical control. It focuses on black-grass ( Alopecurus myosuroides ), an
endemic plant in European agriculture that has emerged as a serious yield-robber with increasing levels of
herbicidal resistance. Following farmers and agronomists who have developed “integrated ”approaches to
black-grass management, the article identifies approaches to biosecurity that do not target unwanted life so
much as they modulate ecological systems in their entirety. Pathogenesis, in this relational understanding,
follows not from breaches of dangerous life into healthy space, but from ecological intra-actions that enablethe proliferation of some life to compromise the multispecies livability of the body in question. The article
contributes to the literature by detailing how this configurational approach works in the world. It traces the
polymorphic spatial imaginaries required to map pests well; the process of knowledge intensification neededto reveal which configurations can resist pathogenesis; and the probiotic biopolitical interventions used to
safeguard farmland productivity. The article uses black-grass to present a temporal metanarrative of intensive
farming causing ecological blowback, leading to the development of approaches to pest managementpredicated on a pragmatic tolerance toward unwanted life. Key Words: agriculture, black-grass, disease
geographies, integrated pest management, pests.
Black-grass ( Alopecurus myosuroides ) is wreaking
havoc in the arable areas of England andnorthwest Europe ( Figure 1 ). It is prolific,
highly competitive, and spreads across fields like ablack smear. Black-grass produces seed at an aston-ishingly high rate —as many as 80,000 per square
meter —which means that each germination is a hot
spot for genetic variation and the emergence of her-bicide resistance. Chemical products designed tocontrol black-grass, which themselves take years todevelop, become redundant within a few growingseasons. Serious black-grass burdens can reduceyields of staple crops like wheat and barley by asmuch as 70 percent. One recent calculation suggeststhat 820,000 tons of wheat are lost in the UnitedKingdom each year to herbicide-resistant black-grass,costing the country £400 million (Varah et al.2020 ). Even for the most hardened farmers, black-
grass is referred to in awed, reverential tones. Itsname evokes the pestilential, the macabre, and eventhe satanic.The emergence of black-grass as theproblem weed
for certain parts of the farming world illustrates the
wider patterns of disease outbreaks originatingfrom—but not necessarily confined to —modern agri-
cultural settings. Geographers and anthropologists
have traced how the globalizing monocrop logics
that govern intensive food production systems have
produced “accelerator landscapes ”(Gandy 2022 )
whose ecological simplification and space –time com-
pression enable the proliferation of viruses, fungi,
bacteria, and plant and animal pests (Gandy 2023 ).
Geographers researching the emergence of such
pathogenic life have called for a change in how we
map the topologies of plant, animal, and zoonotic
disease: away from bounded regions threatened by
external contamination, toward the networks of eco-
logical relations that allow pathogenesis to take root
(Hinchliffe et al. 2013 ; Hinchliffe et al. 2016 ). The
emergence of disease, in this latter understanding, is
not solely the outcome of a breach of dangerous
life into an otherwise healthy space. Instead, it is
immanent from the ecological milieu in question
ARTICLE HISTORY
Initial submission, June 2023; revised submission, September 2023; final acceptance, October 2023
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR George Cusworth George.cusworth@biology.ox.ac.uk
#2024 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ), which permits
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has bee n published allow the
posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.ANNALS OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF GEOGRAPHERS
2024, VOL. 114, NO. 3, 462 –480
https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2023.2289984
(Barker 2015 ; Lorimer 2017 ). Complex “intra-
actions ”(following Barad 2007 ) between multiple
lives folded together permit or frustrate a pathologi-
cal event. An outbreak happens when a configura-tion is such that it allows the proliferation of some
life to come at the expense of the others it might
have otherwise lived alongside. This shift in under-standing necessitates a change in the language used
to describe health and disease: from breaches to tip-
ping points, from borderlines to borderlands, fromexternal to endogenous, from inherent to relational,and from pathogen-free to immuno-competent. In
this article, we refer to these changes as a shift from
acontamination to a configuration model of health,
pathogenesis, and disease (after Hinchliffe 2015 ).
The literature on these topics has largely been
written in a diagnostic and critical register. Scholars
have shown how the contamination model under-pins attempts to keep desirable life (like crops and
livestock animals) at hygienic spatial remove from
those with pathogenic potential through high-techinfrastructure and biosecurity protocols (Hinchliffe
Figure 1. Head of black-grass. Source: Image by ETC project at TEAGASC. Reproduced with permission.On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 463
et al. 2016 ). They show how the success of this
approach is thwarted by the way these simplified
environments create, rather than displace, the condi-
tions needed for pathogenic proliferation (Tsing
2017 ; Chao 2022 ). We add to this literature by
detailing the principles of a configurational approach
that seeks to manage the pathologies immanent tointensive agriculture.
After we describe the methods used in the pro-
duction of this article, we review the literature on
disease geographies and provide an introduction to
the black-grass weed at the heart of the research.
We then describe integrated pest management
(IPM) —an approach that embodies the configura-
tional mode of pest and disease control —and intro-
duce the practices deployed to mitigate against
black-grass. In the main analytic section, we use the
example of black-grass to (1) map the polymorphic
spatial imaginary needed to understand agricultural
pathogenesis as an outcome of agro-ecological rela-
tions; (2) document the “intensive, ”“holistic ”and
“contextual ”knowledge practices required to know
and manage disease as an outcome of an ecological
configuration rather than the product of a contami-
nation event; and (3) examine an emerging, probi-otic model of “agribiopolitics ”(Hetherington 2020 )
manifest in IPM strategies. These address the prob-
lem of black-grass by modulating agro-ecological
relations rather than isolating and destroying the
unwanted life itself. They are premised on a prag-
matic (if reluctant) tolerance toward unwanted life.
In conclusion, we propose a metanarrative for agri-
cultural biosecurity and flag its implications for geo-
graphical scholarship developing ways of living well
with disease, awkward plants, and other pests (Ginn
2014 ; Giraud 2021; Arg €uelles and March 2022 ).
The novelty of the article lies not in identifying
the explanatory deficiencies of contamination mod-
els of disease. Similar claims have been made in
both agricultural (Hinchliffe et al. 2016 ) and epide-
miological contexts (Rosenberg 1989 ) for some time.
Nor is it unique in its attempt to claim that an
industry-wide shift is underway (although as chemi-
cal controls cease to work, these interventions really
are becoming more popular). Instead, the article ’s
contribution can be found in the way it attends to
the details of how a configurational approach to ara-
ble pests and disease works out there in the world.
The article asks the following questions: How can
the relational aspects of a disease or pest outbreak beconceptualized when they are so complex, dynamic,
and messy? How can appropriate and actionable
knowledge on the situation be produced? What do
the resulting strategies end up looking like?
Methods
Our analysis is grounded in interviews, farm visits,
and ethnographic observation of industry events inthe arable lowlands of southern and eastern England.We focus first on farmers (thirty-five interviewees)
and second on researchers, agronomists, and farm
advisory professionals dedicated to pest managementand black-grass control (eight interviewees). Forboth groups, interviews were a mix of telephone andface-to-face conversations.
With regard to the project ’s data collection, there
was a chronology to how these two groups were con-
sulted. Interviews were initially conducted with the
first group: those managing commercial agriculturalbusinesses (selling commodities into large marketsrather than direct-to-consumer niches), medium tolarge in size ( /C24150–12,000 ha), operating mixed or
arable systems, and those experimenting with IPM,regenerative practices, or both. These farmers werecontacted through a research project on regenerative
agriculture (Cusworth et al. 2022 ) and crop diversifi-
cation strategies (Cusworth, Garnett, and Lorimer2021a ,2021b ). The ubiquity of the black-grass prob-
lem was such that, among these farming actors, itwas a recurring topic of conversation —noteworthy
either for the toll it was taking on the farm business,or because of the unlikely successes that were beingrecorded in its mitigation.
After initial rounds of analysis, and after the
black-grass weed emerged as a coherent theme, sev-eral repeat interviews from the first group were con-ducted. Contact was also made with actors in alliedprofessions —those that made up the second group of
interviewees. This latter group spoke from positionsin agronomy firms, extension services, and agricul-
tural research stations. They added a level of
research expertise to the farming interview data. Indifferent ways, this latter group verified, contra-dicted, and complicated the reports from the agricul-tural front line. The project thus followed inductiveand purposeful methods. An overarching researchproject (on regenerative agriculture and crop464 Cusworth and Lorimer
diversification) led to a more specific engagement
(black-grass), which, in turn, generated a need toseek out a specific set of research participants.
Our data capture also included textual analysis of
pest management research, technical guides written
for farmers, and industry communications. This
helped confirm that the practices and ideas weencountered during interviews had broader traction
in the industry. We refer to these materials through-
out the article. Speaking to our agronomy expertslate in the data collection process also allowed us to
get a sense of how the perspectives of our farming
participants compared with the more strategic vistasthese experts had on the sector. Once we had fin-
ished our article, it was returned to a small selection
of our interviewees (six, from both the farming andagronomy cohorts) for corroboration. Although theyadmitted that our terms and concepts were novel to
them, and some suggested minor edits, all agreed
with the sentiments and conclusions we reached.
Mapping the Geographies of Biosecurity
Geographers have demonstrated how conven-
tional biosecurity —“the protection of production sys-
tems from the threats caused by pests, pathogens anddiseases ”(Ilbery 2012 , 310) —is predicated on a
Pasteurian, germ-theory model (Paxson 2008 ). This
holds that bodies, landscapes, and populations arehealthy until their borders are invaded by hazardouslife. To guard against deleterious health outcomes,
the borders of safe life must be policed to repel
whatever breaches might otherwise compromise itsgood functioning (Hinchliffe et al. 2016 ). They sug-
gest that this model is founded on a “regional ”(Mol
and Law 1994 )o r “topographic ”(Hinchliffe et al.
2013 ) imaginary in which space is divided into dis-
crete and bounded territories.
This conceptualization, which predominates in
public, biomedical, and biosecurity thinking, is being
complicated by an emerging understanding of bodiesas composite amalgams: ecological assemblages
whose good health necessitates rather than precludes
the presence of other species (Barker 2015 ;
Braverman 2022 ). New and established research in
microbiology, immunology, and disease ecology is
refiguring health as a multispecies achievement pre-mised on ecological intradependencies (McFall-Ngai
et al. 2013 ; Faure, Simon, and Heulin 2018 ). It sug-
gests that plants and animals are holobionts,composed of, and ontologically inalienable from the
collegial ecologies of microscopic bacteria, fungi and
viruses, and inert matter from which they are com-
posed. Many of these nonhuman lives, whose pres-
ence makes life livable, are symbionts. These
scientists diagnose widespread “dysbiosis ”manifest in
the rise of autoimmune, allergic, and inflammatorydisease as well as in the proliferation of drug-resis-
tant organisms, caused in part by the absence of the
symbionts that once configured holobiont ecologies
(Blaser 2014 ). This postgenomic ecological ontology
has become popular in the environmental and medi-
cal humanities (Lorimer 2016 ) as part of a more
general decentering of the human in accounts of the
distribution of agency, intelligence, creativity, and
ethical value in a more-than-human world (Brives,
Rest, and Sariola 2021 ). Here, nature no longer acts
as a passive backdrop for the activities of self-con-tained human bodies. It has its own world-making
vitality, and we are entangled within it.
This relational disease ontology helps explain how
intensive monocrop systems (Tsing 2017 ; Morand
and Lajaunie 2021 ) and livestock feedlots
(Blanchette 2020 ) provide breeding grounds for
pathogenic proliferation. Holobiont ecosystems,which are deprived of symbionts in the service of
expediting the growth of a target crop or animal, are
thrown into dysbiosis, leading to the emergence and
unruly spread of infections and disease (Perfecto,
Jim/C19enez-Soto, and Vandermeer 2019 ). With the
diminishing efficacy of fixes predicated on antibiotic
rationalization, the costs involved in maintaining
control over volatile monocrop landscapes are begin-ning to outstrip the profits they generate (Guthman
2019 ; Giraud 2021).
Responses to these problems range in scale and
type, but an important subset share a commitment
to fostering health through the presence, not
absence, of life. Documented examples of this
“probiotic turn ”(Lorimer 2020 ) include consumers
concerned with the adverse health impacts of mod-
ern pasteurized diets who are seeking out unpasteur-
ized foodstuffs for the bacteria, yeast, and mold
they contain (Paxson 2008 ); contract livestock
farmers covering their sterile pigs in muck whenthey arrive on the farm to acclimatize the animals ’
immune systems to the messy and complex multi-
species environments they will have to inhabit
(Hinchliffe and Ward 2014 ); and farmers in Indian
Natural Farming systems fermenting the manure ofOn Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 465
their livestock animals before applying the prepara-
tions back onto the land to improve soil health(M€unster 2021 ).
These probiotic strategies are founded on a radical
reconceptualization of the geographies of health anddisease (Lorimer 2017 ). Moving away from the con-
tamination model, these actors grapple with how the
configuration of ecological relations structures thedynamics between interwoven and folded multispe-cies life. Salutary and violent outcomes are, in this
configurational mode, the product of how relations
unfold in space and over time, how many differentthings there are, how many of each thing there is,how they move, how they interact, and so on.
Health and disease become relative, not absolute,
terms (Hinchliffe 2022a ), applicable to ecosystems,
landscapes, and other multispecies bodies rather
than the discrete lifeforms within them.
Far from the grand narratives of dangerous life
besieging healthy space, here health and disease
emerge from mundane encounters between an array
of more-than-human, ecological, political, economic,architectural, and social factors (Brown and Kelly2014 ). Building on this work, this article aims to
codify the key components of a post-Pasteurian,
postcontamination, proconfiguration model of con-trol. It explores how different and potentially antag-onistic lives are made to live alongside one another,
and it describes how such strategies work in the
messy realities of agricultural management.
We see a clear and varied demand for this scholar-
ship. Ginn and colleagues have noted the way scholarshave averted their gaze from multispecies entangle-ments “when togetherness is difficult, when vulnera-
bility is in the making, and death is at hand ”(Ginn,
Beisel, and Barua 2014 , 114). Giraud et al. ( 2019 )
called for attention to be directed toward “ways of
‘being alongside ’life that is difficult to live with ”
(357) in a manner that learns from a history of failed
technofixes. In developing their analysis of the patchyAnthropocene, Tsing, Mathews, and Bubandt ( 2019 )
called for research attuned to the configurations that
might enable multispecies resurgence. We offer thisarticle in response to these calls.
The Emergence of Black-Grass as a Pest
Black-grass is a plant endemic to Britain, France,
Italy, Germany, Denmark, and Holland. It was noted
as a weed with potentially troublesome impacts forEnglish agriculture nearly 200 years ago (Sinclair
1838 ), but it is only in the last few decades that it
has become one of, if not the,worst problem weeds
for arable farming in northwest Europe (Riches
2022 ). Its frontiers are expanding, too, with perni-
cious black-grass problems emerging in China, theUnited States, and Russia, and herbicide-resistant
populations documented in Czechia, Poland, and
Sweden (Moss 2017 ).
As with other weeds (Barua 2023 ), the contempo-
rary abundance of black-grass results from a broader
history of land-use change. Three interlinking causalfactors stand out: (1) the intensification of agricul-
tural management; (2) the deterioration of the eco-
logical conditions of the land, especially soil health;
and (3) the difficulties of managing black-grass with
chemical controls, particularly due to the emergence
of herbicidal resistance.
In relation to the first driver, agricultural manage-
ment in the United Kingdom, Europe, and beyond,
underwent dramatic shifts in the postwar period.
With the emergence and increasing affordability of
synthetic pesticides and fertilizers, the crop rotations
and mixed arable-livestock land uses that were his-
torically used to improve fertility and combat pests
became of limited agricultural value (Cusworth,
Garnett, and Lorimer 2021a ). This had several
important consequences for black-grass. Paired with
developments in frost-resistant seed cultivars, main-
stream farming witnessed a rise in winter cropping,
the loss of spring cropping, and the specialization of
farms into either arable or pasture systems. Where
farmers once left their fields fallow after a late-sum-
mer harvest, or where they planted grass mixes or
left crop stubble to be grazed by ruminant animals
like sheep and cattle before sowing the following
year (spring cropping), farmers now typically get suc-
cessive cash crops in the ground immediately afterharvest (winter cropping). This continuous cycle
requires additional tillage in the September and
October period, which is when black-grass seed ger-
minates. This means that if there is seedbank in the
soil, it will germinate and, in turn, compete with the
crop for light, nutrients, and water. These changes
are part of the “intensification ”of agricultural
management.
The second factor is soil degradation. The simpli-
fication of crop rotations, the loss of fallowing and
grass-arable cycles, and the increasing intensity and
depth of tillage programs have degraded soil ecology466 Cusworth and Lorimer
and increased topsoil compaction (Arriaga, Guzman,
and Lowery 2017 ). These processes affect soil drain-
age: There are fewer worms and other invertebrates
to aerate the soil, simpler root systems to break it
up, more tillage disrupting the establishment of soilecology, and more passes of heavy machinery com-
pacting it. Black-grass thrives in moist conditions
and is very competitive in the poorly drained soilsbeing produced by intensive farm management
(BASF 2018 ).
Finally, herbicide efficacy and resistance play a
role. Black-grass is a grassweed, not a broadleaf
weed, and is taxonomically very close to many ofthe staple plants (like wheat and barley) of contem-
porary arable production in the United Kingdom
and Europe. This genetic overlap has helped make itdifficult to manage. As the growth mechanisms andgenetic makeup of black-grass are similar to the
crops being grown, it is hard to develop selective
herbicides that can be applied to the field after theweed has emerged in the crop. Furthermore, black-
grass’s genetic development pathways and its high
seeding rate make it particularly quick to developresistance to selective herbicides (Cai et al. 2021 ).
As excess chemical applications select for more resis-
tant weeds, the emergence of herbicide resistance iscorrelated with the intensity of historical chemical
control programs (Hicks et al. 2018 ). With compa-
nies increasingly reluctant to pour significantresearch and development budgets into such testy
conditions, the products for black-grass now entering
the market are typically based on compounds thatwere shelved in earlier rounds of product testing due
to their limited efficacy.
Integrated Pest Management
To counter troublesome pests like black-grass, our
interviewees are experimenting with a range of prac-tices that can be grouped under the rubric of IPM.
We use this term as our interviewees were happy to
apply it to their practice, albeit often in conjunctionwith other terms like organic, regenerative, and
agroecological. Some observed strict IPM practices,
and others used its principles and research as a moregeneral set of management heuristics.
IPM aims to integrate the goals of pest manage-
ment into practices of food production and land-
scape management so that pest suppression becomes
an emergent feature of the farm ’s agro-ecosystemrather than something applied to it in chemical
form. IPM seeks to reduce, as far as is practicable,
the use of herbicidal, insecticidal, and fungicidal
products (Naranjo 2001 ). This need not entail their
total exclusion as it would in an organic system, but
“chemical controls ”are the final level in the IPM
flow of prioritization —the measure of last resort.
IPM stresses the importance of “cultural ”con-
trols. These refer to the agricultural practices that
configure the material conditions of the farm,
including the ecologies of insects, animals, and bac-
teria, as well as biophysical factors like moisturecontent, soil structure, and drainage. It aims to pre-
vent or combat disease events and pest outbreaks
by creating a set of agro-ecological relations that
are hostile to pathological proliferation. It does this
via intervention in the agricultural activities that
configure those relations: crop rotations, the pres-
ence or absence of livestock animals, fertilizer
application programs, tillage regimes, biodiversity
areas, water quality, hedgerows, buffer strips, and so
on. IPM takes as its unit of intervention the entire
agro-ecosystem of a farm, as opposed to the pestitself (Deguine et al. 2021 ).
IPM is based on the calculation of thresholds .
Under this rubric, it is only when some pest or dis-
ease burden becomes sufficiently problematic thatchemical applications are permitted. Before these
thresholds are met, managers must prioritize cultural
methods of control and, more generally, learn to live
with the pests that could potentially cause them and
their businesses harm. We discuss the biopolitical
implications of this tolerance later.
Figure 2 provides an overview of the IPM strate-
gies used for controlling black-grass, which we dis-
cuss in more detail in the analysis that follows. The
most important factor in IPM approaches to black-
grass management is the reduction of soil distur-
bance in September and October to prevent any
latent seedbank in the soil from having the opportu-
nity to germinate. This typically entails a shift from
winter to spring cropping: sowing arable cash crops
in February, March, or April (or later, depending on
the crop) rather than drilling the seeds directly afterharvest in August, September, or October. There are
several land management practices that enable this
transition. The establishment of cover crops —like
vetch, mustard, and clover that are grown to keep
the soil covered, and to improve its nutrient content
and structure —provide an alternative agronomicOn Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 467
benefit to make up for the lower yields of spring-
sown crops (which enjoy a shorter growing period
than those sown in winter).
Livestock-arable integration is also seen as a key
tool for black-grass control (Hill 2015 ). Grazing ani-
mals, particularly cows and sheep, allow farmers tointroduce multiyear grass breaks from the croppingcycle. This helps build soil structure and improve
drainage. These grass “leys”can even keep the
black-grass seed buried for long enough that itbecomes inactive. Livestock animals can also be fedon the cover crops grown over the winter, whichprovides an additional financial return from a moveto spring cropping.
Analysis
In the following sections, we examine three cen-
tral features of the configurational model of pestmanagement that are illustrated by our UK black-grass example: its spatiotemporal imaginary, its pro-cess of “knowledge intensification, ”and its probioticmode of agribiopolitics. These three reflect the onto-
logical, epistemological, and ethico-political consequen-
ces of a configurational approach to weed control.
A Polymorphic Spatiotemporal Imaginary
In this section, we tease apart the different ele-
ments of the “polymorphic ”(after Jessop, Brenner,
and Jones 2008 ) spatiotemporal imaginary that is
helping our research informants conceptualize patho-genesis as immanent from the configuration of agro-ecological relations. Over the course of our inter-views, we found that our participants reconciled andoverlayed three different topologies onto thebounded regional map of disease we introduced ear-lier. A black-grass outbreak certainly has a bounded
territorial aspect: An outbreak on the farm could be
drawn on a two-dimensional cartographic map, andefforts must be made to stop the weed from movingout. What is missing, though? What ontologicaladditions are being made by those following IPMprinciples to better understand how, why, where,and when it spreads?
Figure 2. Integrated pest management (IPM) strategies for black-grass management. The practices in bold are those we discuss in the
analysis. Source: Adapted from Moss ( 2017 ).468 Cusworth and Lorimer
To answer these questions, we must start with the
common outbreak narrative our farmers offered uswhen discussing black-grass (Wald 2008 ). Tom
Sewell, an arable farmer who had completed a
Nuffield Scholarship on no-tillage and regenerative
practices, explained:
Machinery, insects, birds, the wind … there ’sa
hundred and one different ways it moves about.
These same ideas can be seen in the left-most por-
tion (the text that reads “minimize seed spread in
crop seed, straw, equipment, and manure ”)o f
Figure 2 —our simplified version of an image that
circulates on Web sites and forums dedicated to
black-grass management (e.g., Agricology 2020 ).
This is the common starting point for black-grassmanagement: To mitigate against black-grass you
need to know how it moves, and to understand
how it moves you need to think in terms of vectors
of networked connection. Like the webs of global
trade, these material linkages are disjointed, rhizo-matic, and far-reaching. Many can be accounted for
and acted on. For example, to stop black-grass from
moving between fields and farms, industry pressarticles encourage readers to clean machinery after
it is used in a field with high levels of the weed
and to vet their contractors to ensure they do thesame (Crop Production Magazine 2017 ). They also
encourage farmers to be vigilant about where they
buy their manure to ensure they are not importing
black-grass seed from heavily burdened farms (Irish
Farmers ’Journal 2022 ). To mobilize a configura-
tion-based approach to pathogenesis, our actors first
overlay a model of networked connection onto the
“bounded space ”understanding of health and
disease.
Not all of vectors of black-grass movement can be
mapped in this same strategic way, though. The dis-
tribution of black-grass seed by the wind and birds
amounts to a more random and potentially totalizingmobility. Clearly, though, black-grass burdens are
not evenly spread. Some landscapes, farms, and fields
have proven themselves more vulnerable to outbreak
than others. Given the constant circulation of
potentially dangerous pests and diseases, good healthis not so much about presence or absence but rather
an immunocompetent ability to live with other life
(Hinchliffe et al. 2013 ). To better account for and
act on these dynamics, our farmers call on what we
term a hot spot imaginary.Consider the following excerpts. When asked
about the conditions that are likely to lead to ablack-grass outbreak, Stephen Briggs, a researcherand advisor at Innovation for Agriculture —a
research and agronomy firm with a focus on sustain-able farming solutions —explained:
Black-grass likes and thrives in conditions of poorly
structured, anaerobic soils, with low levels of organic
matter, low aeration, consolidation, compaction. …
No farmer has a black-grass problem. Farmers have asoil problem.
The BASF handbook on black-grass management
also stresses the correlation between soil quality andblack-grass risk. It recommends spatially targetedapplications of soil amendments to biophysicallyreshape the configurations of at-risk areas:
Soils with a high clay content and poor structure, and
soils that maintain high water content, will favourblack-grass. To assist cultivation practices designed toimprove black-grass control, soil physical conditions
can be improved by applications of organic matter and
Gypsum. (BASF 2018 ,1 )
Here, the pathogenicity of black-grass is a function
of the ecological configurations (mostly, but not
exclusively, those of the soil) in which it exists:
what things there are in a farm ’s agro-ecosystem,
how many of those things there are, and how theyrelate to one another over time. The hot spot imagi-nary helps farmers conceptualize how ecologicaldynamics determine why some fields, farms, andlandscapes are particularly prone to an outbreak, andit allows them to make spatially tailored black-grassmanagement decisions.
From this vantage point, a pest outbreak is not
extrinsic to the farm ’s agricultural milieu, but “are
part and parcel of [the] play of forces ”(Hinchliffe
2022b , 147) of which it is constituted. Although
terms like invasion andcontamination are meaningful
in IPM, notions of health and disease are more oftenused to describe the agro-ecological conditions of agiven space. Black-grass becomes a sentinel, symp-tomatic of ecosystem dysbiosis (e.g., poor soil condi-tion) rather than the manifestation of a discretepest. Mapping the geographies of black-grass there-fore requires a hot spot spatiotemporal imaginarythat is alert to these intensities and relations: all of
the folded intra-actions, multiple species, abiotic fac-
tors, and biochemical pathways that determineOn Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 469
outbreak hot spots, as well as an attentiveness to the
way these relations vary across the fields, farms, and
landscapes being managed.
These regions, vectors, and hot spots imaginaries
help our interviewees grapple with the ecological
mechanics of black-grass proliferation, but we foundthat another is needed to understand when a black-
grass outbreak crosses the threshold into the realm
of pathogenesis. For this, our informants deploy atopological imaginary attuned to the nonlinear tem-
poralities and stochastic dynamics of black-grass that
dictate when and where black-grass might explodeinto unruly life. Here, they attend to the clues that
can, to the diligent observer, portend a weed out-
break. This amounts to a spatiotemporal ontologyakin to what Law and Mol ( 2001 ) described as a
topology of fire: a means of knowing when latent
forms will flicker into pathogenesis.
The discourse surrounding autumn versus spring
cropping offers a good opportunity to see this fire
imaginary at work. Julian Gold manages 800 ha of
arable land in southeast England, and he won SoilFarmer of the Year in 2019. When asked why black-
grass is currently so problematic, he explained that it
was not so much a focus on spatial hot spots of poorsoil health that can explain the rise of black-grass,
but a history of changing cropping practices:
Everyone tells you you ’re going to get black-grass on
wet ground and all you do is drain your farm. …[But
it’s] too many intense autumn rotations. Basically
black-grass adapts. If you ’ve got autumn rotations,
which everyone had, it leaves it open for black-grass.
Both poor soil conditions and the black-grass-
friendly shift to autumn cropping are due to human
activity, but there is a more straightforward and trac-
table pathogenic causality at work in the latter. Thisis the fire imaginary we are describing here —the
more immediate temporalities involved in pushing
some ecological configuration into an event. BenTaylor-Davies, a farmer and black-grass management
consultant, also stresses this cause –effect aspect of a
weed outbreak. To him, a black-grass outbreak isindivisible from the agro-ecological configurations
being created by the management practices being
employed around the farm:
What the farm does is how bad your black-grass gets.
Across the country, black-grass has changed frombeing a marginal and benign feature into one ofthe most troublesome pests. Its pathogenesis caughtalight through the changes wrought by the indus-
try’s transition to winter cropping (in which cere-
als are sown directly after harvest, instead ofgiving the land a fallow or grazing period). ManyIPM guides, like the one produced by the
Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board
(a nondepartmental public body in the UnitedKingdom) on black-grass, stress the importance of
reversing these trends to put out the fire: “If these
factors encouraged black-grass, then the solution isobvious —do the opposite; sow crops later and
reduce dependency on herbicides ” (Moss
2017 , 210).
Even once IPM practices appear to have a black-
grass outbreak under control, farmers must be
attuned to the signals warning about a possiblefuture outbreak. At the Agrovista Lamport researchstation we visited, the presence of any black-grass
was taken as a cue to persist with the most stringent
protections: to keep up with diverse, low-intensityspring crop rotations. If a black-grass outbreak can
flash into life on the farm in one or two growing
seasons, farmers must be attuned to all the signals —
the burning embers or smoldering tinder —that can
tell of an impending fire. As an Agrovista ( 2022 )
research report explained, “Growers have to stick to
the guidelines or risk going backwards with black-
grass control. …Before considering a return to win-
ter wheat you have to reduce the weed seedbank toa low-enough level. ”
When a black-grass germination can be consid-
ered aflame —when it becomes pathological —is also
about contingent constructions of what constitutesan outbreak that is sufficiently problematic or riskyto warrant intervention. Whether something is onfire is as much a function of personal and culturalideas (about risk, danger, and farm business manage-ment) and farm economics as it is of ecologicaldynamics (about seeding rates, cultivation practices,
and the soil conditions that lead to or frustrate
black-grass growth). For David Purdy, an agriculturalmachinery merchant conducting extensive PhDresearch on black-grass germination explained, thedevelopment of a black-grass control program has toincorporate these other-than-ecological factors:
So there ’s that tension between controlling black-grass
and penalizing yourself with reduction in yield. If we
can get a crop in at the end of September, that ’s great,
but then you stand a huge risk of running into black-grass.470 Cusworth and Lorimer
Here, the flickering of a black-grass germination into
the fire of a “disease situation ”(Hinchliffe et al.
2016 ) is configured by the networks, regions, and
hot spots we described earlier —but it also incorpo-
rates a more complex sociocultural calculus aroundfinance, risk, and reward.
To summarize, our interviewees are developing a
polymorphic spatiotemporal imaginary of a weed out-break. They imagine black-grass as existing inbounded regional territories that can spread outward
as well as travel along rhizomatic networked connec-
tions. They map how outbreaks occur in specific hotspots, whose geography is configured by the rhythmsand intensities of agro-ecological relations that are
conceived along different time scales. To understand
how and when an outbreak might catch alight, theydeploy a topology of fire that involves attuning toforewarnings, presences, and signals, and the conver-gence of social and ecological factors.
Knowledge Intensification
The translation of this polymorphic spatial imagi-
nary into practicable farm-level guidance is not sim-
ple. To manage black-grass via intervention in the
agro-ecosystem as a whole requires expertise abouthow different biological, physical, and chemicalagents intra-act, about which configurations lead topathological proliferation, and which lead to their
suppression. What does such knowledge look like
and how is it produced? Our interviewees describedand prescribed a process of knowledge intensificationthat they felt was required to bridge the gap between
the relational ontology undergirding the configura-
tion model of pest management (described earlier)and their biopolitical enactment (described later). Inthis section, we present three related components ofthis process of knowledge intensification: an episte-
mological shift from scientific reductionism to
holism, a methodological shift from basic to appliedresearch on pest management practices, and a socio-logical shift in the knowledge economies associated
with IPM expertise.
Agrarian historians and political economists have
traced how contemporary, modern, Western foodproduction systems became defined by “input sub-
stitutions ”(Altieri 1995 ): the replacement of labor-
intensive and ecological farm management practicesby applications of agricultural chemicals (pesticidesand fertilizers) and the use of agricultural machinery(till, sow, spray, reap). They have shown how these
substitutions were enabled by an agronomic research
agenda predicated on a type of scientific reduction-
ism (Worster 1977 ) that focuses on atomistic parts
within systems (crops, pests, nutrients) rather thantaking those systems in their integrity (Baars andBaars 2007 ).
This reductionist agenda has helped create a
“herbicidal assemblage ”geared toward chemical
methods of control (Werner, Berndt, and Mansfield
2022 ). Akin to the Pasteurian model of biomedicine,
pest management research focused on developingpesticides with “modes of action ”that intervene in
“target sites ”to destroy specific pests (Casida 2009 ).
This epistemological paradigm was cognate with acontamination-based approach to weed management:
identifying, isolating, and targeting organisms to
ensure they are absent from healthy space and itsmore desirable forms of life. Many reports on thebarriers to greater uptake of IPM, including thoserelated directly to black-grass management (Moss,Perryman, and Tatnell 2007 ), grapple with IPM ’s
incompatibility with this research agenda.
As Guthman ( 2019 ) traced in her exploration of
California strawberry cultivation, this reductionistscientific model, along with the pest managementstrategies it has produced, is beginning to creakunder the pressures emanating from the alterations ithas made into farmland ecosystems. As Julian Gold,who we heard from earlier, put it:
[Black-grass] is like nature giving us the middle finger
and saying “you think you ’re so clever. ”How about
going back to your A-Level [high school] biology
textbooks to work out that if you have systems that
aren’t conducive to staying on top of weeds, they ’re
going to get the upper hand.
In response, black-grass experts are turning to forms
of systems thinking, noting how crops, cultivation
practices, and soil management solutions can bestitched together as component parts of a dynamicagro-ecological system as a means of combatingblack-grass (Lutman et al. 2013 ). As such, IPM
implies a profound epistemological shift (Wolff2023 ) from scientific reductionism to a more holistic
mode of systems thinking.
This shift is closely related to the second feature
of the knowledge intensification processes associatedwith configurational approaches to pestilent life: amethodological reorientation of the scientific practi-ces used to generate disease management strategies.On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 471
As Scott ( 1998 ) showed in his Seeing Like a State,
over the course of the twentieth century, mainstreamagronomic science gravitated toward basic research
methods owing to the way they meshed with state
and large-scale bureaucratic capitalists ’desire for
techne —knowledge that is “impersonal, universal and
completely impervious to context ”(Scott 1998 ,
320)—and aversion to m/C22etis—the“practical skills
and acquired intelligence ”(Scott 1998 , 313) —that
is embodied and context specific. Stephen Moss (orDr. Black-grass, as he is affectionately known) traced
a parallel history for us in reflecting on more than
forty years of involvement in agronomic researchand extension.
He explained how a growth in research on the
“basic ”disease mechanisms of plant pests has come
at the expense of “applied ”methods. He suggests
that contemporary agronomic research and develop-
ment has tended to focus on the specific growthmechanisms of pests like black-grass and the possibleaction sites for herbicidal intervention, rather than
on the whole agro-ecosystem whose complex behav-
iors can only be effectively studied through field-level applied approaches. He noted:
We’re dealing with a very practical field problem, you
know, you can ’t replicate this in a lab.
This difference between basic and applied research is
similar to what medical researchers describe as the
difference between “bench ”and “bedside ”research
(Woolf 2008 ). Moss suggests that there is too much
bench research and not enough bedside research
translating information into workable agriculturalpractice. As this gap grows, it creates a “valley of
death ”(Seyhan 2019 ): a pathological situation cre-
ated by a paucity of insight into how to manage dis-
ease “out there ”in the messy complexities of the
world; a situation exacerbated by the tendency fortechnological and pharmaceutical pipelines to dry up
through lack of investment and take-up.
Those producing IPM agronomic research and
offering IPM extension services aim to bridge this
bench-to-bedside gap. The Agrovista research station,shown in Figure 3 , is illustrative of this type of transla-
tional research. It is situated in a region with a high
black-grass burden and mimics the activities of a
working farm. Here, researchers conduct longitudinaland open-ended studies, charting the black-grassgrowth rates associated with different IPM strategies.
Their methods intervene in the farm ’s ecologicalconfigurations (rather than the black-grass itself) in
ways that mirror the responses farmers might make toan actual outbreak. They collate and compare infor-
mation on the input costs, crop yield, profits, and pest
outcomes of different management inputs. Ratherthan develop strategies reliant on specialist machineryor proprietary chemical products, they experiment
with crop rotations, tillage dates, tillage depths, cover
crops, biodiversity provisioning, and so on to producewieldy and applied insight for their farming customers.
A vital dimension of this bench-to-bedside research
is its contextual specificity, capturing how different
management interventions yield different results in
different places with different configurations of soiltype, rainfall quantity, cropping systems, historicalpesticide regimes, and so on. The process of IPM
knowledge intensification situates investigations at
the interface of disease and place, recognizing that theconditions that lead to pathogenesis cannot be under-stood in absolute terms but only as a function of a
plant ’s relationships with its environmental condi-
tions. Health and disease become “a matter of geo-
graphical specificity ”(Hinchliffe 2022a , xxx).
This need for holistic, applied, and context-specific
knowledge practices has led to a shift in the sociology
of agronomic knowledge production and dissemina-
tion. This is the third feature of the knowledge inten-sification process associated with the configurationalmode. Farm managers are learning that off-the-shelf
IPM black-grass management strategies need to be tai-
lored to the specifics of their farm ’s ecological
makeup. Research and agronomy firms, like
Agrovista, know that this contextualization needs to
be an important part of their commercial offer. AsMark Hemmant, one of their researchers, explained:
Rotational plowing definitely can reduce grass weeds,
but it can make it worse. Applying that in somesituations works whereas in others, it doesn ’t. It’s
trying to, what ’s the word, interpret it for the given
conditions.
There is also a highly do-it-yourself and collegiate
bent to this experimentalism. The farmers we inter-
viewed explained how they had trialed different sow-
ing dates, tillage depths, break crops, and livestock-arable integration arrangements, and studied which
practices control black-grass establishment rates in
specific locations. As with the related regenerativeagricultural movement (Cusworth, Garnett, andLorimer 2021a ), they share IPM knowledge and expe-
rience. They do this particularly via social media,472 Cusworth and Lorimer
which has become an important channel for farmer-
to-farmer communication (Skaalsveen, Ingram, andUrquhart 2020 ). Social media is accessible on the go,
it offers informal spaces where farmers feel comfort-able sharing experiences, and where they can plowtheir social energy into groups with common political,social, and farming perspectives. Speaking in relationto crop rotations and pest control, John Cherry, afarmer and leading figure in the United Kingdom ’s
regenerative movement, explained:
The whole computer thing has allowed this to happen
…suddenly you ’ve got the ability to talk in real time
to people doing extraordinary things all over the world
…and you say, well, that ’s exciting, we ’ll try it.
Although the transfer of knowledge from one farmer
to another entails the inevitable loss of context-spe-cific resolution, the pooling of expertise and experi-ence is nevertheless valuable for refining IPMinterventions for black-grass management. The focus
on context specificity and translational and appliedresearch has also given rise to new pest managementexperts. These agronomists help navigate the explan-atory gaps between general IPM best practice (e.g.,that a transition to spring cropping can help reduceblack-grass) and the application of those ideas inspecific contexts. These actors are like vets in live-stock systems (Hinchliffe and Ward 2014 ; Holloway
2019 ). Through situated knowledge of their client ’s
agro-ecological environments, they translate and
interpret configurational biosecurity principles intofarm-relevant insight.
Probiotic Agribiopolitics
In this section, we trace how the polymorphic
spatial imaginary and the intensive knowledgeframework introduced in the previous two sections
Figure 3. Agrovista black-grass research station. The strips each represent a longitudinal study of different approaches to black-grass
management. Source: Images reproduced with permission from Agrovista UK, Ltd.On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 473
inform a probiotic approach to pest management.
This approach is founded on a growing skepticism
toward the antibiotic myth of hygiene and a subse-
quent recalibration of its modes of managing life.
This shift in thinking is not being driven by a
softening of attitudes toward black-grass. Farmers
certainly do not like the weed and, if they could,
they would have it removed from their landscapes
altogether. Their multispecies relations are still hos-
tile and violent and organized in service of the
anthropocentric goals of crop growth and farm busi-
ness profit. Knowing that the goal of pest extirpation
is impossible (or at least only fleetingly achieved),
though, farmers and IPM experts are developing newbiopolitical strategies for making live and letting die.
These strategies are reconciled to the inevitability of
living alongside awkward organisms like black-grass
that have the potential for pathological proliferation,
so long as they remain below the tolerable levels of
abundance. In IPM, these are specified as thresholds .
Building on Lorimer ( 2020 ), we here describe an
emerging “probiotic ”model of biopolitics where “life
is used to manage life. ”These work toward the pre-
vention and suppression of disease through interven-
tions that modulate the configuration of agro-
ecological relations on the farm. We describe two
strategies in which farmers use cultural rather than
chemical controls.
In the first, farmers change the choreography of the
agricultural calendar to modulate the sequencing of the
reproductive cycles of desired and undesired plants (as
shown in Figure 4 ). Farmers and researchers are develop-
ing cropping and cultivation systems that set aside time
in the agricultural calendar for black-grass to flourish. As
Tom Sewell, a farmer interviewee explained:
If we let black-grass grow, when we drill the wheat we
get better control because we ’ve killed out some of the
flushing black-grass. Probably not all of it but a bigchunk of it. And then we ’ve just now [November]
scratched the wheat stubbles, to flush the black-grasswhich has now been killed off. We still got moreblack-grass coming through … then just before
Christmas we might go again and just give it anotherblast and try and get a third flush in January, February,March and then just start the oats into that and then
spray again to try and get as much of the seed bank
gone as we can, then make the most of spring crops.
Tom explained how he “scratches ”the earth, creat-
ing a light and shallow disturbance of the topsoil to
encourage black-grass to burst into life in a “flush”of vitality. These flushes can then be buried via
plowing, or, in no-tillage systems, killed off with a
broad-spectrum herbicide like glyphosate. Such prac-
tices create space for desired crops to be grown later
in the season without its competition. Black-grass ’s
life force is effectively truncated into one or a small
number of short and intense periods by coaxing itinto life with specifically designed soil disturbance
interventions. A spring crop can then (hopefully) be
grown absent the pest. This involves a finely tuned
choreography of the dynamics and intensities of the
farm’s ecological relations over time and space.
These interventions —which now circulate widely in
the farming press (Farmers Weekly 2023 )—orches-
trate syncopated periods in which different plants,
even awkward ones, are encouraged to grow.
There is a tension when attempting to manage
black-grass through no-tillage regimes and the foster-
ing of improved soil health. No-tillage relies on the
herbicide glyphosate (the generic chemical name for
Roundup) as farmers cannot bury their weeds with a
plow. Its use is associated with a hotly contested set
of downstream environmental and human health
impacts, however. These trade-offs are made all the
thornier by the way large agricultural chemical pro-ducers have seized on the market opportunity mani-
fest in promoting glyphosate as an essential tool for
sustainable food producers (M €uller 2021 ). Such soil
health, biodiversity, and productivity tensions
amount to an archetypal case of the “multifaceted
nature ”(Mansfield et al. 2023 ) of the politics of pes-
ticide usage. Although we do not have room to pur-
sue these discussions further (but we direct readers
to Werner, Berndt, and Mansfield [ 2022 ] and M €uller
[2021 ] for their excellent treatments), the point is
that efforts to pursue probiotic biopolitical strategies
to live well with awkward life like black-grass are
fraught with compromise.
These trade-offs notwithstanding, our farmers
make time for IPM, emulating Puig de la Bellacasa ’s
(2015 ) description of care in agricultural soil man-
agement. This injunction carries a dual meaning:
Farmers must make time to attune themselves and
be affected by the ecological configurations that per-
tain to pathogenesis. They must also make time toaccommodate the multiple temporalities that define
when weed management becomes an emergent,
immanent feature of a farm ’s agro-ecosystem. Time,
in other words, is central to the means of living
alongside awkward life. For these reasons,474 Cusworth and Lorimer
understanding whether some agroecological configu-
ration is “immuno-competent ”(Hinchliffe et al.
2013 ) cannot be apprehended from a single snapshot
of the farm. It needs to be understood as a functionof the more-than-human, abiotic, physical, chemical,
and messy intra-actions that take place over longer
temporal stretches.
In a second related probiotic strategy, IPM experts
and farmers seek to use the ecological agencies of
some organisms to prevent or suppress the growth ofblack-grass. They aim to “use life to manage life ”
(Lorimer 2020 ) in ways akin to how those involved
in rewilding seek to restore degraded ecosystems
through the introduction of keystone species likebeavers, wolves, earthworms, and soil microbes. IPM
black-grass management strategies are defined by an
effort to foster health through the presence, not theabsence of life. Farmers are finding that certainplants (like arable crops, cover crops, grasses,
legumes) and animals (cows, sheep) are effective at
managing pests in ways that chemical and physical
controls are not. Here, ecologically significant life-
forms are deployed as agents for biocontrol. For
example, livestock animals are used to improve soil
conditions, improve ecological functions, and
increase drainage to resist black-grass proliferation(Cusworth et al. 2022 ). They also enhance land-use
diversity on the farm system by opening up opportu-
nities for grass-arable rotations. As a farmer, Julian
Gold, explained:
[Black-grass] is a function of our specialized systems
[where animals are reared separately from arable farms].
In the old-fashioned days with rotational leys [where
grass was grown in between arable crops] …you could
get on top of black-grass. If you put it down to grass
Figure 4. Pathogenesis metanarrative: Annual farming practices associated with a premodern regime; a modern/antibiotic model; and the
probiotic regime embodied in integrated pest management black-grass management strategies. Note, this image was produced to reflecttemperate agricultural settings. Source: Original image by Vivien Martineau.On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 475
for like four years, then plow it up, you will probably
get rid of your black-grass.
These strategies tell of an overarching probiotic
strategy: to rebuild ecological abundance, diversity,
and complexity on the farm with a view to enhanc-
ing the resilience of the system to withstand pestshocks. The new choreography of planting we traced
earlier, for example, slows down and roughs up the
seasonal cycles that were smoothed and acceleratedby input substitutions, the rise of continuous crop-
ping, and the loss of alternating arable-grass phases.
Figure 4 captures how IPM and related regenerative
and agro-ecological practices like crop rotation
diversification and livestock arable-integration work
to (re)install space –time complexity into the farm
system.
In this probiotic configurational mode, there is a
reluctantly pragmatic (rather than enthusiastically
normative) tolerance for awkward life: an acceptancethat commensals like black-grass have been made
(relationally) pathological by the simplified ecologi-
cal configurations created by anthropogenic activity,that their imperviousness to chemical controls is an
outcome of their historical and profligate usage, and
that mitigating against the power and likelihood ofproliferation (rather than the total removal of life
that might become pathological) is the only remain-
ing avenue for agricultural action. All this serves tocomplicate the biopolitical rubric of making live and
letting die. These farmers are not seeking to kill
awkward life like black-grass. They are, instead, mak-ing it live in specific ways and at specified points in
the agricultural calendar to ensure it does not spoil
the livability of the landscapes for the crops beinggrown.
If pathological events and pest outbreaks are
understood to be features of an agro-ecosystem as a
whole rather than the proliferation of dangerous lifecontaminating healthy space, then their prevention
demands intervention in configurations rather than
the targeting of pathological bodies. There is goodsense, from this vantage point, in working toward
the mutual livability of awkward and sought-after
bodies and bad sense in seeking to wholly extermi-nate the former for the benefit of the latter.
Although there is still a violence involved in focus-
ing agricultural care toward some lives and notothers (Cusworth 2023 ), this (agri)biopolitics does
not necessitate the de facto death of pestilent life.Conclusions: A Metanarrative of
Pathogenesis in Arable Agriculture
We conclude by recapitulating the analysis we
have offered here in more general and historical
terms. We do this to flag its broader significance for
the geographies of agricultural disease. We suggest
that the case of black-grass and IPM can be used to
conceptualize a chronology of the rise of probioticapproaches to tackling the “blowback ”(Wallace and
Wallace 2015 ) caused by the excessive application
of antibiotic modes of managing nonhuman life. We
offer the following illustration to capture this patho-
genesis metanarrative.
Drawing on data-driven evolutionary models,
Wallace and Wallace ( 2015 ) argued that the diver-
sity inherent in premodern agriculture acted as a
metaphorical “sterilising temperature, ”curtailing the
evolution and the spread of pathogenic disease, par-
ticularly novel zoonotic viral strains. They proposed
that the variety of microbes, plants, and animals on
such farms, cycled around over space and across
time, created an agro-ecological configuration that
provided evolutionary roadblocks that inhibited
opportunities for pathogenic proliferation. In con-
trast, they suggested that the simplicity inherent in
intensive farming systems drives “selection for
greater virulence and lowered response to biomedical
intervention ”(Wallace and Wallace 2015 , 2068).
Through an analysis of the pathologies of inten-
sive agriculture, they referred to the (unforeseen)
outcomes of these phase shifts as “blowback. ”Black-
grass provides a perfect example. Premodern farming
acted as a safeguard against the rupture of black-grassoutbreaks by producing configurations hostile to pro-
liferation. Simplified, intensive and modern systems,
in contrast, have reduced the friction of land-use
diversity and are creating ecological blowback in the
form of rapidly proliferating, herbicide-resistant
black-grass populations.
The changes in farm management that drive
black-grass blowback are indicative of an antibiotic
mode of agriculture that seeks to simplify, smooth,and accelerate the temporal cycles of farming to
make ecosystems better fit with market conditions.
In the case of black-grass, the rise of continuous
cropping, the loss of fallowing and grass-arable
cycles, and the use of herbicides have driven
increases in its herbicidal resistance and general
abundance levels. These shifts degrade (at least with476 Cusworth and Lorimer
regard to black-grass management) the agro-ecologi-
cal configuration and push the farm system over the
pathogenesis threshold.
The long-standing yet marginal presence of black-
grass in the places where it is now problematic is an
important part of this story. It hints at the incom-
pleteness of a model of health and disease organized
around bounded regional areas contaminated by
breaches of pathogenic life. Black-grass evolved along-
side premodern agriculture, where it was a commensal
and largely undisruptive force. It has long been here,
and has certainly not invaded from out there. Assuch, its contemporary pathogenesis and subsequent
biopolitical intervention can only be understood in
terms of immanence, relations, and configurations. It
differs markedly, for example, from the story of
Gamba grass, which has become pathogenic in
Australia as a result of intercontinental translocation
into ecologies in which it lacks natural predators
(Atchison and Head 2013 ). The point to draw from
the endemic quality of the black-grass is not that con-
figurational approaches must be reserved for dealing
with pests created within a given agricultural milieu,nor that they cannot work for introduced species in
novel and unprepared environments. The point,
rather, is to demonstrate the explanatory deficiencies
of an understanding of health and disease overly
focused on breaches and contamination.
The three plot points in this metanarrative should
be read as an incremental and accretive rather than
epochal account of change. It is not so much that
there were (good) premodern farmers managing fertil-
ity and pests through diversity who suddenly became
(bad) antibiotic practitioners (Latour 1993 ). Even in
the most intensive and chemically reliant systems,
rotations remain an important part of crop protection
programs, and “alternative ”farming systems —like no-
till, organics, and integrated pest control programs —
have emerged in symbiosis with, rather than strict
alterity to, commercial systems and productivity-
minded governmental policy (Tomlinson 2008 ).
Nevertheless, change has happened, and this is our
attempt to essentialize a set of messy and never-com-
prehensive dynamics of change into a more tractable
story of premodern, antibiotic, and probiotic modes.
This article has traced how an agro-ecological blow-
back event (like herbicidal-resistant black-grass)
presents socioeconomic opportunity for creative experi-
mentation with alternative modes of ecological gover-
nance. IPM —and other related probiotic agriculturalmodels like regenerative farming and agro-ecology —
has emerged from these experimentations. It satisfies a
need for more sophisticated spatiotemporal imaginaries
to conceive of agro-ecological relations, more intensiveknowledge practices to understand situated and holistic
ecological interactions, and it demonstrates the poten-
tial of probiotic models of biopolitics that use life tomanage life. IPM intervenes into agro-ecological con-
figurations to modulate evolutionary and biochemical
processes to secure or restore tempered modes of multi-
species conviviality.
These strategies have the potential to deliver rela-
tive increases in ecological functionality, biodiver-
sity, and abundance. They stay with the trouble(Haraway 2016 ) of the violence inherent to agricul-
tural production and, in the words of Tsing and her
colleagues, they strive for pragmatic “arts of living
on a damaged planet ”(Tsing et al. 2017 ).
Disclosure Statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by
the authors.
Funding
This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust,
Our Planet Our Health (Livestock, Environment
and People —LEAP), Award No. 205212/Z/16/Z. For
the purpose of open access, the authors have applied
a CC BY public copyright license to any AuthorAccepted Manuscript version arising from this sub-
mission. The funding body played no part in the
study design; in the collection, analysis, and inter-
pretation of data; in the writing of the report; nor in
the decision to submit the article for publication.
ORCID
George Cusworth http://orcid.org/0000-0002-
7623-938X
Jamie Lorimer http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4369-
0884
References
Agricology. 2020 . Black-grass: What ’s the problem, what ’s
the solution? https://agricology.co.uk/blog/black-grass-
whats-problem-whats-solution/ .On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 477
Agrovista. 2022 . Blackgrass-beating wheat rotations
appear a profitable option. https://www.agrovista.co.
uk/news/2022-11-29/blackgrass-beating-wheat-rota-tions-appear-a-profitable-option .
Altieri, M. 1995 .Agroecology: The science of sustainable
agriculture . 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Arg€uelles, L., and H. March. 2022 . Weeds in action:
Vegetal political ecology of unwanted plants. Progress
in Human Geography 46 (1):44 –66. doi: 10.1177/
03091325211054966 .
Arriaga, F. J., J. Guzman, and B. Lowery. 2017 .
Conventional agricultural production systems and soilfunctions. In Soil health and intensification of agroecosy-
tems, ed. M. M. Al-Kaisi and B. Lowery, 109 –25.
Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Atchison, J., and L. Head. 2013 . Eradicating bodies in
invasive plant management. Environment and Planning
D: Society and Space 31 (6):951 –68. doi: 10.1068/
d17712 .
Baars, E., and T. Baars. 2007 . Towards a philosophical
underpinning of the holistic concept of integrity oforganisms within organic agriculture. NJAS:
Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences 54 (4):463 –77. doi:
10.1016/S1573-5214(07)80016-9 .
Barad, K. 2007 .Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum
physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Barker, K. 2015 . Biosecurity: Securing circulations from
the microbe to the macrocosm. The Geographical
Journal 181 (4):357 –65. doi: 10.1111/geoj.12097 .
Barua, M. 2023 . Plantationocene: A vegetal geography.
Annals of the American Association of Geographers 113
(1):13 –29. doi: 10.1080/24694452.2022.2094326 .
BASF. 2018 . Soil management —Black grass. Agricultural
Solutions .https://www.agricentre.basf.co.uk/en/Crop-
Solutions/Weed-Fact-Sheets/Black-grass/Soil-
management/ .
Blanchette, A.
2020 .Porkopolis: American animality, stan-
dardized life, and the factory farm . Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Blaser, M. 2014 .Missing microbes: How killing bacteria cre-
ates modern plagues . New York: Oneworld.
Braverman, I. 2022 .More-than-one health: Humans, ani-
mals, and the environment post-COVID . London and
New York: Taylor & Francis.
Brives, C., M. Rest, and S. Sariola. 2021 .With microbes .
Manchester, UK: Mattering Press.
Brown, H., and A. H. Kelly. 2014 . Material proximities
and hotspots: Toward an anthropology of viral hem-orrhagic fevers. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 28
(2):280 –303. doi: 10.1111/maq.12092 .
Cai, L., D. Comont, D. Macgregor, C. Lowe, R. Beffa, C.
Saski, and P. Neve. 2021 . The blackgrass genome
reveals patterns of divergent evolution of non-target
site resistance to herbicides. BioRxiv preprint . doi: 10.
1101/2021.12.14.472569 .
Casida, J. E. 2009 . Pest toxicology: The primary mecha-
nisms of pesticide action. Chemical Research in
Toxicology 22 (4):609 –19. doi: 10.1021/tx8004949 .
Chao, S. 2022 . Plantation. Environmental Humanities 14
(2):361 –66. doi: 10.1215/22011919-9712423 .Crop Production Magazine. 2017 . Harvest hygiene —Keep
it clean to reduce blackgrass. https://www.cpm-maga-
zine.co.uk/machinery/harvest-hygiene-keep-clean-reduce-blackgrass/ .
Cusworth, G. 2023 . Metabolic agricultural ethics:
Violence and care beyond the gate. Progress in
Environmental Geography 2( 1–2):58 –76. doi: 10.1177/
27539687231155224 .
Cusworth, G., T. Garnett, and J. Lorimer. 2021a .
Agroecological break out: Legumes, crop diversifica-
tion and the regenerative futures of UK agriculture.Journal of Rural Studies 88:126 –37. doi: 10.1016/j.jrur-
stud.2021.10.005
.
Cusworth, G., T. Garnett, and J. Lorimer. 2021b . Legume
dreams: The contested futures of sustainable plant-
based food systems in Europe. Global Environmental
Change: Human and Policy Dimensions 69:102321. doi:
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102321 .
Cusworth, G., J. Lorimer, J. Brice, and T. Garnett. 2022 .
Green rebranding: Regenerative agriculture, future-
pasts, and the naturalisation of livestock. Transactions
of the Institute of British Geographers 47 (4):1009 –27.
doi:10.1111/tran.12555 .
Deguine, J.-P., J.-N. Aubertot, R. J. Flor, F. Lescourret, K.
Wyckhuys, and A. Ratnadass. 2021 . Integrated pest
management: Good intentions, hard realities. A
review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 41
(3):38. doi: 10.1007/s13593-021-00689-w .
Farmers Weekly. 2023 . Why blackgrass is so bad in 2023
and what to do about it. https://www.fwi.co.uk/arable/
crop-management/weed-management/blackgrass/why-
blackgrass-is-so-bad-in-2023-and-what-to-do-about-it .
Faure, D., J.-C. Simon, and T. Heulin. 2018 . Holobiont:
A conceptual framework to explore the eco-evolu-
tionary and functional implications of host –micro-
biota interactions in all ecosystems. The New
Phytologist 218 (4):1321 –24. doi: 10.1111/nph.15199 .
Gandy, M. 2022 . The zoonotic city: Urban political ecol-
ogy and the pandemic imaginary. International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research 46 (2):202 –19. doi: 10.
1111/1468-2427.13080 .
Gandy, M. 2023 .The plantationocene as zoonotic transfer zone .
Society for Cultural Anthropology. Theorizing theContemporary, Fieldsights. https://culanth.org/field-
sights/the-plantationocene-as-zoonotic-transfer-zone .
Ginn, F. 2014 . Sticky lives: Slugs, detachment and more-
than-human ethics in the garden. Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 39 (4):532 –44. doi: 10.
1111/tran.12043 .
Ginn, F., U. Beisel, and M. Barua. 2014 . Flourishing with
awkward creatures: Togetherness, vulnerability, kill-
ing. Environmental Humanities 4 (1):113 –23. doi: 10.
1215/22011919-3614953 .
Giraud, E., E. Hadley Kershaw, R. Helliwell, and G.
Hollin. 2019 . Abundance in the Anthropocene. The
Sociological Review 67 (2):357 –73. doi: 10.1177/
0038026119830907 .
Guthman, J. 2019 .Wilted: Pathogens, chemicals, and the
fragile future of the strawberry industry . Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Haraway, D. 2016 .Staying with the trouble: Making kin in
the Chthulucene . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.478 Cusworth and Lorimer
Hetherington, K. 2020 . Agribiopolitics: The health of
plants and humans in the age of monocrops.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 38
(4):682 –98. doi: 10.1177/0263775820912757 .
Hicks, H., D. Comont, S. Coutts, L. Crook, R. Hull, K.
Norris, P. Neve, D. Childs, and R. Freckleton. 2018 .
The factors driving evolved herbicide resistance at a
national scale. Nature, Ecology & Evolution 2
(3):529 –36. doi: 10.1038/s41559-018-0470-1
Hill, O. 2015 . How grazing livestock can beat blackgrass.
Farmers Weekly , May 22. https://www.fwi.co.uk/arable/
grazing-livestock-can-beat-blackgrass .
Hinchliffe, S. 2015 . More than one world, more than one
health: Re-configuring interspecies health. Social
Science & Medicine 129:28 –35. doi: 10.1016/j.socs-
cimed.2014.07.007 .
Hinchliffe, S. 2022a . Foreword. In More-than-one health:
Humans, animals, and the environment post-COVID ,
ed. I. Braverman, ix-xxxviii. London and New York:
Routledge.
Hinchliffe, S. 2022b . Postcolonial global health, post-col-
ony microbes and antimicrobial resistance. Theory,
Culture & Society 39 (3):145 –68. doi: 10.1177/
0263276420981606 .
Hinchliffe, S., J. Allen, S. Lavau, N. Bingham, and S.
Carter. 2013 . Biosecurity and the topologies of
infected life: From borderlines to borderlands.
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 38
(4):531 –43. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-5661.2012.00538.x .
Hinchliffe, S., N. Bingham, J. Allen, and S. Carter. 2016 .
Pathological lives: Disease, space, and biopolitics . Oxford,
UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Hinchliffe, S., and K. J. Ward. 2014 . Geographies of
folded life: How immunity reframes biosecurity.
Geoforum 53:136 –44. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.
03.002 .
Holloway, L. 2019 . Smallholder knowledge-practices and
smallholding animals: Threats or alternatives to agri-
cultural biosecurity? Journal of Rural Studies 69:19 –29.
doi:10.1016/j.jrurstud.2019.04.013 .
Ilbery, B. 2012 . Interrogating food security and infectious
animal and plant diseases: A critical introduction.
The Geographical Journal 178 (4):308 –12. doi: 10.
1111/j.1475-4959.2012.00483.x .
Irish Farmers ’Journal. 2022 . Why are we seeing a rapid
spread of blackgrass? https://www.farmersjournal.ie/
why-are-we-seeing-a-rapid-spread-of-blackgrass-
740150 .
Jessop, B., N. Brenner, and M. Jones. 2008 . Theorizing
sociospatial relations. Environment and Planning D:
Society and Space 26 (3):389 –401. doi: 10.1068/d9107 .
Latour, B. 1993 .We have never been modern . Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Law, J., and A. Mol. 2001 . Situating technoscience: An
inquiry into spatialities. Environment and Planning D:
Society and Space 19 (5):609 –21. doi: 10.1068/d243t .
Lorimer, J. 2016 . Gut buddies: Multispecies studies and
the microbiome. Environmental Humanities 8 (1):57 –
76. doi: 10.1215/22011919-3527722 .Lorimer, J. 2017 . Parasites, ghosts and mutualists: A rela-
tional geography of microbes for global health.
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 42
(4):544 –58. doi: 10.1111/tran.12189 .
Lorimer, J. 2020 .The probiotic planet: Using life to manage
life. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Lutman, P. J. W., S. R. Moss, S. Cook, and S. J.
Welham. 2013 . A review of the effects of crop agron-
omy on the management of Alopecurus myosuroides .
Weed Research 53 (5):299 –313. doi: 10.1111/wre.
12024 .
Mansfield, B., M. Werner, C. Berndt, A. Shattuck, R.
Galt, B. Williams, L. Arg €uelles, F. R. Barri, M. Ishii,
J. Kunin, et al. 2023 . A new critical social science
research agenda on pesticides. Agriculture and Human
Values . doi: 10.1007/s10460-023-10492-w .
McFall-Ngai, M., M. G. Hadfield, T. C. Bosch, H. V.
Carey, T. Domazet-Lo /C20so, A. E. Douglas, N. Dubilier,
G. Eberl, T. Fukami, S. F. Gilbert, et al. 2013 .
Animals in a bacterial world, a new imperative for
the life sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 110
(9):3229 –36. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1218525110 .
Mol, A., and J. Law. 1994 . Regions, networks and fluids:
Anaemia and social topology. Social Studies of Science
24 (4):641 –71. doi: 10.1177/030631279402400402 .
Morand, S., and C. Lajaunie. 2021 . Outbreaks of vector-
borne and zoonotic diseases are associated with
changes in forest cover and oil palm expansion at
global scale. Frontiers in Veterinary Science 8:661063.
doi:10.3389/fvets.2021.661063 .
Moss, S. 2017 . Black-grass ( Alopecurus myosuroides ): Why
has this weed become such a problem in Western
Europe and what are the solutions? Outlooks on Pest
Management 28 (5):207 –12. doi: 10.1564/v28_oct_04 .
Moss, S. R., S. Perryman, and L. V. Tatnell. 2007 .
Managing herbicide-resistant blackgrass ( Alopecurus
myosuroides ): Theory and practice. Weed Technology
21 (2):300 –309. doi: 10.1614/WT-06-087.1 .
M€uller, B. 2021 . Glyphosate —A love story: Ordinary
thoughtlessness and response-ability in industrial
farming. Journal of Agrarian Change 21 (1):160 –79.
doi:10.1111/joac.12374 .
M€unster, D. 2021 . The nectar of life: Fermentation, soil
health, and bionativism in Indian natural farming.
Current Anthropology 62 (Suppl. 24):S311 –S322. doi:
10.1086/715477 .
Naranjo, S. E. 2001 . Conservation and evaluation of nat-
ural enemies in IPM systems for Bemisia tabaci .Crop
Protection 20 (9):835 –52. doi: 10.1016/s0261-
2194(01)00115-6 .
Paxson, H. 2008 . Post-Pasteurian cultures: The microbio-
politics of raw-milk cheese in the United States.
Cultural Anthropology 23 (1):15 –47. doi: 10.1111/j.
1548-1360.2008.00002.x .
Perfecto, I., M. Jim /C19enez-Soto, and J. Vandermeer. 2019 .
Coffee landscapes shaping the Anthropocene: Forcedsimplification on a complex agroecological landscape.
Current Anthropology 60 (Suppl. 20):S236 –S250. doi:
10.1086/703413 .On Disease Configurations, Black-Grass Blowback, and Probiotic Pest Management 479
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015 . Making time for soil:
Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45 (5):691 –716. doi: 10.1177/
0306312715599851 .
Riches, C. 2022 .Alopecurus myosuroides (black-grass).
CABI Compendium 1:1–18. doi: 10.1079/cabicompen-
dium.4360 .
Rosenberg, C. 1989 . What is an epidemic? AIDS in his-
torical perspective. Daedalus 118 (2):1 –17.
Scott, J. 1998 .Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to
improve the human condition have failed . New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Seyhan, A. A. 2019 . Lost in translation: The valley of
death across preclinical and clinical divide —
Identification of problems and overcoming obstacles.
Translational Medicine Communications 4 (1):18. doi:
10.1186/s41231-019-0050-7 .
Sinclair, G. 1838 .Hortus Gramineus Woburnensis . London:
Ridegways.
Skaalsveen, K., J. Ingram, and J. Urquhart. 2020 . The
role of farmers ’social networks in the implementation
of no-till farming practices. Agricultural Systems
181:102824. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2020.102824 .
Tomlinson, I. 2008 . Re-thinking the transformation of
organics: The role of the UK government in shapingBritish organic food and farming. Sociologia Ruralis 48
(2):133 –51. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.2008.00457.x .
Tsing, A. 2017 . A threat to Holocene resurgence is a threat
to liveability. In The anthropology of sustainability , ed.
M. Brightman and J. Lewis, 186 –97. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Tsing, A. L., A. S. Mathews, and N. Bubandt. 2019 . Patchy
Anthropocene: Landscape structure, multispecies history,
and the retooling of anthropology. Current Anthropology
60 (Suppl. 20):S186 –S197. doi: 10.1086/703391 .
Tsing, A., H. Swanson, E. Gan, and N. Bubandt. 2017 .
Arts of living on a damaged planet: Ghosts and monsters
of the Anthropocene . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Varah, A., K. Ahodo, S. R. Coutts, H. L. Hicks, D.
Comont, L. Crook, R. Hull, P. Neve, D. Z. Childs,
R. P. Freckleton, et al. 2020 . The costs of human-induced evolution in an agricultural system. Nature
Sustainability 3 (1):63 –71. doi: 10.1038/s41893-019-
0450-8 .
Wald, P. 2008 .Contagious: Cultures, carriers, and the out-
break narrative . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Wallace, R., and R. G. Wallace. 2015 . Blowback: New
formal perspectives on agriculturally driven pathogen
evolution and spread. Epidemiology and Infection 143
(10):2068 –80. doi: 10.1017/S0950268814000077 .
Werner, M., C. Berndt, and B. Mansfield. 2022 . The
glyphosate assemblage: Herbicides, uneven develop-
ment, and chemical geographies of ubiquity. Annals of
the American Association of Geographers 112 (1):19 –35.
doi:10.1080/24694452.2021.1898322 .
Wolff, L. 2023 . Regulating pests —Material politics and
calculation in integrated pest management.
Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 6
(1):455 –72. doi: 10.1177/25148486221076138 .
Woolf, S. H. 2008 . The meaning of translational research
and why it matters. JAMA 299 (2):211 –13. doi: 10.
1001/jama.2007.26 .
Worster, D. 1977 .Nature ’s economy: The roots of ecology .
San Francisco, CA: Sierra Club Books.
GEORGE CUSWORTH is a Postdoctoral
Researcher at the University of Oxford, based at the
Oxford Martin School, Oxford OX1 3BD, UK.
E-mail: George.cusworth@biology.ox.ac.uk . He uses
geographic and science and technology studies meth-
ods to investigate the design, governance, and trans-
formation of the food system.
JAMIE LORIMER is a Professor of Environmental
Geography at the University of Oxford based in the
School of Geography and the Environment and
Hertford College, Oxford OX1 3BW, UK.E-mail: Jamie.lorimer@ouce.ox.ac.uk . He researches
human –nature relations in a variety of agricultural
conservation, medical, and planetary contexts.480 Cusworth and Lorimer
