PERFORMING CLIMATES
PERFORMING CLIMATES
Eddie Paterson and Lara Stevens
With a Contribution from Angie AbdillaRoutledge Advances in Theatre & Performance Studies
‘Performing Climates  speaks brilliantly to the new zeitgeist of artistic and 
cultural thinking that is showing ways of living with climate change empa -
thetically and with attention to multiple cultural knowledge systems and 
artistic sensibilities. Paterson and Stevens show how to live with sensitive 
attention to the everyday, situated inextricably between thinking, creativ -
ity and activism.’
Peter Eckersall , City University of New York

Performing Climates
Performing Climates  features 14 interconnected chapters exploring theatre 
and performance’s relationship with more-than-human elements at a time 
of climate emergency. The book argues that Western performance – how 
we conceive of it, as well as how we train and educate people in and about 
it – needs to reorient its ways of making and thinking about itself to recon -
sider patterns of breakdown, decay and renewal happening on and off stage 
in a literal play of cells and particles. Performing Climates  examines live 
performance as a uniquely compostable artform,  formed by sonic vibrations 
and movements of air and matter, more-than-human elements, composi -
tion and decomposition. This book will appeal to undergraduate audiences, 
postgraduate scholars and performance studies colleagues, offering exciting 
possibilities for reconsidering theatre and performing in an age of crisis.
Eddie Paterson  is Associate Professor in Creative Writing at the University 
of Melbourne.
Lara Stevens  is Lecturer in English at Charles Sturt University, Australia.
This series is our home for cutting-edge, upper-level scholarly studies and 
edited collections. Considering theatre and performance alongside topics such as religion, politics, gender, race, ecology, and the avant-garde, titles are characterise by dynamic interventions into established subjects and innova-tive studies on emerging topics.
Researching Popular Entertainment
Edited by Kim Baston & Jason Price
The Dancer’s Handbook
A Practical Guide to Reimagining Dance, Body, and  Society by OFEN Co-ArtsGala Moody and Michael Carter
Staging Muslims in Britain
Playwrighting, Performance, and RepresentationÖnder Çakırtaş
Performing Violence
Limits and Transformative Means in Staged ViolenceDavide Giovanzana
Performing Corporate Bodies
Multinational Theatre in Global IndiaSarah Saddler
Performing Climates
Eddie Paterson and Lara StevensRoutledge Advances in Theatre & Performance Studies
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/Routledge- 
Advances-in-Theatre–Performance-Studies/book-series/RATPS
Performing Climates
Eddie Paterson and Lara Stevens
With a Contribution from Angie Abdilla
First published 2025
by Routledge4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business
© 2025 Eddie Paterson and Lara StevensThe right of Eddie Paterson and Lara Stevens to be identified as author 
of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-032-22556-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-22560-9 (pbk)ISBN: 978-1-003-27308-0 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003273080
Typeset in Sabon
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.
List of Figures  ix
Author Biographies  x
Authors’ Note  xi
Acknowledgements  xii
 1 Performing Climates  1
 2 Biospheres  15
 3 Death  22
 4 Ear 31
 5 Ants 45
 6 Mermaid  51
 7 Granite  59
 8 Spider  69
 9 Mycorrhizae  78
 10 Lego  89
 11 Ice 98
 12 Worms  109Contents
viii Contents
 13 Unicorn  117
 14 Tree 126
WITH ANGIE ABDILLA
References  137
Index  152
 1.1 Bloody Mess Empty Stage, Forced Entertainment © 2020.  3
 1.2 Composting.  8
 2.1 Gardens by the Bay plan.  19
 3.1 Mooni Van Tichel as the crocodile in PREY,  
Kris Verdonck, 2023.  26
 4.1 Stelarc: Ear on Arm (detail), 2020.  33
 4.2 Wood ear fungus.  40
 5.1 Leafcutter colony composting system.  46
 6.1 Hanna Cormick, The Mermaid, 2020.  52
 7.1 Lucy Bleach, underground, Contemporary Art  Tasmania, 2015.
 64
 8.1 Maria Fernanda Cardoso, ‘Origins of Art’, 2016.  71
 9.1 Tree Mountain: A Living Time Capsule – 11,000 Trees, 11,000 People, 400 Years, 1992–1996 (420 × 270 ×  28 metres). Ylojarvi, Finland.
 81
 9.2 Björk, Cornucopia, 2019.  84
 10.1 A Japanese spider crab sits atop a Lego skyscraper in Miniland New York City at Legoland, Carlsbad,  California, 2012.
 90
 11.1 Laurie Anderson, Duets on Ice, Adelaide Festival, 2013.  100
 12.1 Out-Of-Sync, Waiting, 2017. Photograph by Maria Miranda.  113
 13.1 Karen Finley, Unicorn Gratitude Mystery, 2016.  121
 14.1 Country-Centred Design diagrams.  128
14.2 Ngapulara Ngarngarnyi Wirra (Our Family Tree), 2022.  129Figures
Author Biographies
Angie Abdilla, palawa, is Professor of Cybernetics at the Australian National 
University, Founder, Director of Old Ways, New and co-founder of the 
Indigenous Protocols and Artificial Intelligence working group (IP//AI).
Eddie Paterson is Associate Professor in Creative Writing at the University of 
Melbourne. He is the author of The Contemporary American Monologue  
and co-author of Once Upon a Pixel: Storytelling and Worldbuilding in 
Videogames, with Tim Williams and Will Cordner.
Lara Stevens is Lecturer in English at Charles Sturt University, Australia. She 
is the author of Anti-war Theatre After Brecht  and co-editor of Feminist 
Ecologies: Changing Environments in the Anthropocene, with Peta Tait and Denise Varney.
This book was written on the unceded lands of the Dhudhuroa, Waywurru, 
Gadigal and Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung peoples. We acknowledge the Tradi-tional Owners and pay respects to their Elders, past, present and emerging.Authors’ Note
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Melinda Hetzel for early research assistance and Laura Hussey 
and the team at Routledge for guiding the production of this book. We are 
indebted to Dr Kyle Harvey for his meticulous editorial contribution. This 
book was developed with the support of Denise Varney, Peter Eckersall and 
Peta Tait on the research project ‘Towards an Australian Ecological Theatre’. 
Thanks to the School of Culture and Communication and the Arts Faculty 
at the University of Melbourne for publication support. Previous versions of 
some chapters were published elsewhere; we gratefully acknowledge the pub -
lishers, editors and peer-reviewers of those volumes. This research was partly 
funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Research 
Council (ARC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and are 
not necessarily those of the Australian Government or the ARC.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003273080-1Performing Climates
We are compost, not posthuman; we inhabit the humusities, not the 
humanities … Beings—human and not—become with each other, compose 
and decompose each other, in every scale and register of time and stuff in sympoietic tangling, in earthly worlding and unworlding.
(Haraway in Tsing et al. 2017: M45)
 Living with Mess
Performance is and has always been a mess, a bloody mess as we say in 
Australia (and in Forced Entertainment). And that’s what draws us to it. Performance is a mess of matter, climates, things, actors and affects: neither a dramatic nor postdramatic theatre but a network of dramaturgical elements; a site of birth and death, decay and renewal. Performance is a place of com-
posting and mulching (and Eddie loves mulching). This book of 14 intercon-nected chapters, each oriented around a more-than-human element or being (ice, ants, ears, mermaids, etc.), will resituate Western theatre in relation to the biological, cellular and bacterial conditions which govern our planetary existence.
We think that Western performance – how we conceive of it as well as 
how we train and educate people in and about it – needs to reorient its ways of making and thinking about itself to reconsider patterns of breakdown, decay and renewal happening on- and off-stage in a literal play of cells and particles. These chapters are our way of tracing the impact of climates on our work and life in the theatre, in the garden, in our family and in the world. Performing Climates is a book about messy relations: relations between peo -
ple of different places, histories and backgrounds; relations between human and more-than-human entities; relations between built environments and natural ones; and relations between the past, the present climate emergency and the future of the planet.
Performance is always rooted in a place with its own microclimate con-
nected to broader systems and spheres of relation. But what does it mean to make, watch and think about performance in a climate emergency? We 1
2 Performing Climates
asked each other this question as we stood in a rehearsal room that was fill -
ing with bushfire smoke. Do we have the time or capacity at this moment to 
stand around in air-conditioned black boxes staring in wonder at the dancing dust particles in the air? Should we have racked up all those carbon miles to fly to Japan to watch a performance of robots when the country was still reeling from the fallout of the Fukushima nuclear disaster? Are we crying Lear as the world burns? As we relocated from the Australian city of Naarm (Melbourne) to the countryside, how was the changing environment alter -
ing our perception of the natural world we were (re)discovering? How did the growing pile of toys and other objects that seem to accompany having children further deepen our position as privileged settlers living on stolen Indigenous land? How might performance reengage with the messiness of the world off-stage?
Live performance is a form of art that explicitly engages with the climates 
around it, but these climates are not always well understood or even visible. While theatre has always been composed of human and more-than-human entanglements, Performing Climates explores interactions in performance 
from the micro (elemental particles) to the macro (climate change). In these rapidly changing environmental and social conditions, we need to reinterro -
gate the role of theatre and performance in the fabric of our global cultures. This book argues that live performance, being composed of living and dead skin cells, sonic vibrations and movements of air and matter, composition and decomposition, is a uniquely compostable art form. Considering per -
forming climates in an age of crisis requires us to reenvisage performance in and of decay, in and of atmospheres, and in and outside of human scale and human perception (Figure 1.1).
This book makes no apology for being a sprawling, messy book. ‘What is 
mess’ writes Isabelle Stengers, but ‘the irreducible and always embedded in-terplay of processes, practices, experience and ways of knowing and valuing that makes up our common world’ ( 2018: 120). We lead sprawling, messy 
lives. (‘We have children!’, cry the parents. ‘We are still children!’, cry the parents to their parents. Aren’t families always the messiest of relations?) Performing Climates mixes autobiographical stories, and the places they play out, merging them into analysis of artworks that view the natural and the synthetic as performing subjects alongside a series of images. We thank our families, particularly our two children, as well as colleagues, students and friends near and far for being part of this process. We also attempt to situ-ate ourselves and our biases in the places we saw particular performances or events.
In this book, we try to live by our methodology. In so doing, we draw on 
and owe a debt to the anti-colonial methodologies of scholars such as Max Liboiron (2021), Aileen Moreton-Robinson (2000), the Gay’wu Group 
of Women (2019), Mary Graham (1999), Irene Watson (2014), Dwayne Donald (2010) and Kim TallBear (2014), all of whom remind us that our 
research does not occur in a vacuum, but rather in relations to the places  
Performing Climates  3
we live and their histories, human and more-than-human, elemental and ge -
ological. We are indebted to First Nations colleagues Angie Abdilla – who 
is co-author of Chapter 14, Tree – Tony Birch, Brian Martin, Latai Tau -
moepeau and Alexis Wright for so generously sharing their time, thoughts and expertise during the writing of this book. We also acknowledge the deep influences of Freya Mathews (1991), Val Plumwood (1993), Deborah Bird Rose (1992) and Ariel Salleh (1997). This book would not be the 
same without the Plumwood Committee, particularly Affrica Taylor and Plumwood Mountain itself, for the embodied lessons they have so gener -
ously offered up. We are grateful for our relationships with artists Lucy Bleach, Hanna Cormick,
1 Maria Fernanda Cardoso, Karen Finley, Gregory 
Lorenzutti, Norie Neumark, Kris Verdonck and Robert Walton who have given up their time and energy to entrust us with their stories and with our serious and playful explorations of their work.
Canadian Métis scholar Max Liboiron teaches us that respectful and re -
ciprocal relations in all modes of life, including in scholarship, begin with a recognition of the smallest particularities of the places from which we work. These places inform and infuse who we are and what we do, not necessarily in a spiritual sense, though it might be that too, but materially. Liboiron writes: ‘methodology is a way of being in the world and ways of being are tied up in obligation’ (2021: 1). Our obligation is to our teachers who show us the 
Figure 1.1   Bloody Mess Empty Stage, Forced Entertainment © 2020.
Photo: Hugo Glendenning.
4 Performing Climates
blind spots in our own thinking and ask us to tread carefully as we reconsider 
relations with human, more-than-human, living and nonliving elements and 
our place in the world.
As a consequence, we are not interested in performing what Donna Hara -
way calls the ‘god trick’ to assert our scholarly authority and hide our emo -
tional, spiritual and material connection to our subject matter ( 1988 : 581). 
Instead, we recognise our particular relations to performance and people. 
We try to acknowledge all we have learned, and continue to learn, from our 
parents and family, our friends and local community and Indigenous, non-
Western and feminist philosophies that teach us that place-based relationality 
is what fosters responsibility to protect and nurture Country. Methodology 
matters, even and especially if it is not flawless, symmetrical or easy for us or 
for you, dear readers.
 Ours, Not Ours
We live on unceded Indigenous land. We live on the ancestral lands of the 
Dhudhuroa and Wayrurru peoples. We live in the north-east of a southern 
state in Australia, in a place called Wooragee. Wooragee is said to be de -
rived from the Dhudhuroa term for ‘peppermint tree’ or Wurritba ( Blake 
and Reid 2002 ). Most likely Wooragee refers to the Eucalyptus dives , 
commonly known as the Broad-leaved Peppermint or Blue Peppermint 
Gum, a peppermint-scented species endemic to the stony soils of higher 
places in South Eastern Australia. Directly outside of our kitchen window 
grows a peppermint tree. However, this tree is not a peppermint gum, but 
a peppermint willow, Agonis flexuosa . The Agonis  is a species native to 
a place that is around 3000 kilometres away in Western Australia. To ar -
rive here, it has not travelled on the wind. Yet, the appearance of this tree 
doesn’t seem to be a random coincidence. We can only imagine that it has 
been grown from seed, tended and raised, transplanted and transported 
across the country. Perhaps it was purchased at a plant nursery nearby, 
and because its common English name is the peppermint tree, perhaps it 
was even planted here in a well-meaning but misguided gesture of recog -
nition of the Dhudhuroa people, their language and connection to this 
place. Like us, the misplaced Wooragee Agonis  lives on land that is not 
its own.
Let us set the scene in a different way. We are a couple with two young 
children. We are two middle-aged scholars, theatre nerds, one obsessive 
gardener, both animal lovers, settler Australians, ecofeminist philosophers 
and activists. We have relocated our lives to an alpine region where Tradi -
tional Owners have sustained what Australian Indigenous communities re -
fer to as ‘Country’ for over 65,000 years. Indigenous knowledge teaches us 
that Country and the reciprocal relations between First Peoples and their 
places are bound to what settlers might see as cultural and artistic practices, 
but which are so deeply integrated that they are inextricable for Indigenous 
Performing Climates  5
cultures. As Ann McGrath and Laura Rademaker write, in the introduction 
to Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History :
The land is the theater of storytelling and itself the storyteller – it pro -
vides proof, containing relics of the deep past, and it activates a living 
history. Words spoken or sung and dances reenacted in that landscape 
really matter, for there is an iterative relationship among the place, the 
present generations, and ancestral being. Country enhances the Indig -
enous sense of continuity. The land remains a creative, animating force, 
generating people, animals and geographies.
(2023 : 15–16)
As settler Australians, we are awkwardly positioned to write about that 
which is both ours and not ours. Walking with and talking to Traditional 
Owners leads us to acknowledge that we are bound up with, nourished and 
indebted to Dhudhuroa Wayrurru Country and its custodians, and that we 
are now part of the custodianship of this place, with deep and lasting respon -
sibility and obligations ( Birch 2019b ).
What ancient knowledge is available to take and use for our analysis of per -
formance is always fraught territory, and we take guidance where it is offered, 
act in good faith and know that at times it will be unavoidably messy. We rec -
ognise that we walk a fine line and so defer to the instructions that come with 
the shared knowledge in each particular instance. We are reminded that coloni -
sation is a process of erasing language, culture and species. We arrive with the 
attitude that to attempt to recuperate and engage earnestly, playfully and deeply 
with Indigenous knowledge and to make mistakes, acknowledge and learn from 
Traditional Owners is better than continuing the colonial project of ignoring or 
eliding such knowledge because we fear being extractive or disrespectful.
In her recent novel Praiseworthy , Indigenous Australian author and 
Waanyi woman Alexis Wright writes playfully of the vital importance of lis -
tening to Indigenous people, ‘the world’s greatest human survivors’:
Extinction-less tempest people from enduring one million storms, come 
from the ark of infinity right down to the last baby. They were now 
forced to speak, and yelled that they knew a thing or two about being 
trodden upon, and of being more on trend than the rest of humanity 
about how to look after the future.
(2023 : 2)
In taking up the knowledge offered by First Nations people, we acknowl -
edge our complicity and responsibility in protecting and fairly representing 
that knowledge to the best of our ability ( Neale 2022 : 1).
Performing Climates  mixes the autobiographical and analytical alongside 
a series of images and lyrical imaginings. Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, author 
of The Mushroom at the End of the World , uses similar mixed modes as 
6 Performing Climates
a means of capturing the ‘lively activities of all beings, human and not hu -
man’ that have historically been left to fabulists and non-Western storytellers 
(2015 : v). We ask questions, tell stories and offer moments of poetic illus -
tration and nontextual material in the hope of reckoning with being in the 
world with animals, rivers, rocks, plants, atmospheres, memory and spirits. 
Wright describes the inspection of the golden beetle ( Anoplognathus aureus ) 
as it moves across Country:
It seems to be imagining the world through the fine old music of the 
trees sing-talking back and forth while relaying all the storylines, the 
sounds of infinity reaching through a multitude of tracks over vast dis -
tances. It crawls through the leaf litter on the ground, along twigs, turns 
over soil, moves pebbles around while searching for the tiny devil mob. 
It finds all of those spirits with antennae that do not stop moving.
(2023 : 14)
Remember the image of the misplaced peppermint tree. This image re -
minds us that when we sat down to write this book, we were new and re -
turned inhabitants to the ancestral homelands of the Dhudhuroa people. 
Dhudhuroa Country was stolen by colonial forces in the eighteenth century. 
By the nineteenth century, its invading inhabitants became very wealthy from 
gold prospecting, a pattern of theft and destructive practices of extraction 
and agricultural mismanagement that has defined Australian colonialism and 
continues to this day.
Liboiron writes that settler scholarly practices can be extractive too, read -
ing Indigenous knowledge with a quarrying mindset, mining it for what can 
be ‘used’ for settler-colonial purposes and self-advancement ( 2021 : 35–37). 
As settlers on these lands working with Indigenous philosophy, we are ac -
countable for building reconciliation and acknowledging the lineage of First 
Nations thought, as a mode of rectifying exploitative practices and regener -
ating place and people. Our friend and colleague, the Indigenous Australian 
author, scholar and activist Tony Birch confirms that ‘through an intellectual, 
cultural and, for some, a spiritual attachment to place and country’, Indig -
enous and non-Indigenous people can promote collective responsibility for 
future ecological care ( 2016 : 381).2
In this way, our work and life exist in what Liboiron calls a ‘place-based 
relationality’ ( 2021 ) after the work of Mary Graham (2009) , Aileen Moreton-
Robinson (2015) , Shawn Wilson (2008) , Alex Wilson (2008)  and Dwayne 
Donald (2012) . The Agonis  appears several times in this book. Each time it 
offers a new intermingling image: a tree breathing in a biodome, the symbi -
otic relation between fungi, bacteria and root, and a shimmering example of 
photosynthesis ( Rose 2017 ), but the peppermint tree always brings us back 
to a place that is ours and not ours.
In exploring the meaning and shapes of performing climates, we seek 
solidarity with the more-than-human, memories of the past and hopes for 
Performing Climates  7
the future. Eddie grew up here. He is returning to an idea of ‘home’ after 
22 years away. This place, Wooragee, is deeply knitted into his being and his dreams. It is a place of human and more-than-human ghosts. Eddie passed his childhood playing in this dry and spectacular bush, swimming in its creeks and planting trees along their banks – learning from Elders like the late-Bangerang (Pangerang) artist and educator, Eddie ‘Kooka -
burra’ Kneebone who was generous with his knowledge of Country. While Eddie holds no rightful claim over these lands, they hold a rightful claim over him.
Lara is also marked by the past and present. As the child of Sri Lankan 
and British immigrants, Lara’s connections to place extend from a suburb of Melbourne on the banks of the Birrarung (Yarra) river and the lands of the Wurundjeri Woi-Wurrung peoples to post World War II South London, and the mercantile networks of the Sri Lankan Burghers, descended from the fifteenth- to eighteenth-century Portuguese and Dutch setters of what Europeans then called Ceylon. As a child of migrants, she continues in that recent familial tradition of moving and setting down roots in places where the newcomer might be considered an outsider but who arrives with fresh eyes, open to new learning, with senses not yet blunted by habit or precon -
ceived ideas.
 Compost as Performance
The basis of this book’s conceptual framework is grounded in compost (pun intended and achieved) as a cycle of decomposition that gener -
ates something vital, rich and useful. We are interested in analysing per -
formance not as an insulated, exclusive art form predicated on human centrality but as a process that celebrates the transformative properties of waste – bacteria, debris and breakdown – composting and mulching within a larger network of bacteria, fungi and microbes embedded in the skin, air, soil and interacting with cellular networks and atmospheric con -
ditions (Figure 1.2).
First Nations’ knowledge and cosmologies pre-empt the Western phil -
osophical notion of human and more-than-human co-becoming by many thousands of years. For many Indigenous artists, performance-makers and philosophers, the ideas animating this book will be old news! Con -
cepts of relationality, the practice of making performances that centre around something other than the human, and learnings drawn from deep knowledge of a particular place and climate, is both ancient wisdom and everyday knowledge for many Aboriginal people.
3 In his essay ‘Walking 
and Being’, Tony Birch conveys the foundational ‘connection between humans and earth’ through a Kulin creation story. In the story, the first men and women are sculpted from the clay and waters of riverbanks and creeks – humans are literally and spiritually composed of Country (2019a).
8 Performing Climates
Indeed, it is through ancient practices of listening to and caring for Coun-
try that Australian Indigenous cultures have retained the idea of an animate 
and lively world of interconnected systems. The Gay’wu Women write:
People might think that the land doesn’t speak, nor the rivers, the ani -
mals or the winds, but they do. We feel the land, the sea, and the rivers, and they tell us many things.
(2019: xxviii)
Within knowledge systems where the lands, winds and oceans speak, the 
notion of performing climates requires no imaginative leap. The things that are told through the land are layered through family histories, kinships, spiritual re -
lations, defining places that hold particular meanings or where particular prac-tices were or should be carried out, many of which are not accessible to settlers.
In this book, we draw upon the Australian Aboriginal term Country to 
keep us grounded in the place we live, even when our performance examples are global.
4 As Waanyi author Wright reminds us, ‘We studied everything 
you needed to know about surviving from the biggest library in the world –  
country’ (2023: 2, italics in original). We also draw on recent Western phil -
osophical accounts of the integrated ecologies of human and more-than-human life, including concepts such as ‘vibrant matter’ (Bennett 2010), ‘intra-active’ relations ( Barad 2007 ), ‘transcorporeality’ ( Alaimo 2014), the 
‘planthropocene’ (Myers 2017) and ‘situated knowledges’ ( Haraway 1988). 
Such accounts demonstrate that art and performance has the potential to 
Figure 1.2   Composting.
Performing Climates  9
sustain Jane Bennett’s ‘thing-power’ ( 2010 ) and to visualise networks such 
as what Bruno Latour calls a ‘parliament of things’ in which groupings 
of nonhumans, quasi-objects and hybrids are granted visibility and rights 
(1993: 145).
While we are building our three-bay composting structures, we recall Jen -
nifer Hamilton and Astrida Neimanis arguing that composting is not only a 
material labour for enhancing the nutrients in the soil but also a scholarly 
practice. Their work attempts a reclamation of the under/unvalued or ig -
nored foundations to environmental philosophy in feminist scholarship or 
the writings of other marginalised groups such as Women of Colour or Indig -
enous Women ( 2018 ). Following their example, we draw on and acknowl -
edge, through citation, the undervalued work done in this field, particularly 
the influence of First Nations and feminist thought on theoretical and artistic 
modes of performing climates.
Our concept of performing climates is far less complex and culturally sig -
nificant than Indigenous Australian experiences of Country. Nevertheless, it 
tries to think, feel and listen to the networked relations and flows between 
atmospheres, technologies and complex biological systems and views these 
entanglements ‘as’ performance. Performing Climates  aims to unsettle the 
deeply anthropocentric history of theatre and performance, its obsession 
with human drama or autobiography, its able-bodied rules and aspirations, 
its backgrounding of the natural world and its blindness to more-than-  
human agency. We interrogate what the discipline loses by ignoring the more-
than-human and the nonliving. This interrogation builds on the foundational 
thought of many scholars working in the West who have laboured to unsettle 
the deeply anthropocentric history of theatre and performance, its obsession 
with human drama or autobiography, particularly Una Chaudhuri, Wendy 
Arons and Theresa J. May, Carl Lavery, Bonnie Marranca, Baz Kershaw, 
Astrida Neimanis, Jennifer Hamilton, Peta Tait, Denise Varney, Lisa Woy -
narski, Martin Welton, Tanja Beer, Oron Catts and Ionat Zurr.
This book arises in part from Eddie’s work organising Performance Cli -
mates , the 2016 Performance Studies international conference that took place 
in Naarm (Melbourne). This conference featured the landmark performance 
Cut the Sky  by acclaimed Indigenous Australian dance company Marrugeku, 
keynotes from Richard Frankland, Rebecca Schneider, Peta Tait and Bruno 
Latour, and resulted in several themed journal editions ( Paterson and Brown 
2018 ; Fensham et al. 2018 ).5 Our work expands upon this groundswell of 
voices critiquing Western theatre and performance makings’ responses to the 
climate emergency.
We are working against a model of Western theatre making that might be 
imagined as ‘biospherical’. Recalling the Spheres  Trilogy from Peter Sloter -
dijk (2011 , 2014 , 2016 ), biospherical theatre sees actions taking place in ar -
tificially constructed atmospheres for artistic innovation – proto-laboratories 
and human greenhouses – in which able-bodied actors are trained and per -
form within air-conditioned black boxes. Or, more tellingly, white people in 
10 Performing Climates
white cubes. Biospherical theatre is an enclosed Western form. It is labour in -
tensive, carbon intensive, hierarchical, exclusive, inaccessible and extractive 
rather than generative of new knowledges and different ways of being with 
the world. It privileges the human over the more-than-human in all aspects: 
from theatrical architecture to traditional conservatoire theatre training, to 
themes, narrative trajectories, design, dramaturgy and direction, casting, 
consumption, rehearsal and performance style.
In this book, we further dismantle theatre and performance’s histori -
cal tendency to background the natural world. We develop a model for 
a more expansive and inclusive theatre ecology. Key to this model are 
enhanced ideas of theatrical dramaturgy, including Peter Eckersall and 
Eddie’s conception of ‘slow dramaturgy’ as a means of reconceiving the 
material conditions of the everyday world in performance such as dura -
tion, slowness, place, ambience and bodies both human and nonhuman 
(Eckersall and Paterson 2011 ; Eckersall et al. 2017 ; Eckersall 2024 ) and 
Lara’s theorisation of ‘deep dramaturgy’ as an ecological form of drama -
turgical practice ( Stevens 2019a ). Additionally, this book is informed by 
Angie Abdilla’s work developing Country Centred Design; a methodology 
that centres Indigenous knowledge systems in the development of cultural 
protocols for the design of new technologies, artificial intelligence and im -
mersive experiences ( Abdilla et al. 2021 ). In Performing Climates , these 
material, ecological and technological modes are also inflected by multi-
scalar biological and cellular processes of growth, flow and disintegra -
tion that exist within a ‘planetary performance studies’ ( Cervera 2017 ) in 
which each performance is a cycle with particles and debris ( Bleeker and 
van der Tuin 2014 ).
Drawing on case studies that might not be necessarily recognisable to 
Westerners as ‘theatre’ or ‘art’, we are interested in performance as a mess of 
matter, atmospheres, objects, actors and affects: a compostable art form  that 
exposes the encounters, transformations and breakdown of cells, of organ -
isms, of bodies, of air, of machines and of light within emergent ecosystems. 
Performing Climates  takes into account the cyclical relations and flows be -
tween atmospheres, technologies and complex biological systems and views 
these interactions ‘as’ performance ( Schechner 2002 ). We see compost in/of 
performance as a means to reimagine aesthetics and reconnect theatre with 
 Compost as Relationality
The chapters in this book engage with some conventional performances with 
human actors but are just as interested in what Stacy Alaimo calls ‘thinking 
as the stuff of the world’ ( 2014 ): the travelling Agonis  sapling; a melting ice -
berg; a mermaid who turns into foam; the last breath drawn; the hum of ant  climate politics. Our exploration of performing climates necessarily reckons with 
the climate crisis and its interconnection with the socio-cultural-cosmological 
fabric of our planet.
Performing Climates  11
air-conditioning; vibrations of voice; the throb of fungal communications; 
discarded cells of skin; a phallic unicorn horn; underground cathedrals and 
a Lego-bloom in the Pacific Ocean.
Theatre and performance has always been a political medium, sometimes 
confirming the status quo and sometimes staging revolt against it. Perform -
ing Climates  brings Western theatre into the century of the climate emer -
gency, to make it a politically ‘relevant’ and urgent art form again. To make 
performance-as-usual, which is to say, to churn out the old Western classics 
without innovation is to perpetuate a culture that has destroyed relationality 
and kinship between human and the more-than-human world. Performance 
offers us the tools by which to reframe our relationality – to embody and 
show others what the world can look like without the human at the centre. 
It allows us to intermingle with other roots, in ways that might help to radi -
cally drive our commitment to protect what is left, to share knowledge of 
these delicate interconnections of our planetary existence or even to accept 
the redundancy of our species with grace, courage and humility.
As scholars trained in the rational, ordered, taxonomised Western tradi -
tion, with its seemingly pristine lines of demarcation, we are slowly learning 
to find peace in mess. We do this in order to build on a politics that rejects 
mastery and those clean binary shapes that obscure the sprawling realities in 
which we exist. As Alaimo reminds us:
The anthropocene is no time for transcendent, definitive mappings, 
transparent knowledge systems, or confident epistemologies. Surely 
those things got us into this predicament to begin with.
(2016 : 3)
Performing Climates  thus draws together chapters that are curious about 
systems of composting matter at different scales and in very different kinds 
of performances. However, this book does not provide any neat answers to 
what performance should be or look like as we move through these uncertain 
times of emergency. All the performances explored in this book are featured 
because they stage changing states of and sit in tension with biospherical 
models of theatre.
While writing this book, we have been thinking with the seasons and 
soil, setting up rat-proof composting bays, navigating the red-bellied black 
snakes in the vegetable patch, cleaning the gutters, yarning and working 
with members of the Dhudhuroa Dhargal Aboriginal Corporation to re -
generate the land through cultural burning (cool burns), and avoiding the 
swooping masked-lapwings nesting on the dam. We tell you all this because 
these are the performing climates which shape our lives and work and be -
cause this is a book about the entanglement of systems, weather, particles, 
organisms, species and art. We agree with 20th century French composer 
Olivier Messiaen when he described the birds as artists ( Odle 2010 ). We 
thank Alexis Wright for sharing the butterfly songlines that dance across 
12 Performing Climates
Indigenous Country ( 2023 ). We invite you to read on, to think compost, to 
re-picture the world beyond biospherical theatre, to acknowledge place and 
time and connection and, above all, to enjoy the bloody mess of it all.
Notes
 1 Hanna Cormick is of Saami ancestry and has created a performance that grapples 
with the complex politics of First Nations identification.
 2 Examples of collaborative ecological work includes the Indigenous-led projects 
of Michael-Shawn Fletcher, Jack Pascoe, Uncle Dave Wandin (2022)  and the 
Walbunja Rangers from the Batemans Bay Land Council (Country Needs People 
n.d.), which draw on Indigenous knowledge and culture to restore the health of 
Country since invasion and educate Western settlers through traditional fire, land-
management and conservation practices.
 3 There is no better example of this than the 2024 Venice Biennale Golden Lion 
award winner Archie Moore’s exhibition kith and kin . In this expansive work, 
Moore hand-drew, in white chalk, a 65,000-year First Nations family tree on the 
black walls and ceiling of the Australia Pavilion. The work included an archive 
of official redacted documents showing Aboriginal deaths and incarcerations.  
The chalk drawing included gaping black holes and gaps that point to the vio -
lent impact of colonialism on his (and all Aboriginal) ancestry. What was infre -
quently reported in media coverage of the exhibition and award, however, was 
that Moore’s family tree included nonhuman others as part of the webs of inter -
connection and kinship lines.
 4 Liboiron notes that some First Nations groups refer to Land (with a capital ‘L’) as 
an animate entity and ancestor to humans ( 2021 : 7).
 5 We acknowledge our colleagues on the organising team of Performance Climates : 
Rachel Fensham, Paul Rae, Robert Walton, Peta Tait, Meredith Rogers, Angharad 
Wynne-Jones and Alyson Campbell; Melinda Hetzel and the volunteer team; and 
the many participants of the conference who provided much inspiration for this 
book. We also thank the contributors, co-editors and teams working on the ‘Per -
formance Climates’ themed issues of Global Performance Studies  (Paterson and 
Brown 2018 ) and Performance Research  (Fensham et al. 2018 ).
References
Abdilla, Angela, Megan Kelleher, Rick Shaw and Tyson Yunkaporta  (2021). Out of 
the Black Box: Indigenous Protocols for AI. Report . Melbourne: Deakin University.
Alaimo, Stacy  (2014). ‘Thinking as the Stuff of the World’. O-Zone: A Journal of 
Object-Oriented Studies . 1(1): 13–21.
Alaimo, Stacy  (2016). Exposed: Environmental Politics and Pleasures in Posthuman 
Times . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Barad, Karen  (2007). Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the En -
tanglement of Matter and Meaning . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bennett, Jane  (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.
Birch, Tony  (2016). ‘Climate Change, Recognition and Social Place-Making’. In Eve 
Vincent and Timothy Neale, eds, Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and Envi -
ronmentalism in Contemporary Australia . Crawley: UWAP Scholarly, pp. 356–383.
Birch, Tony  (2019a). ‘Walking and Being’. Meanjin Journal , Summer 2019, https://
meanjin.com.au/essays/walking-and-being /
Performing Climates  13
Birch, Tony  (2019b). HumanNature: Connection and cooperation in a time of climate 
change . Australian Museum HumanNature Podcast Series, 14 May 2019. https://
australian.museum/blog-archive/museullaneous/humannature-podcast-tonybirch /, 
accessed 9 October 2024.
Blake, Barry J. and Julie Reid  (2002). ‘The Dhudhuroa Language of Northeastern Vic -
toria: a Description Based on Historical Sources’. Aboriginal History . 26: 177–210.
Bleeker, Maaike and Iris van der Tuin  (2014). ‘Science in the Performance Stratum: 
Hunting for Higgs and Nature as Performance’. International Journal of Perfor -
mance Arts and Digital Media . 10(2): 232–245.
Cervera, Felipe  (2017). ‘Planetary Performance Studies’. Global Performance Studies . 
1(1). https://doi.org/10.33303/gpsv1n1a3
Country Needs People website (n.d.). https://www.countryneedspeople.org.au/about , 
accessed 23 April 2024.
Donald, Dwayne  (2010). On What Terms Can We Speak? . Lecture, University of 
Lethbridge, Faculty of Education. https://vimeo.com/15264558
Donald, Dwayne  (2012). ‘Indigenous Métissage: A Decolonizing Research Sensibil -
ity’. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education . 25(5): 533–555.
Eckersall, Peter  (2024). Dramaturgy to Make Visible: The Legacies of New Drama -
turgy for Politics and Performance in Our Times . London: Routledge.
Eckersall, Peter, Helena Grehan and Edward Scheer  (2017). New Media Dramaturgy: 
Performance, Media and New Materialism . London and New York: Palgrave 
MacMillan.
Eckersall, Peter and Eddie Paterson  (2011). ‘Slow Dramaturgy: Renegotiating Politics 
and Staging the Everyday’. Australasian Drama Studies . (58): 178–192.
Fensham, Rachel, Eddie Paterson and Paul Rae , eds (2018). ‘On Climates’. Themed 
Issue, Performance Research . 23(3).
Fletcher, Michael-Shawn  et al. (2022). ‘Healthy Country’. Indigenous Knowledge In -
stitute . https://indigenousknowledge.unimelb.edu.au/Research/themes/2021-2022-
themes/healthy-country , accessed 23 April 2024.
Gay’wu Group of Women  (2019). Songspirals: Sharing Women’s Wisdom of Country 
through Songlines . Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Graham, Mary  (1999). ‘Some Thoughts about the Philosophical Underpinnings of 
Aboriginal Worldviews’. Worldviews: Environment, Culture, Religion . 3: 105–118.
Graham, Mary  (2009). ‘Understanding Human Agency in Terms of Place: A Proposed 
Aboriginal Research Methodology’. PAN: Philosophy Activism Nature . 6: 71–78.
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae and Astrida Neimanis  (2018). ‘Composting Feminisms and En -
vironmental Humanities’. Environmental Humanities . 10(2) November: 501–527.
Haraway, Donna  (1988). ‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism 
and the Privilege of Partial Perspective’. Feminist Studies . 14(3): 575–599.
Haraway, Donna (2017). ‘Symbiogenesis, Sympoiesis, and Art Science Activisms for 
Staying with the Trouble’. In Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, Heather Swanson, Elaine 
Gan and Nils Bubandt, eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, pp. M25–M50.
Latour, Bruno (1993). We Have Never Been Modern . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni -
versity Press.
Liboiron, Max  (2021). Pollution Is Colonialism . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Mathews, Freya  (1991). The Ecological Self . London and New York: Routledge.
McGrath, Ann and Laura Rademaker  (2023). ‘The Languages and Temporalities of 
“Everywhen” in Deep History’. In Ann McGrath, Laura Rademaker and Jake -
lin Troy, eds, Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History . Sydney: 
UNSW Press, pp. 1–33.
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen  (2000). Talkin’ Up to the White Woman: Indigenous 
Women and Feminism . Brisbane: The University of Queensland Press.
Performing Climates 
Abdilla, Angela , Megan Kelleher , Rick Shaw and Tyson Yunkaporta (2021). Out of the Black
Box: Indigenous Protocols for AI. Report. Melbourne: Deakin University. 
Alaimo, Stacy (2014). ‘Thinking as the Stuff of the World’. O-Zone: A Journal of Object-Oriented
Studies. 1(1): 13–21. 
Alaimo, Stacy (2016). Exposed: Environmental Politics and Pleasures in Posthuman Times.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Barad, Karen (2007). Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Bennett, Jane (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Birch, Tony (2016). ‘Climate Change, Recognition and Social Place-Making’. In Eve Vincent and
Timothy Neale , eds, Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and Environmentalism in
Contemporary Australia. Crawley: UWAP Scholarly, pp. 356–383. 
Birch, Tony (2019a). ‘Walking and Being’. Meanjin Journal, Summer 2019,
https://meanjin.com.au/essays/walking-and-being/ 
Birch, Tony (2019b). HumanNature: Connection and cooperation in a time of climate change . 
Australian Museum HumanNature Podcast Series, 14 May 2019.
https://australian.museum/blog-archive/museullaneous/humannature-podcast-tonybirch/,
accessed 9 October 2024. 
Blake, Barry J. and Julie Reid (2002). ‘The Dhudhuroa Language of Northeastern Victoria: a
Description Based on Historical Sources’. Aboriginal History. 26: 177–210. 
Bleeker, Maaike and Iris van der Tuin (2014). ‘Science in the Performance Stratum: Hunting for
Higgs and Nature as Performance’. International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media.
10(2): 232–245. 
Cervera, Felipe (2017). ‘Planetary Performance Studies’. Global Performance Studies. 1(1).
https://doi.org/10.33303/gpsv1n1a3 
Country Needs People website (n.d.). https://www.countryneedspeople.org.au/about, accessed
23 April 2024. 
Donald, Dwayne (2010). On What Terms Can We Speak? . Lecture, University of Lethbridge, 
Faculty of Education. https://vimeo.com/15264558 
Donald, Dwayne (2012). ‘Indigenous Métissage: A Decolonizing Research Sensibility’.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education. 25(5): 533–555. 
Eckersall, Peter (2024). Dramaturgy to Make Visible: The Legacies of New Dramaturgy for
Politics and Performance in Our Times. London: Routledge. 
Eckersall, Peter , Helena Grehan and Edward Scheer (2017). New Media Dramaturgy:
Performance, Media and New Materialism. London and New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Eckersall, Peter and Eddie Paterson (2011). ‘Slow Dramaturgy: Renegotiating Politics and
Staging the Everyday’. Australasian Drama Studies. (58): 178–192. 
Fensham, Rachel , Eddie Paterson and Paul Rae , eds (2018). ‘On Climates’. Themed Issue,
Performance Research. 23(3). 
Fletcher, Michael-Shawn et al. (2022). ‘Healthy Country’. Indigenous Knowledge Institute . 
https://indigenousknowledge.unimelb.edu.au/Research/themes/2021-2022-themes/healthy-
country, accessed 23 April 2024. 
Gay'wu Group of Women (2019). Songspirals: Sharing Women's Wisdom of Country through
Songlines. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
Graham, Mary (1999). ‘Some Thoughts about the Philosophical Underpinnings of Aboriginal
Worldviews’. Worldviews: Environment, Culture, Religion. 3: 105–118. 
Graham, Mary (2009). ‘Understanding Human Agency in Terms of Place: A Proposed
Aboriginal Research Methodology’. PAN: Philosophy Activism Nature. 6: 71–78. 
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae and Astrida Neimanis (2018). ‘Composting Feminisms and
Environmental Humanities’. Environmental Humanities. 10(2) November: 501–527. 
Haraway, Donna (1988). ‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
Privilege of Partial Perspective’. Feminist Studies. 14(3): 575–599. 
Haraway, Donna (2017). ‘Symbiogenesis, Sympoiesis, and Art Science Activisms for Staying
with the Trouble’. In Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing , Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt
, eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
M25–M50. 
Latour, Bruno (1993). We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. 
Liboiron, Max (2021). Pollution Is Colonialism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Mathews, Freya (1991). The Ecological Self. London and New York: Routledge. 
McGrath, Ann and Laura Rademaker (2023). ‘The Languages and Temporalities of
“Everywhen” in Deep History’. In Ann McGrath , Laura Rademaker and Jakelin Troy , eds,
Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History. Sydney: UNSW Press, pp. 1–33. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2000). Talkin’ Up to the White Woman: Indigenous Women and
Feminism. Brisbane: The University of Queensland Press. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2015). The White Possessive: Property, Power, and Indigenous
Sovereignty. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Myers, Natasha (2017). ‘From the Anthropocene to the Planthroposcene: Designing Gardens
for Plant/People Involution’. History and Anthropology. 28(3): 297–301. 
Neale, Margaret (2022). ‘First Knowledges: An Introduction’. In Zena Cumpston , Michael-
Shawn Fletcher and Lesley Head , eds, Plants: Past, Present and Future. Melbourne: Thames
and Hudson, pp. 1–4. 
Odle, Melissa Patrice (2010). ‘Bird Song in the Music of Olivier Messiaen, With an Emphasis on
Le Merle Noir’. Master of Music in Performance Thesis, California State University, Northridge. 
Paterson, Eddie and Kevin Brown , eds (2018). ‘Performance Climates’. Themed Issue. Global
Performance Studies. 1(2). https://gps.psi-web.org/issue/view/2 
Plumwood, Val (1993). Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. London and New York: Routledge. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (1992). Dingo Makes Us Human: Life and Land in an Australian Aboriginal
Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (2017). ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
51–63. 
Salleh, Ariel (1997). Ecofeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx and the Postmodern. London: Zed
Books. 
Schechner, Richard (2002). Performance Studies: An Introduction. London: Routledge. 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2011). Bubbles: Spheres Volume I: Microspherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2014). Globes: Spheres Volume II: Macrospherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2016). Foams: Spheres Volume III: Plural Spherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Stengers, Isabelle (2018). Another Science Is Possible: A Manifesto for Slow Science, trans.
Steven Muecke . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Stevens, Lara (2019a). ‘Anthroposcenic Performance and the Need for “Deep Dramaturgy”’.
Performance Research. 24(8): 89–97. 
TallBear, Kim (2014). ‘Standing with and Speaking as Faith: A Feminist-Indigenous Approach to
Inquiry’. Journal of Research Practice. 10(2): 1–7. 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of
Life in Capitalist Ruins. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Watson, Irene (2014). ‘Re-Centring First Nations Knowledge and Places in a Terra Nullius
Space’. AlterNative: An International Journal of Indigenous Peoples. 10(5): 508–520. 
Wilson, Alex (2008). ‘“N'tacinowin Inna Nah”: Our Coming in Stories’. Canadian Woman
Studies. 26(3): 193–199. 
Wilson, Shawn (2008). Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Black Point,
Nova Scotia: Fernwood Publishing. 
Wright, Alexis (2023). Praiseworthy. Sydney: Giramondo. 
 
Biospheres 
Bellew, Patrick and Meredith Davey (2012). Green House, Green Engineering: Environmental
Design at Gardens by the Bay. Novato, CA: Oro Editions. 
Carreon, Erika (2024). ‘Tropical Futurity: Speculative Ecofiction through the Lens Tropical
Temporality’. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Melbourne. 
Furuhata, Yuriko (2022). Climatic Media: Transpacific Experiments in Atmospheric Control.
Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
George, Cherian (2000). Singapore, the Air-Conditioned Nation: Essays on the Politics of
Comfort and Control, 1990–2000. Singapore: Landmark Books. 
Jongen, Marc (2011). ‘On Anthropospheres and Aphrogrammes: Peter Sloterdijk's Thought
Images of the Monstrous’. Humana.Mente Journal of Philosophical Studies. 18: 199–219. 
McCarthy, Terry (1999). ‘Lee Kuan Yew’. Time Magazine , 23 August. 
http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2054444,00.html#ixzz2lzv7Abbn, accessed 29
November 2013. 
Myers, Natasha (2015). ‘Edenic Apocalypse: Singapore's End-of-Time Botanical Tourism’. In
Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin , eds, Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters among
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies. London: Open Humanities Press, pp.
31–42. 
Nagengast, Bernard A (2009). ‘Was Ice Making John Gorrie's Greatest Legacy?’. ASHRAE
Transactions. 115(1): 122–129. 
Roth, George B (1936). ‘Dr. John Gorrie: Inventor of Artificial Ice and Mechanical Refrigeration’.
The Scientific Monthly. 42(5): 464–469. 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2014). Globes: Spheres II, trans. Wieland Hoban . South Pasadena CA:
Semiotext(e). 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2016). Foams: Spheres Volume III: Plural Spherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Wilson, Richard (2015). ‘A Globe of Sinful Continents: Shakespeare Thinks the World’. In Jernej
Habjan and Fabienne Imlinger , eds, Globalizing Literary Genres: Literature, History, Modernity.
New York: Routledge, pp. 27–49. 
 
Death 
Carlson, Marvin (2003). The Haunted Stage: The Theatre as Memory Machine. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press. 
Cixous, Hélène (1984). ‘Aller à la mer’, trans. Barbara Kerslake . Modern Drama. 27(4):
546–548. 
Crew, Bec (2016). ‘The Robots Sent into Fukushima Have “Died”’. Science Alert , 11 March. 
www.sciencealert.com/the-robots-sent-into-fukushima-have-died, accessed 7 November 2023. 
D'Cruz, Glenn (2014). ‘Things I Know About Geminoid F, or What I Think About When I Think
About Android Theatre’. Australasian Drama Studies. (65): 272–288. 
Eckersall, Peter (2015). ‘Towards a Dramaturgy of Robots and Object-Figures’. TDR: The
Drama Review. 59(3): 123–131. 
Eckersall, Peter (2024). Dramaturgy to Make Visible: The Legacies of New Dramaturgy for
Politics and Performance in Our Times. London: Routledge. 
Etchells, Tim (2008). ‘“Spectacular” Programme Note’. Forced Entertainment , 
www.forcedentertainment.com/spectacular-programme-note-by-tim-etchells, accessed 7
December 2023. 
Forced Entertainment (2008). Spectacular.  Performance Work.  
Grehan, Helena (2015). ‘Actors, Spectators, and “Vibrant” Objects: Kris Verdonck's ACTOR #1 
’. TDR: The Drama Review. 59(3): 132–139. 
Hirata, Oriza (2011). Sayonara . Performance Work, Seinendan Theatre Company.  
McCurry, Justin (2017). ‘Fukushima Nuclear Cleanup Falters Six Years after Tsunami’. The 
Guardian , 9 March. www.theguardian.com/world/2017/mar/09/fukushima-nuclear-cleanup- 
falters-six-years-after-tsunami, accessed 1 September 2023.
McGrath, Ann and Laura Rademaker (2023). ‘The Languages and Temporalities of
“Everywhen” in Deep History’. In Ann McGrath , Laura Rademaker and Jakelin Troy , eds,
Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History. Sydney: UNSW Press, pp. 1–36. 
Murphy, Michelle (2017). ‘Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations’. Cultural Anthropology.
32(4): 494–503. 
Murphy, Michelle (2018). ‘Against Population, towards Alterlife’. In Adele E. Clarke and Donna
Haraway , eds, Making Kin Not Population. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, pp. 101–124. 
Plumwood, Val (1993). Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. London: Routledge. 
Plumwood, Val (1995). ‘Human Vulnerability and the Experience of Being Prey’. Quadrant.
29(3): 29–34. 
Plumwood, Val (2007a). ‘The Cemetery Wars: Cemeteries, Biodiversity and the Sacred’. Local-
Global: Identity, Security, Community. 3: 54–71. 
Plumwood, Val (2007b). Review of Deborah Bird Rose's ‘Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics
for Decolonisation’. Australian Humanities Review. 42.
www.australianhumanitiesreview.org/2007/08/01/a-review-of-deborah-bird-roses-reports-from-
a-wild-country-ethics-for-decolonisation, accessed 22 November 2023. 
Plumwood, Val (2012). The Eye of the Crocodile, ed. Lorraine Shannon . Canberra: ANU Press. 
Spedalieri, Francesca (2014). ‘Quietly Posthuman: Oriza Hirata's Robot-Theatre’. Performance
Research. 19(2): 138–140. 
van Baarle, Kristof (2019). ‘Void’. In Peter Eckersall and Helena Grehan , eds, The Routledge
Companion to Theatre and Politics. London: Routledge, pp. 228–231. 
van Baarle, Kristof (2020). ‘End-Time Attitudes: Performing the Last Part’. In Kristof van Baarle
and Peter Eckersall , eds, Machine Made Silence: The Art of Kris Verdonck. Aberystwyth, UK:
Performance Research Books, pp. 152–162. 
Verdonck, Kris (2016), IN VOID . Performance Work, A Two Dogs Company.  
Verdonck, Kris (2017). CONVERSATIONS (at the end of the world) . Performance Work, A Two 
Dogs Company. 
Verdonck, Kris (2019). SOMETHING (out of nothing) . Performance Work, A Two Dogs 
Company. 
Verdonck, Kris (2023). PREY . Performance Work, A Two Dogs Company.  
 
Ear 
Abrahamsson, Christian and Sebastian Abrahamsson (2007). ‘Cultural Geographies in Practice:
In Conversation with the Body Conveniently Known as Stelarc’. Cultural Geographies. 14(2):
293–308. 
Cai, Ming , Yang Lin , Yin-long Luo et al. (2015). ‘Extraction, Antimicrobial, and Antioxidant
Activities of Crude Polysaccharides from the Wood Ear Medicinal Mushroom Auricularia 
auricula-judae  (Higher Basidiomycetes)’. International Journal of Medicinal Mushrooms 17(6): 
591–600. 
Catts, Oron and Ionat Zurr (2008). ‘The Art of the Semi-Living and Partial Life: Extra Ear – 1⁄4
Scale’. In Melentie Pandilovski , ed, Art in the Biotech Era. Adelaide: Experimental Art
Foundation, pp. 140–147. 
Collins, Rebecca (2021). ‘Aural Attunement Is a Form of Performative Writing Used to Write
About Nonhuman Affective Relations in Emma Bennett's Slideshow Birdshow  (2013)’. 
Ambiances. 2: 1–20. 
Déchery, Chloé and Martin Welton , eds (2020). ‘Staging Atmospheres: Theatre and the
Atmospheric Turn’. Ambiances  1: Special Issue.  
Déchery, Chloé and Martin Welton , eds (2021). ‘Staging Atmospheres: Theatre and the
Atmospheric Turn’. Ambiances  2: Special Issue.  
Gay'Wu Group of Women (2019). Songspirals: Sharing Women's Wisdom of Country through
Songlines. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
Haraway, Donna (1991). Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York:
Routledge. 
Hodge, Gabrielle (2020). ‘The Ideology of Communication Practices Embedded in an Australian
Deaf/Hearing Dance Collaboration’. In Annelies Kusters , Mara Green , Erin Moriarty and Kristin
Snoddon , eds, Sign Language Ideologies in Practice. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, pp. 59–82. 
Ingwersen, Moritz (2017). ‘ Cybernethics : Thinking Bodies and Boundaries through Science’. In 
Anne Waldschmidt , Hanjo Berressem and Moritz Ingwersen , eds, Culture – Theory –
Disability: Encounters between Disability Studies and Cultural Studies. Bielefeld, Germany:
Transcript, pp. 160–169. 
Kelly, Matthew W. , Doris K. Wu , Arthur N. Popper and Richard R. Fay , eds (2005).
Development of the Inner Ear. New York: Springer. 
Kruszelnicki, Karl (2006). ‘Mouse with Human Ear’. ABC Science,  Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation, 2 June. www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2006/06/02/1644154.htm, accessed 5
July 2023. 
Kwaymullina, Ambelin (2018). ‘You Are on Indigenous Land: Ecofeminism, Indigenous Peoples
and Land Justice’. In Lara Stevens , Peta Tait and Denise Varney , eds, Feminist Ecologies:
Changing Environments in the Anthropocene. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 193–208. 
Langton, Marcia (1995). ‘The European Construction of Wilderness’. Wilderness News , 
Summer 1995–1996: 16–17. 
Lavery, Carl , ed (2019). Performance and Ecology: What Can Theatre Do? London: Routledge. 
Liboiron, Max (2021). Pollution Is Colonialism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Lowenfels, Jeff (2017). Teaming with Fungi. Portland, OR: Timber Press. 
Luo, Yangchao , Gang Chen , Bo Li , et al. (2009). ‘Evaluation of Antioxidative and
Hypolipidemic Properties of a Novel Functional Diet Formulation of Auricularia auricula  and 
Hawthorn’. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies. 10(2): 215–221. 
Mapoung, Sariya , Sonthaya Umsumarng , Warathit Semmarath et al. (2021). ‘Skin Wound-
Healing Potential of Polysaccharides from Medicinal Mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae 
(Bull)’. Journal of Fungi. 7: 247. 
Missingham, Racheal (2021). ‘Australia's Deaf Theatre: Past, Present and Future’. Master of
Philosophy Thesis, Queensland University of Technology. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2000). Talkin’ up to the White Woman: Aboriginal Women and
Feminism. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2013). ‘Towards an Australian Indigenous Women's Standpoint
Theory: A Methodological Tool’. Australian Feminist Studies. 28(78): 331–347. 
Neale, Margaret (2022). ‘First Knowledges: An Introduction’. In Zena Cumpston , Michael-
Shawn Fletcher and Lesley Head , eds, Plants: Past, Present and Future. Melbourne: Thames
and Hudson, pp. 1–4. 
Oli, Angus Nnamdi , Peter Anyigor Edeh , Reham M. Al-Mosawi et al. (2020). ‘Evaluation of the
Phytoconstituents of Auricularia auricula-judae  Mushroom and Antimicrobial Activity of Its 
Protein Extract’. European Journal of Integrative Medicine. 38: 101176. 
Paterson, Eddie (2019). ‘Compost and Air-Conditioning: Beyond Biospherical Performance and
towards the Shimmer’. Performance Research. 24(8): 31–36. 
Ross, Annabel (2016). ‘Deaf Can Dance: The Delta Project Combines Hearing and Non-
Hearing Dancers in Under My Skin’. Sydney Morning Herald , 29 April. 
www.smh.com.au/entertainment/dance/deaf-can-dance-the-delta-project-combines-hearing-
and-nonhearing-dancers-in-under-my-skin-20160429-goinls.html, accessed 1 November 2023. 
Serres, Michel (2016). The Five Senses: A Philosophy of Mingled Bodies. London: Bloomsbury. 
Shildrick, Margrit (2017). ‘Border Crossings: The Technologies of Disability and Desire’. In Anne
Waldschmidt , Hanjo Berressem and Moritz Ingwersen , eds, Culture – Theory – Disability:
Encounters between Disability Studies and Cultural Studies. Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript, pp.
137–151. 
Stelarc (2005). ‘From Zombie to Cyborg Bodies – Extra Ear, Exoskeleton and Avatars’. NeMe . 
www.neme.org/texts/from-zombie-to-cyborg, accessed 22 November 2023. 
Stelarc (2019). ‘Extra Ear: Alternate Anatomical Architectures’. stelarc.org/_php, accessed 11
December 2023. 
Stelarc (2023a). ‘Ear on Arm’. http://stelarc.org/_activity-20242.php, accessed 11 December
2023. 
Stelarc (2023b). ‘Extra Ear’. stelarc.org/_activity-20229.php, accessed 11 December 2023. 
Stevens, Lara (2019a). ‘Anthroposcenic Performance and the Need for “Deep Dramaturgy”’.
Performance Research. 24(8): 89–97.
Sundar, Pratap , Chandan Chowdhury and Sagar Kamarthi (2021). ‘Evaluation of Human Ear
Anatomy and Functionality by Axiomatic Design’. Biomimetics. 6(2): 31. 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. 
Under My Skin (2016). Performance Work, The Delta Project. 
Watson, Irene (2014). ‘Re-Centring First Nations Knowledge and Places in a Terra Nullius
Space’. AlterNative: An International Journal of Indigenous Peoples. 10(5): 508–520. 
Welton, Martin (2012). Feeling Theatre. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Zhang, Rui Ying , Dan Dan Hu , Jin Gang Gu et al. (2012). ‘Development of SSR Markers for
Typing Cultivars in the Mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae  ’. Mycological Progress 11: 
587–592. 
Zuboff, Shoshana (2019). The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. London: Profile Books. 
Zylinska, Joanna , ed (2002). The Cyborg Experiments: The Extensions of the Body in the
Media Age. London: Continuum. 
 
Ants 
Beckett, Samuel (1990). The Complete Dramatic Works. London: Faber & Faber. 
Biosphere (2022). Film, Dir. Mel Eslyn. Duplass Brothers Productions, United States. 
Churchill, Caryl (2016). Escaped Alone. London: Nick Hern Books. 
High Life (2018). Film, dir. Claire Denis. Andrew Lauren Productions/Pandora
Filmproduktion/Alcatraz Films/The Apocalypse Films Company/Madants, France. 
Interstellar (2014). Film, dir. Christopher Nolan. Paramount Pictures/Warner Bros.
Pictures/Legendary Pictures/Syncopy/Lynda Obst Productions, United States. 
Latour, Bruno (2018). Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime, trans. Catherine
Porter . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
The Martian (2015). Film, dir. Ridley Scott. Scott Free Productions/Kinberg Genre/TSG
Entertainment, United Kingdom. 
Montgomery, David R (2008). Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations. Berkeley: University of
California Press. 
Pascoe, Bruce (2014). Dark Emu, Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident? Broome, WA:
Magabala Books. 
Passengers (2016). Film, dir. Morten Tyldum. Columbia Pictures/LStar Capital/Village
Roadshow Pictures/Wanda Pictures/Original Film/Company Films/Start Motion Pictures, United
States. 
Phillips, Perdita (2001). Termitaria . Artwork.  
Phillips, Perdita (2015). Termite Embassy . Artwork.  
Reid, Robert (2019). ‘The Detritus of Now: Escaped Alone’. Review for Witness Performance , 6 
June. www.witnessperformance.com/the-detritus-of-now-escaped-alone, accessed 21
November 2019. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (2017). ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
51–63. 
Silent Running (1972). Film, dir. Douglas Trumbull. Trumbull/Gruskoff Productions, United
States. 
Sunshine (2007). Film, dir. Danny Boyle. Moving Picture Company/DNA Films/UK Film
Council/Ingenious Film Partners, United Kingdom. 
Tait, Peta (2019). ‘Striving, Falling, Performing: Phenomenologies of Mood and Apocalypse’. In
Peter Eckersall and Helena Grehan , eds, The Routledge Companion to Theatre and Politics.
London: Routledge, pp. 284–287. 
Tubiana, Laurence , Bruno Latour and Frédérique Aït Touati (2015). Climate – Make It Work.
Performance Event .  
Wadrill, Violet , Topsy Dodd Ngarnjal , Leah Leaman et al. (2023). Tamarra: A Story of Termites
on Gurindji Country. Melbourne: Hardie Grant.
Mermaid 
Andersen, Hans Christian (2017). Hans Christian Andersen's Fairytales, ed. J.H. Stickney .
Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group. 
Barry, Colleen (2023). ‘Venice and Its Lagoon Again Escape Inclusion on UNESCO List of
Heritage Sites in Danger’. AP News , 15 September. www.apnews.com/article/venice-unesco- 
world-heritage-downgrade-threat-45a7e0d51069c9f06e79b69bd8bd1ed3, accessed 10
November 2023. 
Carrington, Damian (2020). ‘Stop Blowing Up Bombs on Sea Floor, Say Whale Campaigners’.
The Guardian , 3 November. www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/nov/03/stop-blowing-up- 
bombs-on-sea-floor-say-whale-campaigners, accessed 10 November 2023. 
Cormick, Hanna (2020). The Mermaid . Performance work, Sydney Festival, 17–19 January.  
Cormick, Hanna (2021). Interviewed by Lara Stevens and Denise Varney, 26 February, Zoom. 
Cramer, Maria (2021). ‘Leaky Gas Pipeline Sparks an Inferno in the Gulf of Mexico’. The New 
York Times , 3 July. www.nytimes.com/2021/07/03/world/americas/eye-fire-gulf-mexico.html, 
accessed 10 November 2023. 
Davis, Tracy C (2019). ‘How Do You Know a Mermaid When You See One? How Do You See a
Mermaid When You Know One?’. Theatre Journal. 71(3): 257–288. 
Extinction Rebellion (2021). ‘Nowhere Is Safe.’ Global Newsletter (53), 16 July.
rebellion.global/blog/2021/07/16/global-newsletter-53/, accessed 14 December 2023. 
Neimanis, Astrida (2016). Bodies of Water: Posthuman Feminist Phenomenology. London:
Bloomsbury. 
Paterson, Eddie (2019). ‘Compost and Air-Conditioning: Beyond Biospherical Performance and
towards the Shimmer’. Performance Research. 24(8): 31–36. 
Ponyo (2008). Film, dir. Hayao Miyazaki. Studio Ghibli, Japan. 
Readfearn, Graham (2021). ‘World Heritage Committee Agrees Not to Place Great Barrier Reef
on “in Danger” List’. The Guardian , 24 July. 
www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/jul/23/world-heritage-committee-agrees-not-to-place-
great-barrier-reef-on-in-danger-list, accessed 4 October 2023. 
Splash (1984). Film, dir. Ron Howard. Touchstone Films, USA. 
Stevens, Lara and Denise Varney (2022). ‘The Climate Siren: Hanna Cormick's The Mermaid  ’. 
TDR: The Drama Review. 66(3): 107–118. 
Strandvad, Sara Malou , Tracy C Davis and Megan Dunn (2021a). ‘Mermaids as Market
Creators: Cultural Entrepreneurship in an Emerging Practice’. International Journal of Cultural
Studies. 25(1): 68–85. 
Strandvad, Sara Malou , Tracy C Davis and Megan Dunn (2021b). ‘Skills and Strategies of
Activist Mermaids: From Pretty to Powerful Pictures’. Text and Performance Quarterly. 41(3–4):
262–282. 
The Little Mermaid (1989). Film, dir. John Musker and Ron Clements. Walt Disney Pictures,
USA. 
Wahlquist, Calla (2020). ‘Australia's Summer Bushfire Smoke Killed 445 and Put Thousands in
Hospital, Inquiry Hears’. The Guardian , 25 May. www.theguardian.com/australia- 
news/2020/may/26/australias-summer-bushfire-smoke-killed-445-and-put-thousands-in-
hospital-inquiry-hears, accessed 14 September 2023. 
Wright, Alexis (2023). ‘The Black Summer Bushfires Killed 3 Billion Animals. They Are Our
Relatives; They Deserve to Be Mourned’. The Guardian , 1 April. 
www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/apr/01/alexis-wright-black-summer-bushfires-vigil-
sydney-speech-3-billion-animals-killed-are-our-relatives-they-deserve-to-be-mourned, accessed
12 June 2023. 
WWF-Australia (2020). ‘Australia's 2019–2020 Bushfires: The Wildlife Toll’.
wwf.org.au/blogs/australias-2019-2020-bushfires-the-wildlife-toll/, accessed 27 January 2023. 
 
Granite 
Australian Museum (2021). ‘Thylacine’. www.australian.museum/learn/australia-over-
time/extinct-animals/the-thylacine/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Beckett, Samuel (1938). Murphy. London: Calder & Boyars. 
Bleach, Lucy (2015). ‘underground (2015)’. Work Description. www.lucybleach.com.au/lucy-
bleach/selected-works/underground/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Cervera, Felipe (2017). ‘The Planet as Method’. www.felipecervera.me/the-planet-as-method,
accessed 9 November 2023. 
Cut the Sky (2016). Performance Work, Marrugeku. 
Detail (2019). Installation Work by Kris Verdonck.
www.atwodogscompany.org/en/projects/detail/ 
Eckersall, Peter (2020). ‘The Poor Old Sun: A Note on Kris Verdonck's DETAIL’. In Peter
Eckersall and Kristof van Baarle , eds, Machine Made Silence: The Art of Kris Verdonck.
Aberystwyth: Performance Research Books, pp. 89–91. 
Explore Beechworth (2017). ‘Yeddonba Aboriginal Cultural Site’.
www.explorebeechworth.com.au/yeddonba, accessed 5 December 2023. 
First Peoples State Relations (2021). ‘Fact Sheet: Aboriginal Stone Arrangements’.
www.firstpeoplesrelations.vic.gov.au/fact-sheet-aboriginal-stone-arrangements, accessed 9
November 2023. 
Gay'wu Group of Women (2019). Songspirals: Sharing Women's Wisdom of Country through
Songlines. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
Grehan, Helena (2018). ‘First Nations Politics in a Climate of Refusal’. Performance Research:
On Climates. 23(3): 7–12. 
Hadingham, Evan (1975). Circles and Standing Stones: An Illustrated Exploration of Megalith
Mysteries of Early Britain. New York: Walker. 
Hiebert, Ted (2023). ‘Trust Fall: Rubbing Rocks and the Irreconcilability of Objects’.
Performance Research. 27(2): 16–24. 
Jones, Andrew Merion (2012). ‘Living Rocks: Animacy, Performance and the Rock Art of the
Kilmartin Region, Scotland’. In Andrew Cochrane and Andrew Merion Jones , eds, Visualising
the Neolithic. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 79–88. 
Latour, Bruno (2018). Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime, trans. Catherine
Porter . Medford, MA: Polity. 
McGrath, Ann and Laura Rademaker (2023). ‘The Languages and Temporalities of
“Everywhen” in Deep History’. In Ann McGrath , Laura Rademaker and Jakelin Troy , eds,
Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History. Sydney: UNSW Press, pp. 1–36. 
National Indigenous Australians Agency (2023). ‘Referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice’. www.niaa.gov.au/indigenous-affairs/referendum-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-
islander-voice, accessed 9 November 2023. 
National Park Service (2015). ‘Granite and Granodiorite FAQ’.
www.nps.gov/goga/learn/education/granite-and-granodiorite-faq.htm, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Resources Victoria (2023). ‘Victoria's Geology’. www.resources.vic.gov.au/geology-
exploration/victorias-geology, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Sacrifice: Contemplating Time and Trust (2022). Performance Work by Robert Walton, Aleks
Michalewics. Airlie Chapman, Goran Duric, Justin Green, Elena Vella, Daniel Williams and
Thomas Keep. Science Gallery Melbourne, University of Melbourne. 
Schneider, Rebecca (2016). ‘Extending a Hand’. Keynote Address to Performance Climate, the
22nd Performance Studies International Conference. University of Melbourne. 
Schneider, Rebecca and Paul Rae (2018). ‘Extending a Hand/Leading an Ear’. Performance
Research. 23(3): 13–24. 
Terrain (2012). Performance Work, Bangarra Dance Theatre. 
Uluru Statement (2023). ‘Uluru Statement from the Heart’. www.ulurustatement.org/the-
statement/view-the-statement/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
van Vegten, Megan (2022). ‘Standing Stones and Swarm Robotics… Artist Dr Robert Walton
Explores the Mysteries of Old and New Technology’. Ingenium , Faculty of Engineering and 
Information Technology, University of Melbourne, 30 September.
https://eng.unimelb.edu.au/ingenium/standing-stones-and-swarm-robotics-artist-dr-robert-
walton-explores-the-mysteries-of-old-and-new-technology, accessed 9 October 2024. 
Varney, Denise , Peta Tait and Lara Stevens (2021–2024). Towards an Australian Ecological
Theatre. Research Project, University of Melbourne. 
Verdonck, Kris and Kristof van Baarle (2022). ‘Between Machine and Prey’. Artist Talk
Delivered at CLIMARTE Gallery, Richmond, Victoria, 26 May. 
Wudjang: Not the Past (2022). Performance Work, Bangarra Dance Theatre. 
Young, Davis (2003). Mind Over Magma: The Story of Igneous Petrology. Princeton: Princeton
University Press. 
 
Spider 
Cardoso, Maria Fernanda (2018a). ‘On the Origins of Art I–II, 2016’. Work Description,
Museum of Contemporary Art.  www.mca.com.au/artists-works/works/2018.13/, accessed 3 
November 2023. 
Cardoso, Maria Fernanda (2018b). ‘On the Origins of Art – Actual Size II Maratus Splendens,
2016’. Work Description, Museum of Contemporary Art . www.mca.com.au/artists- 
works/works/2018.15/, accessed 3 November 2023. 
Chaudhuri, Una (2017). The Stage Lives of Animals: Zooesis and Performance. New York and
London: Routledge. 
Clark, Jane and Luke Hortle (2022). ‘Spider and Stars’. Content available on the Museum of Old
and New Art visitor app. 
Devlin, Hannah (2018). ‘Scientists Discover Spider Species That Feeds Its Young Milk’. The 
Guardian , 30 November. www.theguardian.com/world/2018/nov/29/scientists-discover-spider- 
species-that-feeds-its-young-milk, accessed 3 November 2023. 
Engelmann, Sasha (2016). ‘Social Spiders and Hybrid Webs at Studio Tomás Saraceno’.
Cultural Geographies. 24(1): 161–169. 
Girard, Madeline B , Michael M Kasumovic and Damian O Elias (2011). ‘Multi-Modal Courtship
in the Peacock Spider, Maratus volans  (O.P.-Cambridge, 1874)’. PLoS One. 6(9): e25390.  
Goodall, Jane (2013). ‘Natural Aesthetics: Formations of Gender in the Work of Maria Fernanda
Cardoso’. Artlink. 33(3): 52–55. 
Haraway, Donna J. (2003). The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
Otherness, vol. 1. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. 
Ibsen, Henrik (2012). A Doll's House, trans. Simon Stephens . London: Methuen Drama. 
Iscoe, Adam (2022). ‘Arachnophile’. The New Yorker. 98(6): 22–23. 
O'Hanlon, James (2023). Silk & Venom: The Incredible Lives of Spiders. Sydney: NewSouth
Publishing. 
Rose, Deborah Bird . 2017, ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
G51–G63. 
Saraceno, Tomás (2009). Galaxies Forming along Filaments Like Droplets on a Spider's Web. 
Installation Work. 
Saraceno, Tomás (2010). 14 Billions . Installation Work.  
Saraceno, Tomás (2022). Webs of At-tent(s)ion . Installation Work.  
Stengers, Isabelle (2010). Cosmopolitics, vol. 1, trans. Robert Bononno . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. 
Stevens, Lara (2019a). ‘Anthroposcenic Performance and the Need for “Deep Dramaturgy”’.
Performance Research. 24(8): 89–97. 
Stevens, Lara (2019b). Not Now, Not Ever.  Performance Work.  
 
Mycorrhizae 
Australian National Herbarium (2013). ‘Australian Fungi’.
www.anbg.gov.au/fungi/mycorrhiza.html, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Björk (2011). Biophilia.  Recorded Work, App, Exhibition and Documentary Project.  
Björk (2017). Utopia.  Recorded Work. One Little Independent Records, United Kingdom.  
Björk (2019). Cornucopia . Theatrical Concert.  
Björk (2022). Fossora . Recorded Work. One Little Independent Records, United Kingdom.  
Björkman, E (1970). ‘Forest Tree Mycorrhiza: The Conditions for Its Formation and the
Significance for Tree Growth and Afforestation’. Plant Soil. 32: 589–610. 
Chevalier, Clarissa (2021). ‘Eco-Phenomenology and the Maintenance of Eco Art: Agnes
Denes's A Forest for Australia  ’. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Art. 21(2): 273–290.  
Dastogeer, KMG et al. (2020). ‘Plant Salinity Tolerance Conferred by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal
Fungi and Associated Mechanisms: A Meta-Analysis’. Frontiers in Plant Science. 11: 588550. 
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (2013). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia,
trans. Brian Massumi . London: Bloomsbury. 
Denes, Agnes (1996–ongoing). Tree Mountain . Artwork, Ylojarvi, Finland.  
Denes, Agnes (1998–ongoing). A Forest for Australia . Artwork, Altona, Australia.  
Denes, Agnes (2023). Personal Website. www.agnesdenesstudio.com, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Etchells, Tim (2011). ‘‘‘Tomorrow's Parties” Programme Note’. Forced Entertainment . 
www.forcedentertainment.com/tomorrows-parties-programme-note-by-tim-etchells/, accessed
15 December 2023. 
Fantastic Fungi (2019). Documentary Film, dir. Louie Schwartzberg. Moving Art, United States. 
Forced Entertainment (2011). Tomorrow's Parties.  Performance Work.  
Frew, Adam et al. (2023). ‘Hidden Carbon: Fungi and Their ‘Necromass’ Absorb One-Third of
the Carbon Emitted by Burning Fossil Fuels Every Year’. The Conversation , 6 June. 
www.theconversation.com/hidden-carbon-fungi-and-their-necromass-absorb-one-third-of-the-
carbon-emitted-by-burning-fossil-fuels-every-year-206674, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Greening the West (2023). ‘A Forest for Australia – Altona Treatment Plant’.
www.greeningthewest.org.au/projects/forest-australia-altona-treatment-plant/, accessed 9
November 2023. 
Klinsukon, C , S Lumyong , TW Kuyper et al. (2021). ‘Colonization by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal
Fungi Improves Salinity Tolerance of Eucalyptus ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) seedlings’. 
Scientific Reports. 11: 4362. 
Law, Benjamin (2023). ‘Björk Cornucopia Review – an Electrifying Pop Concert, Art Installation
and Opening Ceremony Rolled into One’. The Guardian , 4 March. 
www.theguardian.com/music/2023/mar/04/bjork-cornucopia-review-an-electrifying-pop-concert-
art-installation-and-opening-ceremony-rolled-into-one, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Pownall, Augusta (2019). ‘Designers of Björk's Cornucopia Show “Ignored the Concert Rule
Book”’. De Zeen , 13 December. www.dezeen.com/2019/12/13/bjork-cornucopia-chiara- 
stephenson-set-design/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Rinaldi, AC , O Comandini and TW Kuyper (2008). ‘Ectomycorrhizal Fungal Diversity:
Separating the Wheat from the Chaff’. Fungal Diversity. 33: 1–45. 
Sheldrake, Merlin (2020). Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds and
Shape Our Futures. New York: Random House. 
Suz, LM , S Kallow , K Reed et al. (2017). ‘Pine Mycorrhizal Communities in Pure and Mixed
Pine-Oak Forests: Abiotic Environment Trumps Neighboring Oak Host Effects’. Forest Ecology
and Management. 406: 370–380. 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of
Life in Capitalist Ruins. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Waddoups, Ryan (2022). ‘Björk's New Album Is an Ode to Mushrooms’. Surface Magazine , 3 
October. www.surfacemag.com/articles/bjork-fossora-album-cover/, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Watson, A (2022). ‘Contemporary Catastrophes: 2010s British Climate Crisis Theatre and
Performativity’. Contemporary Theatre Review. 32(2): 140–161. 
Ważny, R (2014). ‘Ectomycorrhizal Communities Associated with Silver Fir Seedlings ( Abies 
alba Mill.) Differ Largely in Mature Silver Fir Stands and in Scots Pine Forecrops’. Annals of
Forest Science. 71: 801–810. 
 
Lego 
Advisors, Dalberg , Wijnand de Wit and Nathan Bigaud (2019). No Plastic in Nature: Assessing
Plastic Ingestion from Nature to People. Gland, Switzerland: World Wildlife Fund for Nature. 
Alaimo, Stacy (2010). Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material Self.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Bartholomew, Jeff (2023). ‘Lego Abandons Effort to Make Bricks from Recycled Plastic Bottles’.
The Guardian , 25 September. www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2023/sep/24/lego-abandons- 
effort-to-make-bricks-from-recycled-plastic-bottles, accessed 8 December 2023. 
Buranyi, Stephen (2023). ‘“We Are Just Getting Started”: The Plastic-Eating Bacteria That
Could Change the World’. The Guardian , 28 September. 
www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/sep/28/plastic-eating-bacteria-enzyme-recycling-
waste, accessed 8 December 2023. 
Chang, Chia-ju (2016). ‘Wasted Humans and Garbage Animals: Deadly Transcorporeality and
Documentary Activism’. In Rayson K Alex and S Susan Deborah , eds, Ecodocumentaries:
Critical Essays. London: Palgrave, pp. 95–114. 
Chiang, C , S Mahalingam and JA Flaws (2017). ‘Environmental Contaminants Affecting Fertility
and Somatic Health’. Seminars in Reproductive Medicine. 35(3): 241–249. 
Davis, Heather (2022). Plastic Matter. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
De Vietri, Gabrielle (2019). Maps of Gratitude, Cones of Silence and Lumps of Coal.  Interactive 
Work. www.gabrielledevietri.net/maps-of-gratitude 
Diamanti, Jeff (2023). Climate and Capital in the Age of Petroleum: Locating Terminal
Landscapes. London: Bloomsbury. 
Finnigan, David (2019). Kill Climate Deniers. London: Oberon Books. 
Finnigan, David (2023). ‘Falling in Love with Microplastic’. Personal Website, 7 May.
davidfinnigan.substack.com/p/falling-in-love-with-microplastic, accessed 7 November 2023. 
Gulantang! A Children's Musical (2011). Performance Work. Cope/with/Land Theatre Company. 
Hoover, Elizabeth (2017). The River Is in Us: Fighting Toxics in a Mohawk Community.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Ingegnoli, Vittorio , Lombardo Francesco and Torre Giuseppe La , eds ( 2022). Environmental
Alteration Leads to Human Disease: A Planetary Health Approach. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer. 
Lego Breakfast (2020). Video by tomosteen, 17 July.
www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RMKR8h03iw, accessed 16 October 2023. 
Lego Group (2024). ‘How Are LEGO Toys Made?’. Webpage accessed 12 February 2024.
https://www.lego.com/ms-my/service/help/fun-for-fans/behind-the-scenes/brick-facts/how-are-
lego-toys-made-blt0cb8fe682c26474e?locale=ms-my 
Liang, F , X Huo , W Wang et al. (2020). ‘Association of Bisphenol A or Bisphenol S Exposure
with Oxidative Stress and Immune Disturbance among Unexplained Recurrent Spontaneous
Abortion Women’. Chemosphere. 257: 127035. 
Liboiron, Max (2021). Pollution Is Colonialism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Maiquez, Reagan , Dennis Gupa and Kulay Labitigan (2018). ‘Between Theatre and the
Environment: The Experience of Cope/With/Land Theatre Co’. Global Performance Studies.
1(2). 
Milanović, M , N Milošević , N Milić et al. (2023). ‘Food Contaminants and Potential Risk of
Diabetes Development: A Narrative Review’. World Journal of Diabetes. 14(6): 705–723. 
Murphy, Michelle (2018). ‘Against Population, towards Alterlife’. In Adele E Clarke and Donna
Haraway , eds, Making Kin Not Population. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, pp. 101–124. 
Niman, Michael I (2003). ‘Kodak's Toxic Moments’. Alternet , May 28. 
www.alternet.org/2003/05/kodaks_toxic_moments, accessed 6 October 2023. 
Oh! My Gulay! (2010). Performance Work. Cope/with/Land Theatre Company. 
Plumwood, Val (2002). Environmental Culture: The Ecological Crisis of Reason. London:
Routledge.
Rancière, F , J Botton , R Slama et al. (2019). ‘Exposure to Bisphenol A and Bisphenol S and
Incident Type 2 Diabetes: A Case-Cohort Study in the French Cohort D.E.S.I.R.’. Environmental
Health Perspectives. 127(10): 107013. 
Stukenborg, JB , RT Mitchell and O Söder (2021). ‘Endocrine Disruptors and the Male
Reproductive System’. Best Practice & Research: Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 35(5):
101567. 
 
Ice 
Body of Art (2013). Short film, dir. Iona Reto. vimeo.com/60363446, accessed 1 June 2022. 
Duets on Ice (1974). Performance Work by Laurie Anderson. 
Eckersall, Peter and Eddie Paterson (2011). ‘Slow Dramaturgy: Renegotiating Politics and
Staging the Everyday’. Australasian Drama Studies. 58: 178–192. 
Efi, Tui Ātua Tupua Tamasese Tupuola Tufuga (2019). ‘Prelude: Climate Change and the
Perspective of the Fish’. In Tony Crook and Peter Rudiak , eds, Pacific Climate Cultures: Living
Climate Change in Oceania, Warsaw: De Gruyter, pp. ix–xiii. 
Hau'ofa, Epeli (1994). ‘Our Sea of Islands’. The Contemporary Pacific. 6(1): 147–162. 
Ice Watch (2014). Performance Work by Olafur Eliasson and Minik Rosing. 
i-Land X-isle (2012). Performance Work by Latai Taumoepeau. 
Jestrovic, Silvija (2004). ‘From the Ice Cube Stage to Simulated Reality: Place and
Displacement in Laurie Anderson's Performances’. Contemporary Theatre Review. 14(1):
25–37. 
Lavery, Carl (2019). ‘How Does Theatre Think through Ecology?’ In Maaike Bleeker , Adrian
Kear , Joe Kelleher and Heike Roms , eds, Thinking through Theatre and Performance. London:
Methuen. 
Leane, Elizabeth (2022). ‘Ice Islands of the Anthropocene: The Cultural Meaning of Antarctic
Bergs’. In Russell McDougall , John C. Ryan and Pauline Reynolds , eds, Postcolonial
Literatures of Climate Change. Leiden: Brill, 361–382. 
Leane, Elizabeth , Carolyn Philpott and Matt Delbridge (2020). ‘Performing Ice: Histories,
Theories, Contexts’. In Carolyn Philpott , Elizabeth Leane and Matt Delbridge , eds, Performing
Ice. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 1–26. 
Mangioni, Talei Luscia (2021). ‘Confronting Australian Apathy: Latai Taumoepeau and the
Politics of Performance in Pacific Climate Stewardship’. The Contemporary Pacific. 33(1):
32–62. 
McDougall, Russell , Ryan John C. and Reynolds Pauline , eds ( 2022). Postcolonial Literatures
of Climate Change. Leiden: Brill. 
Nixon, Rob (2011). Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 
Ocean Island Mine (2015). Performance Work by Latai Taumoepeau. 
Oliveri, Vicki Antonia , Glenn Porter , Chris Davies and Pamela James (2022). ‘The Juukan
Gorge Destruction: A Case Study in Stakeholder-Driven and Shared Values Approach to
Cultural Heritage Protection’. Journal of Cultural Heritage Management and Sustainable
Development. https://doi.org/10.1108/JCHMSD-12-2021-0208 
Philpott, Carolyn , Elizabeth Leane and Matt Delbridge , eds ( 2020). Performing Ice. Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave. 
Remaud, Olivier (2022). Thinking Like an Iceberg, trans. Stephen Muecke . Cambridge: Polity
Press. 
Shlomowitz, Ralph and Doug Munro (1990). The Ocean Island (Banaba) and Nauru Labour
Trade: 1900–1940. Bedford Park: Flinders University of Australia. 
Stevens, Lara (2022). ‘Sink or Swim: Performing the Iniquities of the Climate Crisis’. Critical
Stages/Scènes Critiques. (26). www.critical-stages.org/26/sink-or-swim-performing-the-
iniquities-of-the-climate-crisis. 
Teaiwa, Teresia K (1994). ‘bikinis and Other s/pacific n/oceans’. The Contemporary Pacific.
6(1): 87–109. 
Teaiwa, Katerina Martina (2015). Consuming Ocean Island: Stories of People and Phosphate
from Banaba. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. 
Teaiwa, Katerina Martina (2021). ‘Katerina Teaiwa’. VCA Art Forum.  8 October. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fFJQC1W-qDI, accessed 12 December 2023. 
Viney, Steven and Edwina Seselja (2022). ‘Postcards from the Frontlines of Climate Change’.
ABC News , 11 May. www.abc.net.au/news/2022-05-11/climate-change-effects-facts-causes- 
pacific-postcards/100999144, accessed 12 October 2023. 
Yalcinkaya, Gunseli (2018). ‘Olafur Eliasson Installs Giant Blocks of Glacial Ice across London’.
Dezeen , 12 December. www.dezeen.com/2018/12/12/ice-watch-olafur-eliasson-installation, 
accessed 12 October 2023. 
 
Worms 
Blakemore, Rob (2019). ‘Australian Earthworms: Factsheet’. Australian Museum, 25 February.
www.australian.museum/learn/animals/worms/australian-earthworms, accessed 11 December
2023. 
Curry, James P and Olaf Schmidt (2007). ‘The Feeding Ecology of Earthworms: A review’.
Pedobiologia. 50(2007): 463–477. 
Darwin, Charles (1881). The Formation of Vegetable Mould, Through the Action of Worms, With
Observations on Their Habits. London: John Murray. 
Furlong, Claire , Nalika S Rahapaksha , Kevin R Butt and Walter T Gibson (2017). ‘Is
Composting Worm Availability the Main Barrier to Large-Scale Adoption of Worm-Based
Organic Waste Processing Technologies?’. Journal of Cleaner Production. 164: 1026–1033. 
It's Still Life: Listening to Compost (2019). Art installation, Out-of-Sync. 
Laird, Tessa (2018). ‘In the Beginning There Was the Worm: Animal Voice Beyond the verbal’.
Artlink. 38(1): 58–65. 
Lorenzutti, Gregory (2022a). ‘Director's Note’. Credits for Theatrum Botanicum . https://finearts- 
music.unimelb.edu.au/showcase/theatrum-botanicum/theatrum-botanicum-credits, accessed 2
October 2023. 
Lorenzutti, Gregory (2022b). ‘Microorganism and Macro-movement: Soil & Food Cultivation for
a Dance Ecology’. Presentation for Performance Studies international conference #27.
www.gregorylorenzutti.com/germinations/blog-post-title-one-86mrb-z4fwc-s6xfb-shh75-5yk6n-
3x9ya-4s26l-x8sr9-p85zt-2k55t-kc2r5-gzw9w, accessed 4 September 2023. 
Montgomery, David R (2012). Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations. 2nd edn. Berkeley: University of
California Press. 
Myers, Natasha (2017). ‘Photosynthetic Mattering: Rooting into the Planthroposcene’. In Line
Marie Thorsen , ed., Moving Plants. Næstved, Denmark: Rønnebæksholm, pp. 123–130. 
Neumark, Norie (2022). ‘Squish, Squelch, shlshlshlurpppp’. In Sharon Jane Mee and Luke
Robinson , eds, Sound Affects: A User's Guide. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 224–236. 
Paterson, Eddie (2010). ‘Paperless and Penless: Headphone performance, audioscripting and
new approaches to writing for performance’. In Catherine Cole , Marcelle Freiman and Donna
Lee Brien , eds, Strange Bedfellows: Refereed Conference Papers of the 15th Annual
Australasian Association of Writing Programs Conference, pp. 1–9.
www.aawp.org.au/publications/the-strange-bedfellows-or-perfect-partners-papers 
Paterson, Eddie (2015). The Contemporary American Monologue: Performance and Politics.
London and New York: Bloomsbury. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria (2015). ‘Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the
Pace of Care’. Social Studies of Science. 45(5): 691–716. 
Stengers, Isabelle (2010). Cosmopolitics 1. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Theatrum Botanicum (2022). Performance work by Gregory Lorenzutti. 
Varney, Denise and Lara Stevens (2023). ‘Australian Coal Theatrics’. TDR: The Drama Review.
67(1): 57–61. 
Waiting (2017). Art installation, Out-of-Sync. 
Wright, Alexis (2023). ‘The black summer bushfires killed 3 billion animals. They are our
relatives; they deserve to be mourned’. The Guardian , 1 April. www.theguardian.com/australia- 
news/2023/apr/01/alexis-wright-black-summer-bushfires-vigil-sydney-speech-3-billion-animals-
killed-are-our-relatives-they-deserve-to-be-mourned, accessed 12 June 2023. 
 
Unicorn 
Bramley, Ellie Violet (2018). ‘Losing Its Sparkle: The Dark Side of glitter’. The Guardian , 22 
January. www.theguardian.com/fashion/2018/jan/21/losing-its-sparkle-the-dark-side-of-glitter,
accessed 28 November 2023. 
Carton, Wim (2020). ‘Carbon Unicorns and Fossil Futures: Whose Emission Reduction
Pathways Is the IPCC Performing?’ In J.P. Sapinski , Holly Jean Buck and Andreas Malm , eds,
Has It Come to This? The Pitfalls and Promises of Geoengineering on the Brink. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, pp. 34–49. 
Cheung, Helier (2020). ‘What Does Trump Actually Believe on Climate Change?’ BBC News , 23 
January. www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-51213003, accessed 19 October 2023. 
Churchill, Caryl (2000). Far Away. London: Nick Hern Books. 
Churchill, Caryl (2016). Escaped Alone. London: Nick Hern Books. 
Finley, Karen (2018). Grabbing Pussy. New York: OR Books. 
Houlton, Sarah (2013). ‘Unicorns don't exist’. Chemistry & Industry. 77(8): 23. 
Klein, Naomi (2007). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. London: Allen Lane. 
Lavers, Chris (2009). The Natural History of Unicorns. New York: William Morrow. 
Lee, Aileen (2013). ‘Welcome To The Unicorn Club: Learning From Billion-Dollar Startups’.
TechCrunch , 3 November. www.techcrunch.com/2013/11/02/welcome-to-the-unicorn-club/, 
accessed 19 October 2023. 
McKenzie, Jon (2001). Perform or Else: From Discipline to Performance. New York: Routledge. 
Nicholson, Simon (2020). ‘Solar Radiation Management’. Wilson Centre , 30 September. 
www.wilsoncenter.org/article/solar-radiation-management, accessed 12 December 2023. 
Robot Unicorn Attack (2010). Computer Game, Spiritonin Media Games. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (2017). ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
51–63. 
Stabinsky, Doreen , Dipti Bhatnagar and Sara Shaw (2021). Chasing Carbon Unicorns: The
Deception of Carbon Markets and “Net Zero”. Amsterdam: Friends of the Earth International. 
The Constant State of Desire (1986). Performance work by Karen Finley. 
Unicorn, Gratitude, Mystery (2016). Performance work by Karen Finley. 
 
Tree 
Australia, Monument (2023). ‘Separation Tree.’
monumentaustralia.org.au/themes/government/colonial/display/32484-separation-tree-/,
accessed 2 December 2023. 
Abdilla, Angie and Robert Fitch (2017). ‘Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Pattern Thinking:
An Expanded Analysis of the First Indigenous Robotics Prototype Workshop’. The Fibreculture
Journal 28(23): 1–14. www.fibreculturejournal.org, accessed 15 April 2024. 
Abdilla, Angela , Megan Kelleher , Rick Shaw and Tyson Yunkaporta (2021). Out of the Black
Box: Indigenous Protocols for AI. Melbourne: Deakin University. 
Beckett, Samuel (1965). Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts. 2nd edn. London:
Faber and Faber. 
Davis, Heather (2022). Plastic Matter. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Harle, Josh , Angie Abdilla and Andrew Newman , eds. (2019). Decolonising the Digital:
Technology as Cultural Practice. Sydney: Tactical Space Lab. 
Kohn, Eduardo (2013). How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond the Human.
Berkley: University of California Press.
Lavery, Carl (2018). ‘Ecology in Beckett's Theatre Garden: Or How to Cultivate the Oikos’.
Contemporary Theatre Review. 28(1): 10–26. 
Lavery, Carl and Clare Finburgh , eds. (2015). Rethinking the Theatre of the Absurd: Ecology,
the Environment and the Greening of the Modern Stage. London: Bloomsbury. 
Lewis, Jason Edward , ed (2020). Indigenous Protocol and Artificial Intelligence Position Paper . 
Honolulu, Hawaiʻi: The Initiative for Indigenous Futures and the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research (CIFAR). 
Martin, Brian (2021). Interview. In Tree Story: New Commissions , video produced for Monash 
University Museum of Art. vimeo.com/521229001, accessed 13 November 2023. 
Martin, Brian (2022). ‘Methexical Countryscape Kamilaroi #10 2017.’ Work description. Monash
University Museum of Art, February. www.monash.edu/muma/education/deadly-
learning/artists/brian-martin, accessed 14 December 2023. 
McTighe, Trish (2023). ‘Gestures of Helpless Compassion: Beckett's Eco-Poetics of Extinction’.
In Michiko Tsushima , Yoshiki Tajiri and Mariko Hori Tanaka , eds, Samuel Beckett and
Catastrophe. London: Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 193–213. 
Methexical Countryscape: Boon Wurrung #1 (2021). Artwork by Brian Martin. 
Methexical Countryscape: Kamilaroi #10 (2017). Artwork by Brian Martin. 
Michiko, Tsushima , Yoshiki Tajiri and Mariko Hori Tanaka , eds. (2023). Samuel Beckett and
Catastrophe. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Monash University Museum of Art (2021a). ‘The Tree School, Educational program (11-23
March 2021)’. https://www.monash.edu/muma/public-programs/previous/2022/tree-school,
accessed 9 October 2024. 
Monash University Museum of Art (2021b). The Boon Wurrung Tree.  Video. 
vimeo.com/521716010, accessed 13 November 2023. 
Munro, Kim (2022). ‘A new exhibition explores invisible data, from facial algorithms to satellite
tracking as a return to Country’. The Conversation , 22 February. theconversation.com/a-new- 
exhibition-explores-invisible-data-from-facial-algorithms-to-satellite-tracking-as-a-return-to-
country-176567, accessed 21 August 2023. 
Myers, Natasha (2017). ‘Photosynthetic Mattering: Rooting into the Planthroposcene’. In Line
Marie Thorsen , ed., Moving Plants. Næstved, Denmark: Rønnebæksholm, pp. 123–130. 
Ngapulara Ngarngarnyi Wirra (Our Family Tree) (2022). Artwork by Old Ways, New. 
Old Ways, New (2023). Work description. oldwaysnew.com/research-dev#spatial-awareness,
accessed 14 December 2023. 
The Australian Dream (2019). Documentary Film, Dir. Daniel Gordon. Australia: Good Thing
Productions/Lorton Entertainment/Passion Pictures. 
The Final Quarter (2019). Documentary Film, Dir. Ian Darling. Australia: Shark Island
Productions. 
Williams, David (2015). ‘Epilogue: ‘The Ruins of Time (I've Forgotten This Before)’. In Carl
Lavery and Clare Finburgh , eds, Rethinking the Theatre of the Absurd: Ecology, the
Environment and the Greening of the Modern Stage. London: Bloomsbury, pp. 241–250. 
 
References 
Abdilla, Angela , Megan Kelleher , Rick Shaw and Tyson Yunkaporta (2021). Out of the Black
Box: Indigenous Protocols for AI. Report, Deakin University. 
Abdilla, Angie and Robert Fitch (2017). ‘Indigenous Knowledge Systems and Pattern Thinking:
An Expanded Analysis of the First Indigenous Robotics Prototype Workshop’. The Fibreculture
Journal. 28, 23 Jan: 1–14. www.fibreculturejournal.org, accessed 15 April 2024. 
Abrahamsson, Christian and Sebastian Abrahamsson (2007). ‘Cultural Geographies in Practice:
In Conversation with the Body Conveniently Known as Stelarc’. Cultural Geographies. 14(2):
293–308. 
Advisors, Dalberg , Wijnand de Wit and Nathan Bigaud (2019). No Plastic in Nature: Assessing
Plastic Ingestion from Nature to People. Gland, Switzerland: World Wildlife Fund for Nature. 
Alaimo, Stacy (2010). Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material Self.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Alaimo, Stacy (2014). ‘Thinking as the Stuff of the World’. O-Zone: A Journal of Object-Oriented
Studies. 1(1): 13–21. 
Alaimo, Stacy (2016). Exposed: Environmental Politics and Pleasures in Posthuman Times.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Andersen, Hans Christian (2017). Hans Christian Andersen's Fairytales, ed. JH Stickney .
Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group. 
Australian Museum (2021). ‘Thylacine’. www.australian.museum/learn/australia-over-
time/extinct-animals/the-thylacine/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Australian National Herbarium (2013). ‘Australian Fungi’.
www.anbg.gov.au/fungi/mycorrhiza.html, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Barad, Karen (2007). Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Barry, Colleen (2023). ‘Venice and Its Lagoon Again Escape Inclusion on UNESCO List of
Heritage Sites in Danger’. AP News , 15 September. www.apnews.com/article/venice-unesco- 
world-heritage-downgrade-threat-45a7e0d51069c9f06e79b69bd8bd1ed3, accessed 10
November 2023. 
Bartholomew, Jeff (2023). ‘Lego Abandons Effort to Make Bricks from Recycled Plastic Bottles’.
The Guardian , 25 September. www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2023/sep/24/lego-abandons- 
effort-to-make-bricks-from-recycled-plastic-bottles, accessed 8 December 2023. 
Beckett, Samuel (1938). Murphy. London: Calder & Boyars. 
Beckett, Samuel (1965). Waiting for Godot: A Tragicomedy in Two Acts. 2nd edn. London:
Faber and Faber. 
Beckett, Samuel (1990). The Complete Dramatic Works. London: Faber & Faber. 
Bellew, Patrick and Meredith Davey (2012). Green House, Green Engineering: Environmental
Design at Gardens by the Bay. Novato, CA: Oro Editions. 
Bennett, Jane (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Biosphere (2022). Film, dir. Mel Eslyn. Duplass Brothers Productions, United States. 
Birch, Tony (2016). ‘Climate Change, Recognition and Social Place-Making’. In Eve Vincent and
Timothy Neale , eds, Unstable Relations: Indigenous People and Environmentalism in
Contemporary Australia. Crawley: UWAP Scholarly, pp. 356–383. 
Birch, Tony (2019a). ‘Walking and Being’. Meanjin Journal, Summer 2019.
https://meanjin.com.au/essays/walking-and-being/ 
Birch, Tony (2019b). HumanNature: Connection and Cooperation in a Time of Climate Change . 
Australian Museum HumanNature Podcast Series, 14 May 2019. 
Björk (2011). Biophilia.  Recorded Work, App, Exhibition and Documentary Project.  
Björk (2017). Utopia . Recorded Work. One Little Independent Records, United Kingdom.  
Björk (2019). Cornucopia . Theatrical Concert.  
Björk (2022). Fossora . Recorded Work. One Little Independent Records, United Kingdom.  
Björkman, E (1970). ‘Forest Tree Mycorrhiza: The Conditions for Its Formation and the
Significance for Tree Growth and Afforestation’. Plant Soil. 32: 589–610. 
Blake, Barry J. and Julie Reid (2002). ‘The Dhudhuroa Language of Northeastern Victoria: A
Description Based on Historical Sources’. Aboriginal History. 26: 177–210. 
Blakemore, Rob (2019). ‘Australian Earthworms: Factsheet’. Australian Museum, 25 February.
www.australian.museum/learn/animals/worms/australian-earthworms, accessed 11 December
2023. 
Bleach, Lucy (2015). underground . Work Description. www.lucybleach.com.au/lucy- 
bleach/selected-works/underground/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Bleeker, Maaike and Iris van der Tuin (2014). ‘Science in the Performance Stratum: Hunting for
Higgs and Nature as Performance’. International Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media.
10(2): 232–245. 
Body of Art (2013). Short Film, dir. Iona Reto. vimeo.com/60363446, accessed 1 June 2022. 
Bramley, Ellie Violet (2018). ‘Losing Its Sparkle: The Dark Side of Glitter’. The Guardian , 22 
January. www.theguardian.com/fashion/2018/jan/21/losing-its-sparkle-the-dark-side-of-glitter,
accessed 28 November 2023. 
Bringhurst, Robert and Jan Zwicky (2018). Learning to Die: Wisdom in the Age of Climate
Crisis. Regina, Saskatchewan: University of Regina Press.
Buranyi, Stephen (2023). ‘“We are Just Getting Started”: The Plastic-Eating Bacteria That Could
Change the World’. The Guardian , 28 September. 
www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/sep/28/plastic-eating-bacteria-enzyme-recycling-
waste, accessed 8 December 2023. 
Cai, Ming , Yang Lin , Yin-long Luo et al. (2015). ‘Extraction, Antimicrobial, and Antioxidant
Activities of Crude Polysaccharides from the Wood Ear Medicinal Mushroom Auricularia 
auricula-judae  (Higher Basidiomycetes)’. International Journal of Medicinal Mushrooms 17(6): 
591–600. 
Cardoso, Maria Fernanda (2018a). ‘On the Origins of Art I–II, 2016’. Work Description,
Museum of Contemporary Art.  www.mca.com.au/artists-works/works/2018.13/, accessed 3 
November 2023. 
Cardoso, Maria Fernanda (2018b). ‘On the Origins of Art – Actual Size II Maratus Splendens,
2016’. Work Description, Museum of Contemporary Art . www.mca.com.au/artists- 
works/works/2018.15/, accessed 3 November 2023. 
Carreon, Erika (2024). ‘Tropical Futurity’. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Melbourne. 
Carrington, Damian (2020). ‘Stop Blowing Up Bombs on Sea Floor, Say Whale Campaigners’.
The Guardian , 3 November. www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/nov/03/stop-blowing-up- 
bombs-on-sea-floor-say-whale-campaigners, accessed 10 November 2023. 
Carton, Wim (2020). ‘Carbon Unicorns and Fossil Futures: Whose Emission Reduction
Pathways Is the IPCC Performing?’. In JP Sapinski , Holly Jean Buck and Andreas Malm , eds,
Has It Come to This? The Pitfalls and Promises of Geoengineering on the Brink. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, pp. 34–49. 
Catts, Oron and Ionat Zurr (2008). ‘The Art of the Semi-Living and Partial Life: Extra Ear – 1⁄4
Scale’. In Melentie Pandilovski , ed, Art in the Biotech Era. Adelaide: Experimental Art
Foundation, pp. 140–147. 
Cervera, Felipe (2017a). ‘Planetary Performance Studies’. Global Performance Studies. 1(1).
https://doi.org/10.33303/gpsv1n1a3 
Cervera, Felipe (2017b). ‘The Planet as Method’. www.felipecervera.me/the-planet-as-method,
accessed 9 November 2023. 
Chang, Chia-ju (2016). ‘Wasted Humans and Garbage Animals: Deadly Transcorporeality and
Documentary Activism’. In Rayson K Alex and S Susan Deborah , eds, Ecodocumentaries:
Critical Essays. London: Palgrave, pp. 95–114. 
Cheung, Helier (2020). ‘What Does Trump Actually Believe on Climate Change?’ BBC News , 23 
January. www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-51213003, accessed 19 October 2023. 
Chevalier, Clarissa (2021). ‘Eco-Phenomenology and the Maintenance of Eco Art: Agnes
Denes's A Forest for Australia  ’. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Art. 21(2): 273–290.  
Chiang, C , S Mahalingam and JA Flaws (2017). ‘Environmental Contaminants Affecting Fertility
and Somatic Health’. Seminars in Reproductive Medicine. 35(3): 241–249. 
Churchill, Caryl (2000). Far Away. London: Nick Hern Books. 
Churchill, Caryl (2016). Escaped Alone. London: Nick Hern Books. 
Cixous, Hélène (1984). ‘Aller à la mer’, trans. Barbara Kerslake . Modern Drama. 27(4):
546–548. 
Clark, Jane and Luke Hortle (2022). ‘Spider and Stars’. Content Available on the Museum of
Old and New Art Visitor App. 
Collins, Rebecca (2021). ‘Aural Attunement Is a Form of Performative Writing Used to Write
About Nonhuman Affective Relations in Emma Bennett's Slideshow Birdshow  (2013)’. 
Ambiances. 2: 1–20. 
Cormick, Hanna (2020). The Mermaid . Performance Work, Sydney Festival, 17–19 January.  
Cormick, Hanna (2021). Interviewed by Lara Stevens and Denise Varney, 26 February, Zoom. 
Country Needs People website (n.d.). https://www.countryneedspeople.org.au/about, accessed
23 April 2024. 
Cramer, Maria (2021). ‘Leaky Gas Pipeline Sparks an Inferno in the Gulf of Mexico’. The New 
York Times , 3 July. www.nytimes.com/2021/07/03/world/americas/eye-fire-gulf-mexico.html, 
accessed 10 November 2023. 
Crew, Bec (2016). ‘The Robots Sent Into Fukushima Have “Died”’. Science Alert , 11 March. 
www.sciencealert.com/the-robots-sent-into-fukushima-have-died, accessed 7 November 2023. 
Crocodile Dundee (1986). Film, dir. Peter Faiman. Rimfire Films, Australia.
Curry, JP and O Schmidt (2007). ‘The Feeding Ecology of Earthworms: A Review’.
Pedobiologia. 50(2007): 463–477. 
Cut the Sky (2016). Performance Work, Marrugeku. 
D'Cruz, Glenn (2014). ‘Things I Know About Geminoid F, or What I Think About When I Think
About Android Theatre’. Australasian Drama Studies. (65): 272–288. 
Darwin, Charles (1881). The Formation of Vegetable Mould, through the Action of Worms, with
Observations on Their Habits. London: John Murray. 
Dastogeer, KMG et al. (2020). ‘Plant Salinity Tolerance Conferred by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal
Fungi and Associated Mechanisms: A Meta-Analysis’. Frontiers in Plant Science. 11: 588550. 
Davis, Heather (2022). Plastic Matter. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Davis, Tracy C (2019). ‘How Do You Know a Mermaid When You See One? How Do You See a
Mermaid When You Know One?. Theatre Journal. 71(3): 257–288. 
de Beauvoir, Simone (2009). The Second Sex, trans. Constance Borde and Sheila Malovany-
Chevallier . New York: Vintage Books. 
de Vietri, Gabrielle (2019). Maps of Gratitude, Cones of Silence and Lumps of Coal.  Interactive 
Work. www.gabrielledevietri.net/maps-of-gratitude 
Déchery, Chloé and Martin Welton , eds (2020). ‘Staging Atmospheres: Theatre and the
Atmospheric Turn’. Ambiances  1: Special Issue.  
Déchery, Chloé and Martin Welton , eds (2021). ‘Staging Atmospheres: Theatre and the
Atmospheric Turn’. Ambiances  2: Special Issue.  
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (2013). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia,
trans. Brian Massumi . London: Bloomsbury. 
Denes, Agnes (1996). Tree Mountain . Artwork.  
Denes, Agnes (1998). A Forest for Australia . Artwork.  
Denes, Agnes (2023). Personal Website. www.agnesdenesstudio.com, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Detail (2019). Installation Work by Kris Verdonck.
www.atwodogscompany.org/en/projects/detail/. 
Devlin, Hannah (2018). ‘Scientists Discover Spider Species That Feeds Its Young Milk’. The 
Guardian , 30 November. www.theguardian.com/world/2018/nov/29/scientists-discover-spider- 
species-that-feeds-its-young-milk, accessed 3 November 2023. 
Diamanti, Jeff (2023). Climate and Capital in the Age of Petroleum: Locating Terminal
Landscapes. London: Bloomsbury. 
Donald, Dwayne (2012). ‘Indigenous Métissage: A Decolonizing Research Sensibility’.
International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education. 25(5): 533–555. 
Duets on Ice (1974). Performance Work by Laurie Anderson. 
Eckersall, Peter (2015). ‘Towards a Dramaturgy of Robots and Object-Figures’. TDR: The
Drama Review. 59(3): 123–131. 
Eckersall, Peter (2020). ‘The Poor Old Sun: A Note on Kris Verdonck's DETAIL’. In Peter
Eckersall and Kristof van Baarle , eds, Machine Made Silence: The Art of Kris Verdonck.
Aberystwyth: Performance Research Books, pp. 89–91. 
Eckersall, Peter (2024). Dramaturgy to Make Visible: The Legacies of New Dramaturgy for
Politics and Performance in Our Times. London: Routledge. 
Eckersall, Peter and Eddie Paterson (2011). ‘Slow Dramaturgy: Renegotiating Politics and
Staging the Everyday’. Australasian Drama Studies. (58): 178–192. 
Eckersall, Peter , Helena Grehan and Edward Scheer (2017). New Media Dramaturgy:
Performance, Media and New Materialism. London and New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Efi, Tui Ātua Tupua Tamasese Tupuola Tufuga (2019). ‘Prelude: Climate Change and the
Perspective of the Fish’. In Tony Crook and Peter Rudiak , eds, Pacific Climate Cultures: Living
Climate Change in Oceania, Warsaw: De Gruyter, pp. ix–xiii. 
Engelmann, Sasha (2016). ‘Social Spiders and Hybrid Webs at Studio Tomás Saraceno’.
Cultural Geographies. 24(1): 161–169. 
Etchells, Tim (2008). Spectacular  ‘Programme Note’. Forced Entertainment. 
www.forcedentertainment.com/spectacular-programme-note-by-tim-etchells, accessed 7
December 2023. 
Etchells, Tim (2011). Tomorrow's Parties  ‘Programme Note’. Forced Entertainment. 
www.forcedentertainment.com/tomorrows-parties-programme-note-by-tim-etchells/, accessed
15 December 2023.
Explore Beechworth (2017). ‘Yeddonba Aboriginal Cultural Site’.
www.explorebeechworth.com.au/yeddonba, accessed 5 December 2023. 
Extinction Rebellion (2021). ‘Nowhere Is Safe’. Global Newsletter. (53), 16 July.
rebellion.global/blog/2021/07/16/global-newsletter-53/, accessed 14 December 2023. 
Fantastic Fungi (2019). Documentary Film, dir. Louie Schwartzberg. Moving Art, United States. 
Fensham, Rachel , Eddie Paterson and Paul Rae , eds (2018). ‘On Climates’. Themed Issue,
Performance Research. 23(3). 
Finley, Karen (2018). Grabbing Pussy. New York: OR Books. 
Finnigan, David (2023). ‘Falling in Love with Microplastic’. Personal Website, 7 May.
davidfinnigan.substack.com/p/falling-in-love-with-microplastic, accessed 7 November 2023. 
First Peoples State Relations (2021). ‘Fact Sheet: Aboriginal Stone Arrangements’.
www.firstpeoplesrelations.vic.gov.au/fact-sheet-aboriginal-stone-arrangements, accessed 9
November 2023. 
Fletcher, Michael-Shawn et al. (2022). ‘Healthy Country’. Indigenous Knowledge Institute 
https://indigenousknowledge.unimelb.edu.au/Research/themes/2021-2022-themes/healthy-
country, accessed 23 April 2024. 
Forced Entertainment (2008). Spectacular.  Performance Work.  
Forced Entertainment (2011). Tomorrow's Parties.  Performance Work.  
French, Jeffrey and Sarah Tessendorf (2018). ‘Does Cloud Seeding Work? Scientists Watch Ice
Crystals Grow Inside Clouds to Find Out’. The Conversation, 14 March.
www.theconversation.com/does-cloud-seeding-work-scientists-watch-ice-crystals-grow-inside-
clouds-to-find-out-90903, accessed 12 October 2023. 
Frew, Adam et al. (2023). ‘Hidden Carbon: Fungi and Their ‘Necromass’ Absorb One-Third of
the Carbon Emitted by Burning Fossil Fuels Every Year’. The Conversation , 6 June. 
www.theconversation.com/hidden-carbon-fungi-and-their-necromass-absorb-one-third-of-the-
carbon-emitted-by-burning-fossil-fuels-every-year-206674, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Furlong, Claire , Nalika S Rahapaksha , Kevin R Butt and Walter T Gibson (2017). ‘Is
Composting Worm Availability the Main Barrier to Large-Scale Adoption of Worm-Based
Organic Waste Processing Technologies?’ Journal of Cleaner Production. 164: 1026–1033. 
Furuhata, Yuriko (2022). Climatic Media: Transpacific Experiments in Atmospheric Control.
Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Gay'Wu Group of Women (2019). Songspirals: Sharing Women's Wisdom of Country through
Songlines. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
George, Cherian (2000). Singapore, the Air-Conditioned Nation: Essays on the Politics of
Comfort and Control, 1990–2000. Singapore: Landmark Books. 
Girard, Madeline B , Michael M Kasumovic and Damian O Elias (2011). ‘Multi-Modal Courtship
in the Peacock Spider, Maratus Volans  ’. (O.P.-Cambridge, 1874). PLoS One. 6(9): e25390.  
Goodall, Jane (2013). ‘Natural Aesthetics: Formations of Gender in the Work of Maria Fernanda
Cardoso’. Artlink. 33(3): 52–55. 
Graham, Mary (1999). ‘Some Thoughts about the Philosophical Underpinnings of Aboriginal
Worldviews’. Worldviews: Environment, Culture, Religion. 3: 105–118. 
Graham, Mary (2009). ‘Understanding Human Agency in Terms of Place: A Proposed
Aboriginal Research Methodology’. PAN: Philosophy Activism Nature. 6: 71–78. 
Greening the West (2023). ‘A Forest for Australia – Altona Treatment Plant’.
www.greeningthewest.org.au/projects/forest-australia-altona-treatment-plant/, accessed 9
November 2023. 
Grehan, Helena (2015). ‘Actors, Spectators, and “Vibrant” Objects: Kris Verdonck's ACTOR #1 
’. TDR: The Drama Review. 59(3): 132–139. 
Grehan, Helena (2018). ‘First Nations Politics in a Climate of Refusal’. Performance Research:
On Climates. 23(3): 7–12. 
Gulantang! A Children's Musical (2011). Performance Work, Cope/with/Land Theatre Company. 
Hadingham, Evan (1975). Circles and Standing Stones: An Illustrated Exploration of Megalith
Mysteries of Early Britain. New York: Walker. 
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae and Astrida Neimanis (2018). ‘Composting Feminisms and
Environmental Humanities’. Environmental Humanities. 10(2) November: 501–527. 
Haraway, Donna (1988). ‘Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
Privilege of Partial Perspective’. Feminist Studies. 14(3): 575–599.
Haraway, Donna (1991). Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature. New York:
Routledge. 
Haraway, Donna (2017). ‘Symbiogenesis, Sympoiesis, and Art Science Activisms for Staying
with the Trouble’. In Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing , Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt
, eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
M25–M50. 
Haraway, Donna J. (2003). The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
Otherness, vol. 1. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. 
Harle, Josh , Angie Abdilla and Andrew Newman , eds. (2019). Decolonising the Digital:
Technology as Cultural Practice. Sydney: Tactical Space Lab. 
Hau'ofa, Epeli (1994). ‘Our Sea of Islands’. The Contemporary Pacific. 6(1): 147–162. 
Hiebert, Ted (2023). ‘Trust Fall: Rubbing Rocks and the Irreconcilability of Objects’.
Performance Research. 27(2): 16–24. 
High Life (2018). Film, dir. Claire Denis . Andrew Lauren Productions/Pandora
Filmproduktion/Alcatraz Films/The Apocalypse Films Company/Madants, France. 
Hirata, Oriza (2010). Sayonara . Performance Work, Seinendan Theatre Company.  
Hodge, Gabrielle (2020). ‘The Ideology of Communication Practices Embedded in an Australian
Deaf/Hearing Dance Collaboration’. In Annelies Kusters , Mara Green , Erin Moriarty and Kristin
Snoddon , eds, Sign Language Ideologies in Practice. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, pp. 59–82. 
Holmes, Tracey (2022). ‘Adam Goodes's AFL Data, Its Entanglement with Aboriginal
Knowledge Systems, and the Sacred Wirra That's Protecting It’. ABC News , 28 May. 
www.abc.net.au/news/2022-05-28/adam-goodes-afl-data-set-sacred-wirra-tracker-data-
project/101097190, accessed 8 July 2023. 
Hoover, Elizabeth (2017). The River Is in Us: Fighting Toxics in a Mohawk Community.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Houlton, Sarah (2013). ‘Unicorns Don't Exist’. Chemistry & Industry. 77(8): 23. 
Ibsen, Henrik (2012). A Doll's House, trans. Simon Stephens . London: Methuen Drama. 
Ice Watch (2014). Performance Work by Olafur Eliasson and Minik Rosing. 
i-Land X-isle (2012). Performance Work by Latai Taumoepeau. 
Ingegnoli, Vittorio , Francesco Lombardo and Giuseppe La Torre , eds (2022). Environmental
Alteration Leads to Human Disease: A Planetary Health Approach. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer. 
Ingwersen, Moritz (2017). ‘ Cybernethics : Thinking Bodies and Boundaries through Science’. In 
Anne Waldschmidt , Hanjo Berressem and Moritz Ingwersen , eds, Culture – Theory –
Disability: Encounters between Disability Studies and Cultural Studies. Bielefeld, Germany:
Transcript, pp. 160–169. 
Interstellar (2014). Film, dir. Christopher Nolan. Paramount Pictures/Warner Bros.
Pictures/Legendary Pictures/Syncopy/Lynda Obst Productions, United States. 
Iscoe, Adam (2022). ‘Arachnophile’. The New Yorker. 98(6), 28 March: 22–23. It's Still Life: 
Listening to Composts Still Life: Listening to Compost  (2019). Art installation, Out-of-Sync.  
Jestrovic, Silvija (2004). ‘From the Ice Cube Stage to Simulated Reality: Place and
Displacement in Laurie Anderson's Performances’. Contemporary Theatre Review. 14(1):
25–37. 
Jones, Andrew Merion (2012). ‘Living Rocks: Animacy, Performance and the Rock Art of the
Kilmartin Region, Scotland’. In Andrew Cochrane and Andrew Merion Jones , eds, Visualising
the Neolithic. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 79–88. 
Jongen, Marc (2011). ‘On Anthropospheres and Aphrogrammes: Peter Sloterdijk's Thought
Images of the Monstrous’. Humana.Mente Journal of Philosophical Studies. 18: 199–219. 
Kelly, Matthew W. , Doris K. Wu , Arthur N. Popper and Richard R. Fay , eds (2005).
Development of the Inner Ear. New York: Springer. 
Klein, Naomi (2007). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. London: Allen Lane. 
Klinsukon, C , S Lumyong , TW Kuyper et al. (2021). ‘Colonization by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal
Fungi Improves Salinity Tolerance of Eucalyptus ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) Seedlings’. 
Scientific Reports. 11: 4362. 
Kohn, Eduardo (2013). How Forests Think: Towards an Anthropology Beyond the Human.
Berkley: University of California Press. 
Kruszelnicki, Karl (2006). ‘Mouse with Human Ear’. ABC Science,  Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation, 2 June. www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2006/06/02/1644154.htm, accessed 5
July 2023. 
Kwaymullina, Ambelin (2018). ‘You Are on Indigenous Land: Ecofeminism, Indigenous Peoples
and Land Justice’. In Lara Stevens , Peta Tait and Denise Varney , eds, Feminist Ecologies:
Changing Environments in the Anthropocene. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 193–208. 
Laird, Tessa (2018). ‘In the Beginning There Was the Worm: Animal Voice Beyond the Verbal’.
Artlink. 38(1): 58–65. 
Langton, Marcia (1995). ‘The European Construction of Wilderness’. Wilderness News , 
Summer 1995–1996: 16–17. 
Latour, Bruno (2018). Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime, trans. Catherine
Porter . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Lavers, Chris (2009). The Natural History of Unicorns. New York: William Morrow. 
Lavery, Carl (2018). ‘Ecology in Beckett's Theatre Garden: Or How to Cultivate the Oikos’.
Contemporary Theatre Review. 28(1): 10–26. 
Lavery, Carl , ed (2019). Performance and Ecology: What Can Theatre Do? London: Routledge. 
Lavery, Carl and Clare Finburgh , eds (2015). Rethinking the Theatre of the Absurd: Ecology,
the Environment and the Greening of the Modern Stage. London: Bloomsbury. 
Law, Benjamin (2023). ‘Björk Cornucopia Review – an Electrifying Pop Concert, Art Installation
and Opening Ceremony Rolled Into One’. The Guardian , 4 March. 
www.theguardian.com/music/2023/mar/04/bjork-cornucopia-review-an-electrifying-pop-concert-
art-installation-and-opening-ceremony-rolled-into-one, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Leane, Elizabeth (2022). ‘Ice Islands of the Anthropocene: The Cultural Meaning of Antarctic
Bergs’. In Russell McDougall , John C. Ryan and Pauline Reynolds , eds, Postcolonial
Literatures of Climate Change. Leiden: Brill, pp. 361–382. 
Leane, Elizabeth , Carolyn Philpott and Matt Delbridge (2020). ‘Performing Ice: Histories,
Theories, Contexts’. In Carolyn Philpott , Elizabeth Leane and Matt Delbridge , eds, Performing
Ice. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 1–26. 
Lee, Aileen (2013). ‘Welcome to The Unicorn Club: Learning from Billion-Dollar Startups’.
TechCrunch , 3 November. www.techcrunch.com/2013/11/02/welcome-to-the-unicorn-club/, 
accessed 19 October 2023. 
Lego Breakfast (2020). Video by tomosteen, 17 July.
www.youtube.com/watch?v=1RMKR8h03iw, accessed 16 October 2023. 
Liang, F , X Huo , W Wang et al. (2020). ‘Association of Bisphenol A or Bisphenol S Exposure
with Oxidative Stress and Immune Disturbance Among Unexplained Recurrent Spontaneous
Abortion Women’. Chemosphere. 257: 127035. 
Liboiron, Max (2021). Pollution Is Colonialism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Lorenzutti, Gregory (2022a). ‘Director's Note’. Credits for Theatrum Botanicum . https://finearts- 
music.unimelb.edu.au/showcase/theatrum-botanicum/theatrum-botanicum-credits, accessed 2
October 2023. 
Lorenzutti, Gregory (2022b). ‘Microorganism and Macro-Movement: Soil & Food Cultivation for
a Dance Ecology’. Presentation for Performance Studies International Conference #27.
www.gregorylorenzutti.com/germinations/blog-post-title-one-86mrb-z4fwc-s6xfb-shh75-5yk6n-
3x9ya-4s26l-x8sr9-p85zt-2k55t-kc2r5-gzw9w, accessed 4 September 2023. 
Lowenfels, Jeff (2017). Teaming with Fungi. Portland, OR: Timber Press. 
Luo, Yangchao , Gang Chen , Bo Li et al. (2009). ‘Evaluation of Antioxidative and Hypolipidemic
Properties of a Novel Functional Diet Formulation of Auricularia auricula  and Hawthorn’. 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies. 10(2): 215–221. 
Maiquez, Reagan , Dennis Gupa and Kulay Labitigan (2018). ‘Between Theatre and the
Environment: The Experience of Cope/With/Land Theatre Co’. Global Performance Studies.
1(2). 
Mangioni, Talei Luscia (2021). ‘Confronting Australian Apathy: Latai Taumoepeau and the
Politics of Performance in Pacific Climate Stewardship’. The Contemporary Pacific. 33(1):
32–62. 
Mapoung, Sariya , Sonthaya Umsumarng , Warathit Semmarath et al. (2021). ‘Skin Wound-
Healing Potential of Polysaccharides from Medicinal Mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae 
(Bull.)’. Journal of Fungi. 7: 247. 
Martin, Brian (2021). Interview. In Tree Story: New Commissions , video produced for Monash 
University Museum of Art. vimeo.com/521229001, accessed 13 November 2023.
Martin, Brian (2022). ‘Methexical Countryscape Kamilaroi #10 2017’. Work Description. Monash
University Museum of Art, February. www.monash.edu/muma/education/deadly-
learning/artists/brian-martin, accessed 14 December 2023. 
McCarthy, Terry (1999). ‘Lee Kuan Yew’. Time Magazine , 23 August. 
http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2054444,00.html#ixzz2lzv7Abbn, accessed 29
November 2013. 
McCurry, Justin (2017). ‘Fukushima Nuclear Cleanup Falters Six Years After Tsunami’. The 
Guardian , 9 March. www.theguardian.com/world/2017/mar/09/fukushima-nuclear-cleanup- 
falters-six-years-after-tsunami, accessed 1 September 2023. 
McDougall, Russell , John C Ryan and Pauline Reynolds , eds (2022). Postcolonial Literatures
of Climate Change. Leiden: Brill. 
McGrath, Ann and Laura Rademaker (2023). ‘The Languages and Temporalities of
“Everywhen” in Deep History’. In Ann McGrath , Laura Rademaker and Jakelin Troy , eds,
Everywhen: Australia and the Language of Deep History. Sydney: UNSW Press, pp. 1–36. 
McKenzie, Jon (2001). Perform or Else: From Discipline to Performance. New York: Routledge. 
McTighe, Trish (2023). ‘Gestures of Helpless Compassion: Beckett's Eco-Poetics of Extinction’.
In Michiko Tsushima , Yoshiki Tajiri and Mariko Hori Tanaka , eds, Samuel Beckett and
Catastrophe. London: Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 193–213. 
Methexical Countryscape: Boon Wurrung #1 (2021). Artwork by Brian Martin. 
Methexical Countryscape: Kamilaroi #10 (2017). Artwork by Brian Martin. 
Michiko, Tsushima , Yoshiki Tajiri and Mariko Hori Tanaka , eds (2023). Samuel Beckett and
Catastrophe. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Milanović, M , N Milošević , N Milić et al. (2023). ‘Food Contaminants and Potential Risk of
Diabetes Development: A Narrative Review’. World Journal of Diabetes 14(6): 705–723. 
Missingham, Racheal (2021). ‘Australia's Deaf Theatre: Past, Present and Future’. Master of
Philosophy Thesis, Queensland University of Technology. 
Monash University Museum of Art (2021a). ‘The Tree School, Educational Program (11–23
March 2021)’. https://www.monash.edu/muma/public-programs/previous/2022/tree-school,
accessed 13 November 2023. 
Monash University Museum of Art (2021b). The Boon Wurrung Tree . Video. 
vimeo.com/521716010, accessed 13 November 2023. 
Montgomery, David R (2008). Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations. Berkeley: University of
California Press. 
Monument Australia (2023). ‘Separation Tree’.
monumentaustralia.org.au/themes/government/colonial/display/32484-separation-tree-/,
accessed 2 December 2023. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2000). Talkin’ up to the White Woman: Aboriginal Women and
Feminism. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2013). ‘Towards an Australian Indigenous Women's Standpoint
Theory: A Methodological Tool’. Australian Feminist Studies. 28(78): 331–347. 
Moreton-Robinson, Aileen (2015). The White Possessive: Property, Power, and Indigenous
Sovereignty. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Munro, Kim (2022). ‘A New Exhibition Explores Invisible Data, from Facial Algorithms to
Satellite Tracking as a Return to Country’. The Conversation , 22 February. 
theconversation.com/a-new-exhibition-explores-invisible-data-from-facial-algorithms-to-satellite-
tracking-as-a-return-to-country-176567, accessed 21 August 2023. 
Murphy, Michelle (2017). ‘Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations’. Cultural Anthropology.
32(4): 494–503. 
Murphy, Michelle (2018). ‘Against Population, towards Alterlife’. In Adele E Clarke and Donna
Haraway , eds, Making Kin Not Population. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press, pp. 101–124. 
Myers, Natasha (2015). ‘Edenic Apocalypse: Singapore's End-of-Time Botanical Tourism’. In
Heather Davis and Etienne Turpin , eds, Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters Among
Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies. London: Open Humanities Press, pp.
31–42. 
Myers, Natasha (2017a). ‘From the Anthropocene to the Planthroposcene: Designing Gardens
for Plant/People Involution’. History and Anthropology. 28(3): 297–301. 
Myers, Natasha (2017b). ‘Photosynthetic Mattering: Rooting into the Planthroposcene’. In Line
Marie Thorsen , ed, Moving Plants. Næstved, Denmark: Rønnebæksholm, pp. 123–130.
Nagengast, Bernard A (2009). ‘Was Ice Making John Gorrie's Greatest Legacy?’. ASHRAE
Transactions. 115(1): 122–129. 
National Indigenous Australians Agency (2023). ‘Referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Voice’. www.niaa.gov.au/indigenous-affairs/referendum-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-
islander-voice, accessed 9 November 2023. 
National Park Service (2015). ‘Granite and Granodiorite FAQ’.
www.nps.gov/goga/learn/education/granite-and-granodiorite-faq.htm, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Neale, Margaret (2022). ‘First Knowledges: An Introduction’. In Zena Cumpston , Michael-
Shawn Fletcher and Lesley Head , eds, Plants: Past, Present and Future. Melbourne: Thames
and Hudson, pp. 1–4. 
Neimanis, Astrida (2016). Bodies of Water: Posthuman Feminist Phenomenology. London:
Bloomsbury. 
Neumark, Norie (2022). ‘Squish, Squelch, shlshlshlurpppp’. In Sharon Jane Mee and Luke
Robinson , eds, Sound Affects: A User's Guide. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 224–236. 
Ngapulara Ngarngarnyi Wirra (Our Family Tree) (2022). Artwork by Old Ways, New. 
Nicholson, Simon (2020). ‘Solar Radiation Management’. Wilson Centre , 30 September. 
www.wilsoncenter.org/article/solar-radiation-management, accessed 12 December 2023. 
Niman, Michael I. (2003). ‘Kodak's Toxic Moments’. Alternet , May 28. 
www.alternet.org/2003/05/kodaks_toxic_moments, accessed 6 October 2023. 
Nixon, Rob (2011). Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 
O'Hanlon, James (2023). Silk & Venom: The Incredible Lives of Spiders. Sydney: NewSouth
Publishing. 
Ocean Island Mine (2015). Performance Work by Latai Taumoepeau. 
Odle, Melissa Patrice (2010). ‘Bird Song in the Music of Olivier Messiaen, With an Emphasis on
Le Merle Noir’. Master of Music in Performance Thesis, California State University, Northridge. 
Oh! My Gulay! (2010). Performance Work, Cope/with/Land Theatre Company. 
Old Ways, New (2023). Work Description. oldwaysnew.com/research-dev#spatial-awareness,
accessed 14 December 2023. 
Oli, Angus Nnamdi , Peter Anyigor Edeh , Reham M Al-Mosawi et al. (2020). ‘Evaluation of the
Phytoconstituents of Auricularia auricula-judae  Mushroom and Antimicrobial Activity of Its 
Protein Extract’. European Journal of Integrative Medicine. 38: 101176. 
Oliveri, Vicki Antonia , Glenn Porter , Chris Davies and Pamela James (2022). ‘The Juukan
Gorge Destruction: A Case Study in Stakeholder-Driven and Shared Values Approach to
Cultural Heritage Protection’. Journal of Cultural Heritage Management and Sustainable
Development, 1–15. 
Pascoe, Bruce (2014). Dark Emu, Black Seeds: Agriculture or Accident? Broome, WA:
Magabala Books. 
Passengers (2016). Film, dir. Morten Tyldum. Columbia Pictures/LStar Capital/Village
Roadshow Pictures/Wanda Pictures/Original Film/Company Films/Start Motion Pictures, United
States. 
Paterson, Eddie (2010). ‘Paperless and Penless: Headphone Performance, Audioscripting and
New Approaches to Writing for Performance’. In Catherine Cole , Marcelle Freiman and Donna
Lee Brien , eds, Strange Bedfellows: Refereed Conference Papers of the 15th Annual
Australasian Association of Writing Programs Conference, 1–9.
www.aawp.org.au/publications/the-strange-bedfellows-or-perfect-partners-papers 
Paterson, Eddie (2015). The Contemporary American Monologue: Performance and Politics.
London and New York: Bloomsbury. 
Paterson, Eddie (2019). ‘Compost and Air-Conditioning: Beyond Biospherical Performance and
towards the Shimmer’. Performance Research. 24(8): 31–36. 
Paterson, Eddie and Kevin Brown , eds (2018) ‘Performance Climates’. Themed issue. Global
Performance Studies 1(2). 
Phillips, Perdita (2001). Termitaria . Artwork.  
Phillips, Perdita (2015). Termite Embassy . Artwork.  
Philpott, Carolyn , Elizabeth Leane and Matt Delbridge , eds (2020). Performing Ice. Cham,
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 171–194.
Plumwood, Val (1993). Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. London: Routledge. 
Plumwood, Val (1995). ‘Human Vulnerability and the Experience of Being Prey’. Quadrant.
29(3): 29–34. 
Plumwood, Val (2002). Environmental Culture: The Ecological Crisis of Reason. London:
Routledge. 
Plumwood, Val (2007a). ‘The Cemetery Wars: Cemeteries, Biodiversity and the Sacred’. Local-
Global: Identity, Security, Community. 3: 54–71. 
Plumwood, Val (2007b). Review of Deborah Bird Rose's ‘Reports from a Wild Country: Ethics
for Decolonisation’. Australian Humanities Review. 42.
www.australianhumanitiesreview.org/2007/08/01/a-review-of-deborah-bird-roses-reports-from-
a-wild-country-ethics-for-decolonisation, accessed 22 November 2023. 
Plumwood, Val (2012). The Eye of the Crocodile, ed. Lorraine Shannon . Canberra: ANU Press. 
Ponyo (2008). Film, dir. Hayao Miyazaki. Studio Ghibli, Japan. 
Pownall, Augusta (2019). ‘Designers of Björk's Cornucopia Show “Ignored the Concert Rule
Book”’. De Zeen , 13 December. www.dezeen.com/2019/12/13/bjork-cornucopia-chiara- 
stephenson-set-design/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria (2015). ‘Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the
Pace of Care’. Social Studies of Science. 45(5): 691–716. 
Rancière, F. , J. Botton , R. Slama et al. (2019). ‘Exposure to Bisphenol A and Bisphenol S and
Incident Type 2 Diabetes: A Case-Cohort Study in the French Cohort D.E.S.I.R.’. Environmental
Health Perspectives. 127(10): 107013. 
Readfearn, Graham (2021). ‘World Heritage Committee Agrees Not to Place Great Barrier Reef
on ‘in Danger’ List’. The Guardian , 24 July. 
www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/jul/23/world-heritage-committee-agrees-not-to-place-
great-barrier-reef-on-in-danger-list, accessed 4 October 2023. 
Reid, Robert (2019). ‘The Detritus of Now: Escaped Alone’. Review for Witness Performance , 6 
June. www.witnessperformance.com/the-detritus-of-now-escaped-alone, accessed 21
November 2019. 
Remaud, Olivier (2022). Thinking Like an Iceberg, trans. Stephen Muecke . Cambridge: Polity
Press. 
Resources Victoria (2023). ‘Victoria's Geology’. www.resources.vic.gov.au/geology-
exploration/victorias-geology, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Rinaldi, AC , O Comandini and TW Kuyper (2008). ‘Ectomycorrhizal Fungal Diversity:
Separating the Wheat from the Chaff’. Fungal Diversity. 33: 1–45. 
Robot Unicorn Attack (2010). Computer Game, Spiritonin Media Games. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (2017). ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
51–63. 
Rose, Deborah Bird (2017). ‘Shimmer: When All You Love Is Being Trashed’. In Anna Tsing ,
Heather Swanson , Elaine Gan and Nils Bubandt , eds, Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet:
Ghosts and Monsters of the Anthropocene. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
G51–G63. 
Ross, Annabel (2016). ‘Deaf Can Dance: The Delta Project Combines Hearing and Non-
Hearing Dancers in Under My Skin’. Sydney Morning Herald, 29 April.
www.smh.com.au/entertainment/dance/deaf-can-dance-the-delta-project-combines-hearing-
and-nonhearing-dancers-in-under-my-skin-20160429-goinls.html, accessed 1 November 2023. 
Roth, George B (1936). ‘Dr. John Gorrie: Inventor of Artificial Ice and Mechanical Refrigeration’.
The Scientific Monthly. 42(5): 464–469. 
Sacrifice: Contemplating Time and Trust (2022). Performance Work. Science Gallery, University
of Melbourne. 
Saraceno, Tomás (2009). Galaxies Forming Along Filaments Like Droplets on a Spider's Web. 
Installation Work. 
Saraceno, Tomás (2010). 14 Billions . Installation Work.  
Saraceno, Tomás (2022). Webs of At-tent(s)ion . Installation Work.  
Schechner, Richard (2002). Performance Studies: An Introduction. London: Routledge. 
Schneider, Rebecca (2016). ‘Extending a Hand’. Keynote Address to Performance Climate, the
22nd Performance Studies International Conference. University of Melbourne.
Schneider, Rebecca and Paul Rae (2018). ‘Extending a Hand/Leading an Ear’. Performance
Research. 23(3): 13–24. 
Serres, Michel (2016). The Five Senses: A Philosophy of Mingled Bodies. London: Bloomsbury. 
Sheldrake, Merlin (2020). Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds and
Shape Our Futures. New York: Random House. 
Shildrick, Margrit (2017). ‘Border Crossings: The Technologies of Disability and Desire’. In Anne
Waldschmidt , Hanjo Berressem and Moritz Ingwersen , eds, Culture – Theory – Disability:
Encounters between Disability Studies and Cultural Studies. Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript, pp.
137–151. 
Shlomowitz, Ralph and Doug Munro (1990). The Ocean Island (Banaba) and Nauru Labour
Trade: 1900–1940. Bedford Park: Flinders University of Australia. 
Silent Running (1972). Film, dir. Douglas Trumbull. Trumbull/Gruskoff Productions, United
States. 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2011). Bubbles: Spheres Volume I: Microspherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2014). Globes: Spheres Volume II: Macrospherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Sloterdijk, Peter (2016). Foams: Spheres Volume III: Plural Spherology, trans. Wieland Hoban .
South Pasadena CA: Semiotext(e). 
Spedalieri, Francesca (2014). ‘Quietly Posthuman: Oriza Hirata's Robot-Theatre’. Performance
Research. 19(2): 138–140. 
Splash (1984). Film, dir. Ron Howard. Touchstone Films, USA. 
Stabinsky, Doreen , Dipti Bhatnagar and Sara Shaw (2021). Chasing Carbon Unicorns: The
Deception of Carbon Markets and “Net Zero”. Amsterdam: Friends of the Earth International. 
Stelarc (2005). ‘From Zombie to Cyborg Bodies – Extra Ear, Exoskeleton and Avatars’. NeMe , 
www.neme.org/texts/from-zombie-to-cyborg, accessed 22 November 2023. 
Stelarc (2019). ‘Extra Ear: Alternate Anatomical Architectures’. stelarc.org/_.php, accessed 11
December 2023. 
Stelarc (2023a). ‘Ear on Arm’. http://stelarc.org/_activity-20242.php, accessed 11 December
2023. 
Stelarc (2023b). ‘Extra Ear’. stelarc.org/_activity-20229.php, accessed 11 December 2023. 
Stengers, Isabelle (2010). Cosmopolitics, vol. 1, trans. Robert Bononno . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. 
Stengers, Isabelle (2018). Another Science Is Possible: A Manifesto for Slow Science, trans.
Steven Muecke . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Stevens, Lara (2019a). ‘Anthroposcenic Performance and the Need For “Deep Dramaturgy”’.
Performance Research. 24(8): 89–97. 
Stevens, Lara (2019b). Not Now, Not Ever . Performance Work.  
Stevens, Lara (2022). ‘Sink or Swim: Performing the Iniquities of the Climate Crisis’. Critical
Stages/Scènes Critiques. (26). www.critical-stages.org/26/sink-or-swim-performing-the-
iniquities-of-the-climate-crisis. 
Stevens, Lara and Denise Varney (2022). ‘The Climate Siren: Hanna Cormick's The Mermaid  ’. 
TDR: The Drama Review. 66(3): 107–118. 
Strandvad, Sara Malou , Tracy C Davis and Megan Dunn (2021a). ‘Mermaids as Market
Creators: Cultural Entrepreneurship in an Emerging Practice’. International Journal of Cultural
Studies. 25(1): 68–85. 
Strandvad, Sara Malou , Tracy C Davis and Megan Dunn (2021b). ‘Skills and Strategies of
Activist Mermaids: From Pretty to Powerful Pictures’. Text and Performance Quarterly. 41(3–4):
262–282. 
Stukenborg, JB , RT Mitchell and O Söder (2021). ‘Endocrine Disruptors and the Male
Reproductive System’. Best Practice & Research: Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism. 35(5):
101567. 
Sundar, Pratap , Chandan Chowdhury and Sagar Kamarthi (2021). ‘Evaluation of Human Ear
Anatomy and Functionality by Axiomatic Design’. Biomimetics. 6(2): 31. 
Sunshine (2007). Film, dir. Danny Boyle. Moving Picture Company/DNA Films/UK Film
Council/Ingenious Film Partners, United Kingdom. 
Suz, LM , S Kallow , K Reed et al. (2017). ‘Pine Mycorrhizal Communities in Pure and Mixed
Pine-Oak Forests: Abiotic Environment Trumps Neighboring Oak Host Effects’. Forest Ecology
and Management. 406: 370–380. 
Tait, Peta (2019). ‘Striving, Falling, Performing: Phenomenologies of Mood and Apocalypse’. In
Peter Eckersall and Helena Grehan , eds, The Routledge Companion to Theatre and Politics.
London: Routledge, pp. 284–287. 
TallBear, Kim (2014). ‘Standing with and Speaking as Faith: A Feminist-Indigenous Approach to
Inquiry’. Journal of Research Practice. 10(2): 1–7. 
Teaiwa, Katerina Martina (2015). Consuming Ocean Island: Stories of People and Phosphate
from Banaba. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. 
Teaiwa, Katerina Martina (2021). ‘Katerina Teaiwa’. VCA Art Forum.  8 October. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fFJQC1W-qDI, accessed 12 December 2023. 
Teaiwa, Teresia K (1994). ‘Bikinis and Other s/pacific n/oceans’. The Contemporary Pacific.
6(1): 87–109. 
Terrain (2012). Performance Work, Bangarra Dance Theatre. 
The Australian Dream (2019). Documentary Film, dir. Daniel Gordon. Good Thing
Productions/Lorton Entertainment/Passion Pictures, Australia. 
The Constant State of Desire (1986). Performance Work by Karen Finley. 
The Final Quarter (2019). Documentary Film, dir. Ian Darling. Shark Island Productions,
Australia. 
The Little Mermaid (1989). Film, dir. John Musker and Ron Clements. Walt Disney Pictures,
USA. 
The Martian (2015). Film, dir. Ridley Scott. Scott Free Productions/Kinberg Genre/TSG
Entertainment, United Kingdom. 
Theatrum Botanicum (2022). Performance Work by Gregory Lorenzutti. 
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of
Life in Capitalist Ruins. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Tubiana, Laurence , Bruno Latour and Frédérique Aït Touati (2015). Paris Climate – Make It 
Work . Performance Event.  
Uluru Statement (2023). ‘Uluru Statement from the Heart’. www.ulurustatement.org/the-
statement/view-the-statement/, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Under My Skin (2016). Performance Work, The Delta Project. 
Unicorn, Gratitude, Mystery (2016). Performance Work by Karen Finley. University Press. 
van Baarle, Kristof (2019). ‘Void’. In Peter Eckersall and Helena Grehan , eds, The Routledge
Companion to Theatre and Politics. London: Routledge, pp. 228–231. 
van Baarle, Kristof (2020). ‘End-Time Attitudes: Performing the Last Part’. In Kristof van Baarle
and Peter Eckersall , eds, Machine Made Silence: The Art of Kris Verdonck. Aberystwyth, UK:
Performance Research Books, pp. 152–162. 
van Vegten, Megan (2022). ‘Standing Stones and Swarm Robotics… Artist Dr Robert Walton
Explores the Mysteries of Old and New Technology’. Ingenium , Faculty of Engineering and 
Information Technology, University of Melbourne, 30 September
https://eng.unimelb.edu.au/ingenium/standing-stones-and-swarm-robotics-artist-dr-robert-
walton-explores-the-mysteries-of-old-and-new-technology, accessed 9 November 2023. 
Varney, Denise and Lara Stevens (2023). ‘Australian Coal Theatrics’. TDR: The Drama Review.
67(1): 57–61. 
Varney, Denise , Peta Tait and Lara Stevens (2021–2024). Towards An Australian Ecological
Theatre. Australia Research Council Discovery Project, University of Melbourne. 
Verdonck, Kris (2016). IN VOID . Performance Work, A Two Dogs Company.  
Verdonck, Kris (2017). CONVERSATIONS (at the end of the world) . Performance Work, A Two 
Dogs Company. 
Verdonck, Kris (2019). SOMETHING (out of nothing) . Performance Work, A Two Dogs 
Company. 
Verdonck, Kris (2023). PREY . Performance Work, A Two Dogs Company.  
Verdonck, Kris and Kristof van Baarle (2022). ‘Between Machine and Prey’. Artist talk delivered
at CLIMARTE Gallery, Richmond, Victoria, 26 May. 
Viney, Steven and Edwina Seselja (2022). ‘Postcards from the Frontlines of Climate Change’.
ABC News , 11 May. www.abc.net.au/news/2022-05-11/climate-change-effects-facts-causes- 
pacific-postcards/100999144, accessed 12 October 2023. 
Waddoups, Ryan (2022). ‘Björk's New Album Is an Ode to Mushrooms’. Surface Magazine , 3 
October. www.surfacemag.com/articles/bjork-fossora-album-cover/, accessed 9 November
2023. 
Wadrill, Violet , Topsy Dodd Ngarnjal , Leah Leaman et al. (2023). Tamarra: A Story of Termites
on Gurindji Country. Melbourne: Hardie Grant. 
Wahlquist, Calla (2020). ‘Australia's Summer Bushfire Smoke Killed 445 and Put Thousands in
Hospital, Inquiry Hears’. The Guardian , 25 May. www.theguardian.com/australia- 
news/2020/may/26/australias-summer-bushfire-smoke-killed-445-and-put-thousands-in-
hospital-inquiry-hears, accessed 14 September 2023. 
Waiting (2017). Art installation, Out-of-Sync. 
Watson, Irene (2014). ‘Re-Centring First Nations Knowledge and Places in a Terra Nullius
Space’. AlterNative: An International Journal of Indigenous Peoples. 10(5): 508–520. 
Ważny, R (2014). ‘Ectomycorrhizal Communities Associated with Silver Fir Seedlings ( Abies 
alba Mill.) Differ Largely in Mature Silver Fir Stands and in Scots Pine Forecrops’. Annals of
Forest Science. 71: 801–810. 
Welton, Martin (2012). Feeling Theatre. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Williams, David (2015). ‘Epilogue: “The Ruins of Time (I've Forgotten This Before)”’. In Carl
Lavery and Clare Finburgh , eds, Rethinking the Theatre of the Absurd: Ecology, the
Environment and the Greening of the Modern Stage. London: Bloomsbury, pp. 241–250. 
Wilson, Alex (2008). ‘“N'tacinowin Inna Nah”: Our Coming in Stories’. Canadian Woman
Studies. 26(3): 193–199. 
Wilson, Richard (2015). ‘A Globe of Sinful Continents: Shakespeare Thinks the World’. In Jernej
Habjan and Fabienne Imlinger , eds, Globalizing Literary Genres: Literature, History, Modernity.
New York: Routledge, pp. 27–49. 
Wilson, Shawn (2008). Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Black Point,
Nova Scotia: Fernwood Publishing. 
Wright, Alexis (2023). ‘The Black Summer Bushfires Killed 3 Billion Animals. They Are Our
Relatives; They Deserve to be Mourned’. The Guardian , 1 April. 
www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2023/apr/01/alexis-wright-black-summer-bushfires-vigil-
sydney-speech-3-billion-animals-killed-are-our-relatives-they-deserve-to-be-mourned, accessed
12 June 2023. 
Wright, Alexis (2023). Praiseworthy. Sydney: Giramondo. 
Wudjang: Not the Past (2022). Performance Work, Bangarra Dance Theatre. 
WWF-Australia (2020). ‘Australia's 2019–2020 Bushfires: The Wildlife Toll’.
wwf.org.au/blogs/australias-2019-2020-bushfires-the-wildlife-toll/, accessed 27 January 2023. 
Yalcinkaya, Gunseli (2018). ‘Olafur Eliasson Installs Giant Blocks of Glacial Ice Across London’.
Dezeen , 12 December. www.dezeen.com/2018/12/12/ice-watch-olafur-eliasson-installation, 
accessed 12 October 2023. 
Young, Davis (2003). Mind Over Magma: The Story of Igneous Petrology. Princeton: Princeton
University Press. 
Zhang, Rui Ying , Dan Dan Hu and Jin Gang Gu , et al. (2012). ‘Development of SSR Markers
for Typing Cultivars in the Mushroom Auricularia auricula-judae  ’. Mycological Progress. 11: 
587–592. 
Zuboff, Shoshana (2019). The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. London: Profile Books. 
Zylinska, Joanna , ed (2002). The Cyborg Experiments: The Extensions of the Body in the
Media Age. London: Continuum. 
 
