    Performing alternative agriculture: critique and recuperation 
in Zero Budget Natural Farming, South India  
 
 
Daniel Münster1 
 
Heidelberg University , Germany  
 
 
Abstract  
This article explores how 'Zero Budget Natural Farming' , an Indian natural farming mo vement centered on its 
founder and guru Subhash Palekar, enacts alternative agrarian worlds through the dual practices of critique and 
recuperation. Based on fieldwork among practitioners in the South Indian state of Kerala and on participation 
in teaching  events held by Palekar, I describe the movement's critique of the agronomic mainstream (state 
extension  services , agricultural universities, and scientists) and their recuperative practices of restoring small -
scale cultivation based on Indian agroecologic al principles and biologies. Their critique combines familiar 
political -ecological arguments against productionism, and the injustices of the global food regime, with Hindu 
nationalist tropes highlighting Western conspiracies and corrupt science. For their  recuperative work, these 
natural farmers draw, on one hand, on travelling agroecological technologies (fermentation, spacing, mulching, 
cow based farming) and current ' probiotic ', microbiological, and symbiotic understandings of soil and 
agriculture. On t he other hand, they use Hindu nativist tropes, insisting on the exceptional properties of agrarian 
species native to, and belonging to India. I use the idea of ontological politics to describe the movement's performances as enacting an alternative rural wo rld, in which humans, other-than -human animals, plants, 
mycorrhizae, and microbes are doing agriculture together.  
Keywords: agricultural anthropology; alternative agricultures; naturecultures; critique ; ontological politics; 
small -scale cultivators ; India;  Kerala; Subhash Palekar  
 
Résumé  
Cet article explore la manière dont «Zero Budget Natural Farming» , un mouvement d'agriculture naturelle 
indien centré sur son fondateur et gourou Subhash Palekar, met en œuvre des mondes agraires alternatifs par le 
biais de  la double pratique de la critique et de la récupération. En me basant sur le travail de terrain effectué 
auprès de praticiens de l'État du Kerala, dans le sud de l'Inde, et sur la participation à des événements 
pédagogiques organisés par Palekar, je décri s la critique du mouvement concernant le courant agronomique 
(agents de vulgarisation agricole , universités agricoles et scientifiques) et leurs pratiques de récupération à la 
restauration à petite culture basée sur les principes agro -écologiques et les bi ologies indiennes. Leur critique 
associe des arguments politico -écologiques bien connus contre le productionnisme et les injustices du régime 
alimentaire mondial, avec des tropes nationalistes hindouistes mettant en lumière des complots occidentaux et 
une science corrompue. Pour leur travail de récupération, ces agriculteurs naturels s 'appuient, d 'une part, sur les 
technologies agroécologiques itinérantes (fermentation, espacement, paillage, élevage bovin) et sur les 
conceptions «probiotiques», microbiologi ques et symbiotiques actuelles du sol et de l 'agriculture. Par ailleurs, 
ils utilisent des tropes nativistes hindous, insistant sur les propriétés exceptionnelles des espèces agraires 
originaires et appartenant à l 'Inde. J'utilise l'idée de politique ontol ogique pour décrire les performances du 
mouvement en tant que représentation d'un monde rural alternatif, dans lequel des humains, des animaux, des 
plantes, des mycorhizes et des microbes autres que les humains, pratiquent l'agriculture ensemble.  
                                                                                                                                               
1 PD Dr. Daniel Münster, Juni or Research Group Leader at the Heidelberg Center for Transcultural Studies, Heidelberg 
University, Germany. Email: Daniel.muenster "at" asia -europe.uni -heidelberg.de . This research was funded by the  Asia and 
Europe in a Global Context  Cluster of Excellenc e, Heidelberg University, Germany. I would also like to express my sincere 
gratitude to Andrew Flachs and Ursula Münster for their feedback on earlier drafts of the article, as well as to Simon 
Batterbury and two anonymous JPE  reviewers for their valuable comments.  This is the seventh  article in Andrew Flachs 
(ed.). 2018. "Performing development roles: theorizing agriculture as performance", Special Section of the  Journal of 
Political Ecology  25: 638-764. 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 749 
 Mots -clés: anthropologie agricole; agricultures alternatives; nature / cultures; la critique; politique ontologique; 
cultivateurs à petite échelle; Inde; Kerala; Subhash Palekar  
 
Resumen  
Este artículo explora cómo Zero Budget Natural Farming, un movimiento agrícola  natural centrado en su 
fundador y gurú Subhash Palekar, promulga mundos agrarios alternativos a través de las prácticas duales de 
crítica y recuperación. Basándome en el trabajo de campo entre los practicantes en el estado de Kerala, en el 
sur de la India , y en la participación en los eventos de enseñanza organizados por Palekar, describo la crítica 
del movimiento a la corriente principal en agronomía (extensión estatal, universidades de agricultura, científicos) y sus prácticas de recuperación para restau rar cultivos en pequeña escala. Basados en supuestos 
biografías y principios agroecológicos indios. Su crítica combina argumentos familiares, ecológicos y políticos 
contra el produccionismo y las injusticias del régimen alimentario global con los tropos hindúes nacionalistas 
de las conspiraciones occidentales y la ciencia corrupta. Para su trabajo de recuperación, estos agricultores 
naturales recurren, por un lado, a tecnologías agroecológicas ambulantes (fermentos, espaciamiento, acolchado, cría de vacas ) y entendimientos " probióticos ", microbiológicos y simbióticos actuales del suelo y la agricultura, 
y por otro lado en hindú tropos nativistas, insistiendo en las propiedades excepcionales de las especies agrarias 
nativas de (y que pertenecen a) la India.  Utilizo la idea de la política ontológica para describir los movimientos 
de los movimientos como la promulgación de un mundo rural alternativo, en el que los humanos, los animales, 
las plantas, la micorriza y los microbios están haciendo juntos la agricul tura. 
Palabras clave: a ntropología agrícola; agricultura alternativa; c ulturas naturales crítica; política ontológica; 
cultivadores de pequeña escala; India; Kerala; Subhash Palekar  
 
Zusammenfassung  
Der Artikel untersucht wie eine indische Naturlandbaubewe gung, die Zero Budget Natural Farming Bewegung , 
die sich auf ihren Gründer und Guru Subhash Palekar konzentriert, alternative agrarische W elten durch die 
doppelte Praxis  der Kritik und der Genesung (recuperation)  erschafft . Basiere nd auf Feldforschung  bei 
Kleinbauern im südindischen Bundesstaat Kerala und bei  Lehrgängen  von Palekar beschreibe ich die Kritik der 
Bewegung am a gronomischen Mainstream (Landwirthschaftsberater , Landwirtschaftsuniversitäten, 
Wissenschaftler) und ihre Praktiken der Wiederherstellu ng von kleinbäuerlicher Landwirtschaft  basierend auf 
vermeintlich  indischen agrarökologischen Prinzipien und Biologien. Ihre Kritik kombiniert bekannte politisch -
ökologische Argumente gegen den Produktionismus und die Ungerechtigkeiten des globalen 
Nahrung smittelregimes mit den hindunationalistischen Theorien  einer westliche n Verschwörungen und 
korrupter Wissenschaft. Für ihre wiederherstellende  Arbeit greifen die Naturland bauern einerseits auf bekannte 
agroökologische Technologien (Fermenta tion, Pflanzabstand, Mulchen, Kuhhaltung) und aktuelle 
„probiotische ", mikrobiologische und symbiotische Vorstellungen von Boden und Landwirtschaft und 
andererseits auf nationalistische  Ideen , die auf den außergewöhnlichen Eigenschaften von in Indien heimischen  
landwirtsc haftlichen Arten bestehen. Ich benutze den Begriff  der ontologischen Politik, um die performative 
Produktion einer alternative n ländliche Welt, in der Menschen, nicht -menschliche Tiere, Pflanzen, Mycoriza 
und Mikroben gemeinsam Landwirtschaft betreiben , in dieser Bewegung zu beschreiben . 
Schlüsselwörter : Ethnologie der Landwirtschaft; alternative landwirtschaft; naturenkulturen; kritik; 
ontologische politik; kleinbau ern; Indien; Kerala; Subhash Palekar 
 
1. Introduction  
When I reached Mr. Appachan 's2 farm in the Christian settler region of Wayanad on the day he wanted  
to show me how to make jīv āmṛta, the fermented brew of the urine and dung of native cows that is central to 
Zero Budget Natural Farming  (ZBNF) , another visitor arrived on a motorcycle, who was also keen on learning 
about natural farming' s "miracle preparation. " To my surprise Mr . Kumar introduced himself as the Agricultural 
Officer of the local Krishi Bhavan, one of the main institutions for agricultural extension in Kerala. As Mr. 
Appachan carefully retrieved handfuls  of the cow dung that he had collected in the past weeks from his native 
cow ( nāṭan paśu), appraised its texture and smell , and mixed it with a bucket of urine  collected from th e same 
cow,  the three of us –  the agronomist, the ethnographer , and the farmer  – had a conversation that ranged across  
                                                                                                                                               
2 All names are pseudonyms.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 750 
 the sensory differences between native and hybrid cows , "beneficial microorganisms " (mitra kī ṭaṇṇal ) in the 
soil, the pH values in aerobic fermentation , and the potential of jīvām ṛta for restoring  the degraded fields of 
Wayanad. While Appachan continued to add a flour of pulses , sugar cane jig gery,  and a handful of forest soil 
to the mixture , I recalled our previous conversations during which he had expressed his discontent with the 
agronomy of the Green Revolution as well as  with the indifference of agricultural officers, who , according to 
him, were "interested in their salary only ", and with the scientific advice to apply more chemicals to his fields  
he had received all his life . 
As Appachan stirred the mixture that would ferment  in a few days  to become the " nectar of life " (jīvān 
means life , amṛta is a divine nectar of Hindu mythology) in a 200 liter barrel, he kept politely silent about the 
harsh critique leveled by himself and other self -declared natural farmers  against agronom ical sciences  and state 
extension workers . Toda y's event was  "beyond critique " (Shear and Burke 2013) . It was about tinkering with 
and celebrating new low cost technologies  for recuperating small -scale agriculture. As we walked b ack towards 
the house Mr. Kumar revealed his plans to make Mr. Appachan 's farm a model farm  for the experimental 
application of jīvām ṛta for paddy cultivation  (on model farms see also Flachs 2017) . The collaboration  between  
the alternative f armer and the state agronomist  occurred  at a moment in which it would be easy  to dismiss 
science as inhumane and flawed (Shiva 1991)  and alternative agricultur e as reactionary and nativist (Nanda 
2003). I take the slowly fermenting  barre l of jīvām ṛta as an indicator of what recuperation might come to be. It 
indexes an ontological politics that involves the performances of humans and microbes in a project of 
recuperating small -scale agriculture that necessitates both the critique of science and a curiosity about emerging 
scientific facts.  
This article presents the onto -epistemological project of ZBNF as a heterogeneous  combination of 
critique and recuperation. Natural Farming presents a historically situated and place -based critique of sci ence 
and of ' productivist ' (Wilson and Rigg 2003)  agriculture. The movement challenges conventional or mainstream 
agriculture with many of the same arguments shared by scientists, activists , and farmer -activists in the 
cosm opolitan fields of agroecology and alternat ive and organic farming, which have emerged in response to the 
externalities of industrial agriculture since the beginning of the twentieth century (for an inst itutional history 
see Lockeretz 2007; Thirsk 2000). I hope to show the ambivalent position of science in ZBNF. On one hand, it is seen as foreign occupying force, responsible for deskilling farmers and the colonization of traditional 
lifeworlds. On the o ther hand, recent biological sciences ( e.g. microbiology, ecology, soil science) with their 
increasingly  symbiotic  (Gilbert et al. 2012) and "probiotic " (Lorimer 2017)  understandings of soil and plant life 
are also an inspiration fo r the ecological renewal of agriculture. By teaching farmers about bacteria, 
mycorrhiza e, symbiosis , and metabolic relations between plants , the world of soil and animals in  ZBNF works 
toward a restoration of relationships of care (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017) between humans, animals, plants , 
microbes , and the reskilling of farmers with knowledge  about soils and other interdependent ecosystems in 
agriculture. Following Donna Haraway 's formulation I see this as a recuperative politics, which makes possible 
a "partial and robust biological -cultural -political -technological recuperation and recomposit ion […]"  (Haraway 
2016: 101) . 
My perspective on alternative agriculture rejects two prevalent positions in the literature. The first is the 
uncritical endorsement of natural farming movements as progressive movements for food sovereignty. Khadse 
et al.  (2017)  celebrate Zero Budget Farming as a success story of " scaling up"  agroecology, but remain largely 
silent about many of the contradictions of the movement, most n otably the Hindu nationalist affinities I detail 
below. The second position outright rejects alternative agricultures  and other forms of neo-traditional 
environmentalism for their convergence with the Hindu Right in their perspective on pre -colonial India as 
largely "intact " (Mawdsley 2006) and their putatively anti-science stand (Nanda  2006, 2003) . Both of these 
positions, by either interrogating the contradictions of neo-traditionalism or focusing only  on the urgency of 
agroecological reform , fail to fully appreciate the creativity and affect involved in the ontological politics  of 
alternative agronomies. Following Naisargi Dave  (2017)  I am skeptical of what she calls the tyranny of 
consistency, "which demand s that any ethics in an oppositional or oblique relationships to the way things are 
(…) account for its apparent inconsistencies  or contradictions " (Dave 2017: 37) . 
This article deals with the epistemological, political , and practical consequences of the critiques of rural 
realities expressed by ' natural ' farmers. Their intellectual rejection o f soil science, agricultural engineering, 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 751 
 development ideologies, and the workings of the global agro-food system is rooted in their own past experiences 
with growing crops in a crisis conjuncture. Their critique contributes to quite outspoken forms of opp ositional 
knowledge and contestations of mainstream agricultural science and technology. Natural farmers are enacting their contestations in their fields.  Through tinkering with alternative technologies and practices they are 
performing an alternative rura l reality  of mutualism and abundance: "Realities are produced along with the 
statements that report them " (Law 2004: 38) . The politics of alternative  agriculture  performances lies in their 
production of  alternative realities , the ontological otherwise, by rejecting chemical theories and nurturing 
microbial and symbiotic understandings of cultivation . These performances also include the microbial cultures 
and other reevaluated species.  
Understanding agri culture as performance speaks of the discursive and non -discursive enactments of 
specific styles and realities of agriculture. My perspective on agriculture as performance combines the economic 
and ecological realism of political ecology with attention by Science and Technology Studies  (STS) to 
ontological "multiplicity " (Mol 2002) in agriculture enacted by varieties of scientific knowledge and farming 
practices in (see also Goldman et al. 2011) . The challenges put forwar d by Subhash Palekar, the main 
protagonist of this article, in books , in social media , and  on stage are rooted in a profound understanding of 
what political ecologists call "vectors of rural dispossession" (Li 2009: 71) that see small -scale cultivators acr oss 
the G lobal South struggle to survive in the globally integrated market for agrarian commodities (Weis 2007). 
Alternative agricultures respond to rising suicides, declining yields, and increasing debts. They unfold with new 
force after the end of hegemony. Farming as performance, as a way of doing, knowing, enacting farming, has 
increasingly become experimental. The current po litical -ecological crisis among small- holders in India has 
stripped all systems of farming of their taken -for-grantedness. Uncertainty and plurality is the new normal.  
What is Zero Budget Natural Farming? In the shadow of Kerala's much -noted organic policy  (Thottathil 
2014), a more radical natural farming movement has become active. Followers of charismatic farmer -cum -
scientist Subhash Palekar practice an alternative agronomy , also known as 'Zero Budget Spiritual Farming'  that 
is based on the activation of microbial life in the soil via a revival of putatively ' ancient ' farming methods and 
technological innovations by their 'guru'  Palekar. Compared to certified organic farmers in the region, " zero 
budget " farmers, as they ca ll themselves, pose a radical challenge to the agricultural system, both in terms of 
their disregard for state ag ronomy and their working toward  food sovereignty and independence of agrarian 
markets. Aiming for the economic and ecological self -sufficiency of their farms, Palekar and his disciples are 
outspoken critics of mainstream ag ricultural sciences, government -run agronomical extension , and everything 
that is associated with modern industrial agriculture and the global food regime. They counter these w ith utopian 
visions of rural autonomy, prosperity , and abundance that are actualized through heterodox practices based on 
fermentation, multispecies mutualism , and the centrality of native cows. However, their recuperative practices 
also build on emergent scientific understandings.  
Small -scale producers of Wayanad , like Mr. Appachan, have experienced the ecological and financial 
costs of cash crop farming under neoliberalizing condit ions. When Mr. Appachan speaks of his  knowledge and 
practice as 'natural f arming' , or prakṛti kṛṣi in Malayalam
3, he explicitly contrast s it with both  organic farming 
(jaiva  kṛṣi) and what he calls 'chemical ' farming (rāsa kṛṣi). Natural farmers  participate in a complex 
epistemological and ontological project of recuperating vitality, multispecies togetherness, symbiotic processes , 
and prosp erity in a dying  and degraded  world of smallholder agriculture . However , they feel  this relational and 
ecological vision can only be achieved by a fundamental break with mainstream science and development and 
through the exposure of the  'Western conspiracy ' against Indian agriculture.  It is thus a dual project of ecological 
repair and place -based critique  of science.  
The ontological quality  of this  project involves doing agriculture differen tly — sensing, inhabiting, and 
dwelling  in new ways on the farm and cultivating modes of care that allow for symbiotically  relating to soils, 
plants, insects, animals , and even microbes . Regenerative ways of farming, they sense, have the potential to 
                                                                                                                                               
3 Malayalam is the lang uage spoken in Kerala. English is widely used in Kerala when speaking about farming methods, 
owing perhaps to the fact that Palekar does speak in English to his audience and that organic farming was earlier introduced 
by Non -Governmental Organisations and certifying bodies with strong transnational ties. ZBNF is hence most commonly 
known as zero budget k ṛṣi in Wayanad.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 752 
 affec tively and economically  transform precarious lifeworlds  into self-sufficient , autonomous  and abundant 
worlds of life. Following Annemarie Mol (1999) among  others, I call the combined challenges  of thinking, 
knowing and doing agriculture differently an  "ontological politics " (Mol 1999) . Cultivation , like laboratory 
work , can be described as " a sociomaterial practice where reality is transformed and where new ways of doing 
reality are crafted " (1999: 75). In ontological politics "'the real ' is implicated in the 'political ' and vice versa " 
(1999:  74). Mario Blaser calls this a politics of worlding:  "(…) a politics concerned with the processes through 
which a world is being brought into existence "  (2016: 552) .  
I have written  elsewhere about the practices of natural farming, the context of agrarian crisis that 
contributed to their rise , and the novel relationships with native cow s in Zero Budget Natural Farming  (Münster 
2016, 2017b). In this article , I focus on the discursive  performances  of this alternative agriculture movement – 
its critiques of science, the state, and the West : how does this natural farming mo vement articulate questions of 
authenticity, belonging , and attachment to place in a historical conjuncture where  various  enactments of 
knowledge , science, and practice compete for allegiance ? How does the movement position  its agronomical 
innovations in relation to  the sciences and engineering involved in contemporary agriculture? What specific 
epistemic space do they carve out fo r their movement in confronting  the encroachments of colonialism, global 
capitalism, Indian nationalism , and the biopolitics of development  in their livelihoods? What are the positive 
uses of science for the onto -epistemological project of cultivating a new  ecological agriculture of the future in 
a postcolonial landscape?  
 
2. On methodology 
This article is based on several periods  of ethnographic fieldwork  among smallholder farmers in 
Wayanad,  Kerala, beginning in  2008 (Figure 1) . I had first visited Wayanad district in order to study  the 
historical changes in the agrarian landscape  (Müns ter 2017a) and how they contributed to crisis and farmer  
suicides  (Münster 2015a) . At the agrarian frontier of Wayanad, located at the frontier of settler cash -crop 
farming and wildlife conservation, decades of plantation monocropping, chemical biocides and commercial 
cultivars have produced a n 'environment of crisis ', in which people involved in extractive agriculture experience 
increasing precarity, debt, and the destruction of their agro -environ ments. In the context of the agrarian suicide 
crisis , Subhash Palekar 's Zero Budget Farming was a beacon of hope  that could provide a plausible answer to 
question s of how to continue living as agriculturalists on a damaged planet.  
This article, however, de spite being informed by my fieldwork among farmers, focusses mostly  on the 
guru of the movement,  Palekar,  who I have  encountered in ZBNF  training camps, in his books and all over the 
internet (on various social media platforms and websites ).4 I will focus on his published writings  (Palekar 
2010b, 2011).  Palekar mostl y speaks English when addressing farmers in South India . His English  books are 
not translations  from vernacular languages , but written by Palekar himself in English . I have resisted the 
temptation to 'translate ' Palekar 's English into (my Germanic version of) Standard  English in the hope that these 
verbatim quotes may convey a good sense of his oral style  and rhetorical force.  Comparing his writings with 
my audio tape from the workshop in Nilambur, I find his written texts almost identical in content , wordi ng and 
style to his performances of his message on stage. T he way his quotes are reproduced  here is also very close to 
the way he spoke to me on the one occasion I was able to interview him in 2014. This unfiltered, r aw, and 
uncorrected stream of M arathi-inflected English seem s to be Palekar 's deliberate  choice  and part of his  populist 
agenda. As he explains  in the preface to his first book,  he had ' reader farmers ' in mind  when writing it , "who 
cannot  speak English but can read a simple no n literal English.  So, they will accept this rustic or boorish English 
language, no doubt . I have not written these books for Professors, Doctors, Scientists, Barristers or so called 
Intellectuals. So, please, Sorry " (Palekar 2010b: 11) .  
 
 
                                                                                                                                               
4 Subhash Palekar runs his own website, which also features video lectures he has given 
(http://palekarzerobudgetspiritualfarming.org , accessed 15 /11/2013). The online presence of his community followers is 
also vast.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 753 
 Figure 1: Wayanad, Kerala.  Cartography B. Kraus . 
 
3. Critique of s cience: confronting the m ainstream  
In February 2014, I participate d in one of the  five-day workshop s on Zero Budget Natural Farming , or 
celavill ā prakṛti kṛṣi in Malaylam, in the South Indian town of Nilambur (Kerala ), which Subhash Palekar was 
going to teach . I had first met his followers in Wayanad , some 150 committed farmers who , like Mr. Appachand 
were mostly members of the agrarian settler community that had migrated to Wayanad in the second half of the 
20th Century. Mr. Appachan, for example, had converted to ZBN in 2008 when Palekar taught his first  workshop 
in Wayanad.  Wayanad thus came relatively late to the movement, which has existed since the mid 1990s and is  
much larger in other parts of South India, most notably in Karnataka . 
The 2014 workshop  in Nilambur  had the character of a revival meeting for peasant farmers. It was hosted 
in a large multi -purpose auditorium in the outskirts of town at the foothills of  the Western Ghats, geographically 
located directl y below Wayanad district . The auditorium seated several  hundred farmers from across Kerala, 
members of women 's self -help groups ( Kudumba Shree ), agricultural officer s, and other m embers of the 
interested public in long rows of white plastic chairs. The wor kshop lasted long hot days from morning to 
evening interrupted only by a vegetarian l unch break and 'coffee breaks ' without coffee (Palekar pushes his 
followers to break the habits of drinking te a, coffee and milk). Most of the day was thus spent listening to 
Palekar on stage.  
Palekar  speaks in a very energetic and captivating  style and mostly  in English, which another person on 
stage struggles to translate to Malayalam after every other sentence . Palekar 's speech is full of irony and puns. 
He calls Justus von Liebig (1803 -1873), the nineteenth -cent ury pioneer of soil chemistry, " Mr. L ie Big "; 
renames biodynamic farming " bio-dynamite farming "; refers to the Green Revolution as " suicide revolution "; 
and mocks the incompetence of extension officers with little  anecdotes. Occasionally he interrupts his lectures 

Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 754 
 and calls his audience to order  shout ing, "Are you understood?! ", to which his audience  replies with and 
enthusiastic "Yes!" 
Palekar holds a  BSc in agronomy and is a farmer  himself. According to his scatt ered autobiographical 
statements, he  developed his heterodox agronomy in the years 1989 to 1995 on his farm in his native 
Maharashtra . He spent these years studying Vedas,  Western sciences and organic farming methods. Most 
importantly , he conduct ed experim ents on his farm until he  found his system of natural farming and  the recipes 
for his  central 'miracle preparations ' which he calls jīvāmṛta (Sanskrit: nectar of life)  and bijāmṛta (seed nectar) . 
Before Palekar lets his audience in on his findings and his methodology he spends the first two days debunking 
all other methods of farming, the Green Rev olution and agriculture science. He decries  the 'scandal ' of 
vermicomposting as practiced by organic agriculture which robs Indian soil of fertil ity, and lectures on 
incompetent and corrupt a griculture universities, which " should be closed ." He warns his audience to keep away 
from "demonic " substances (chem ical fertilizers, pesticides ), "demonic " species  (Bos taurus  or "foreign cows ", 
the "destructor beast " Eisenia foetida which is the earthworm used in vermicomposting), hybrid seeds, and 
"demonic " technologies  (biotechnology and the "demon tra ctor"):  
 
This tractor is a demon, which destroy your future. This tractor does not give you milk, dung or 
urine, but it drinks Diesel, which is not prepared in any factory, which is lifted through the 
stomach of the earth and which is created before crore of years, by buried forests under the earth 
by means of earthquake and volcanoes . (Palekar 2011: 20)  
 
Wayanad 's farmers respond particularly emotional ly to Palekar 's repeated references to rural  suicide s 
and the increase in dreaded diseases, most notably cancer . After many years of prosperity from cultivating 
pepper  and ot her high-value cash crops Wayanad ha s entered a situation of crisis, not least because of 
increasingly speculative monocrops and chemical inputs that have d egraded soils  and human health. Many have 
subsequently lost their entire plantations to pathogens , cancer is on the rise,  and farmers are trapped in loan and 
pesticide treadmills. For farmers it is quite clear that they have been ill advised by the "govern ment " [sarkkār]. 
Palekar is perhaps more precise in pointing to the origin of agricultural extension work in India.  
 
Who guide the farmers to purchase these inputs? Agricultural Universities? Yes! Agricultural 
Universities! If, it is proved that, there is no any necessity to purchase or to use these inputs, so 
also, then, are Agricultural Universities misguiding the farmers? Yes! So, the guidelines of the 
Agricultural Universities are straight responsible for the debt. And debt is straight responsible 
for the suicides of the farmers. (Palekar 2010a: 5)  
 
Regarding suicides , Wayanad 's farmers can also relate to statements like this one, which was 
paraphrased several times during the workshop:  
 
Millions of farmers have com mitted suicides and these suicides waves are continued and are 
increasing. Every year millions of people are dying by increasing deathful diseases. Increasing 
cost of production by means of chemical farming and organic farming is the main cause for farmer' s suicides, and poisonous food and polluted air, water are the main causes for deathful 
diseases of both farmers and consumers; which is given by both chemical and organic farming . 
(Palekar 2013: 8)  
 
Natural farming 's promise of hope through a re storation of  joy and fascination in farming has to be seen in 
relationship to  farmers  being affected by declining incomes, forced exits from agriculture, deteriorating health, 
the disappearance of familiar species , and a general sense of abandon by state a gronomy.  
In the case of Wayanad and many other regions of the South Asia sustainable agro ecological knowledge, 
skills and practice have been lost in the "epistemic rift" (Schneider and McMichael 2010) of decades of chemical 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 755 
 farming. Farmers with a commitme nt to continue l iving as agriculturalists today  cannot simply tap into cultural 
reserves of pre-Green Revolution practices . Instead they are faced with a plurality of  new competing and 
heterogeneous technologies and practices that they are called upon to a dapt. After independence, the region 
became a frontier of expanding agrarian capitalism. Its forested landscape turned into the site of a "land -rush" 
of internal colonization by Syrian Christian settlers from central Kerala. On these fertile forest soils , settler 
farmers successfully established cash crop cultivation of a great variety of spices and export crops.  A boom in 
these products brought considerable wealth to some parts of Wayanad in the 1980s and 1990s. To simplify a 
very complex story, a  dual cri sis of production and of prices hit the region at the end of the 20th century. 
Fluctuations in the liberalized and globalized commodities market manifested themselves for farmers as a series 
of devastating price crashes of central commodities , most of all coffee and pepper. While prices eventually rose 
again , the crisis of production turned out to be much more pervasive. Decades of overuse of chemicals and 
monocropping and lack of management of soil fertility have depleted formerly fertile forest land.  
Living through agrarian crisis has put the hegemony of Green Revolution agronomy  in question for 
many,  and opened up possibilit ies for experiment ing with radically alternative non-capitalist agronomies , and 
to contest the knowledge, practices , and materialitie s disseminated by the agricultural office and other 
institutions of state extension work.  The moment of pause and reflection that the suicide crisis afforded, was 
also a moment in which performances of traditional, alternative , and mainstream agr iculture p luralized. Farmers 
would speak of chemical -intensive cash crop agriculture as the  "traditional " agriculture  of Wayanad 's settlers, 
alongside the " traditional " paddy agriculture of Wayanad 's autochthonous agrarian castes .5 Certified organic 
agriculture, by contrast, is increasingly "mainstreamed " through its standardization and propagat ion by a various 
governmental and non -governmental institutions.  This leaves ample room for a variety of alternative 
agricultur al systems and technologies to flourish and circ ulate among more edgy farmers who experiment with 
these alternatives. Palekar and his followers are radically opposing what they consider to be  the agrarian 
mainstream.  
Mainstream agriculture " refers to prescribed agricultural practices within conventional systems […]. 
Mainstream agriculture and the wider agri -food regime is underpinned by a productivist logic with established 
supply chains and formal institutions and actors " (Maye 2016) . Under this global productivist regime, 
agricultural science and research, as well as state and industry support is exclusively geared towards the 
expansion of production, quantitative growth, increase of yield, and the intensification of chemical and capital 
inputs (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015) . The Green Revolutions of the 1960s have brought productivist regimes to 
many countries in Asia —installed to combat hunger a nd to win the Cold War. Here is what Palekar has written  
about the " violent, unscientific, inhuman, barbarous, demonous, atrocious, ferocious, monstrous Green 
Revolution " (2010b: 13): "[it] is a world wide preplanned conspiracy to exploit our rural e conomy, natural 
resources like soil, water, environment and existence of living being " (2010b: 37) . 
For actual devotees of Palekar, ZBNF entails a change of personality , the cultivation of an agro-
environmental subjectivity,  as well as a change in th e culture of farming. Palekar camps double as revival 
meetings in which farmers were repeatedly invited to stand up, raise their right arm and solemnly vow to transform themselves from being a " demon destroyer of nature " to a " saint protector of nature ." In Palekar 's 
words:  
 
While practicing Zero Budget spiritual Farming in your farm, there will be a beginning of 
dramatic and miracle changes in your behavior automatically. You will be internally changed. 
(…) Your bad habits i.e. drinking the liquor, gambl ing, eating non vegetarian, waste , falsehood, 
defilement also will be continuously run away from you. Absolute cultivation of mind. Spiritual 
farming means to overall change you yourself. The internal change and external change 
simultaneously . (Palekar 2010b: 186)  
                                                                                                                                               
5 Autochthony is always a matter of temporal scales. All inhabitants of Wayanad migrated there at some point in hist ory. 
By autochthonous caste I am referring to cultivators and hunter -gatherer groups that lived in Wayanad prior to large scale 
immigration of cultivating settlers in the mid -20th century, a process I have called "internal colonization ." Autochthonous 
castes include groups that are classified as Scheduled Tribes.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 756 
  
Mr. Appachan, the Natural Farmer  of Wayanad with whom I talked for hours about his conversion to 
natural farming,  emphasised  the great importance of the aspects of ZBNF  that are unrelated to agriculture:  the 
'simple lifestyle ', the withdrawal of coffee, vegetarian food, and the daily appreciation of life on his farm. To 
Appachan ZBNF has been realized in the almost u topian terms set out by Palekar:  
 
Natural farming is a self -developing, self-nourishing and self -sufficient farming. So, in this 
system, there is no any human made exploitation. There is no any chance for it. It is a pain free, 
care free, loan free, passi on free6 farming. (Palekar 2010b: 194)  
 
Mr. Appachan was particularly impressed by Palekar' s insistence that farmers should not rely on the capacity 
of humans to control things. " He challenged us if we could produce a single molecule ", he sa id. From Palekar 
he claims to have learned that there are many things humans cannot do.  
 
4. Scientism , ecology and displaced knowledge in modern agri culture  
Agriculture is indeed an ancient empirical science , in which  cultivators innovate and engage in s easonal 
experiments  on the basis of vast knowledge about their environment. As Henke puts it: " In this sense, science 
and agriculture share a practical interest in a kind of mastery of the world, disciplining and systematizing it into a form that reduces b ut does not quite eliminate uncertainty " (Henke 2008: 6) . Much of farmers ' knowledge, 
however, is practical, experiential , tacit , or embod ied knowledge . Agriculture as science is thus closely r elated 
to skill (Stone 2007) , practice,  and performance (Richards 1993). There is thus a p oint to be made that scientist  
and economistic imaginings constitute a new quality of scientification in agriculture , with the power to alienat e 
producers from their own capacities for practical research. Chemical farming, in Palekar 's words " carries you 
from life to suicide, from creation to destruction, from knowledge to ignorance, (…)  from affluence to poverty . 
Chemical Farming is Allopathic farming " (Palekar 2010b: 193).  
Historically speaking , agric ulture has been a relative late comer to the scientification of human  
lifeworlds . Compared with human bodies, for example, wh ose study in medical texts  is among the oldest in the 
history of science (Foucault 2008 [1973]) , agriculture only became  the focus of scientific  attention in 
nineteenth -century Europe. But agrarian science and engineering h ad epochal consequences. Vaclav  Smil 
(2001)  has c alled the Haber -Bosch synthesis of ammonia and nitrogen one of the most important technological 
inventions of all human history, as it made chemical fertilizers and hence the contemporary growth in world populations possible. Scientism in agriculture has h ad close connections  to threats to human lives and responses  
to crises  such as famines . If we define scientism as " the misuse of the language of science, and its aura of 
predictive certainty, to portray certain political and economic visions as being inevi tably true, natural and 
triumphant " (Douglas 2009 : 145 ), then the question is : what  is the particular political,  economic , aesthetic vision 
that is rendered inevitable by technoscientif ic interventions in agriculture?  Defenders of the Green Revolution 
have always argued that it was all about hunger and poverty and continue to accuse it s critics  of "antiscience 
zealotry" (Borlaug 2000: 147) . On the other hand, its most outspoken critics have called it a project of the Cold 
War (Cullather 2013) . 
Agronomy, the technoscientific research in agriculture, is historically deeply entangled with European 
colonialism (Brockway 2002) and the development of global food regimes since the mid -nineteenth c entury 
(Friedmann 2005). The publication of German chemist Justus von Liebig 's 1840  seminal work Organic 
chemistry and its application to agriculture and physiology  is inextricably linked to the 'Guano mania ' of the 
1840s (Mann 2011). Liebig had recommended the use of Guano as the best source of nitrogen, a scientific 
statement that co ntributed significantly of the ' age of guano ', in which the Guano islands of f the coast of South 
America became an essential material part of the first global food regime that provided cheap food  for the  
Industr ial Revolution in Europe  (Friedmann 2005 ; Mann 2011). Colonial botanical gardens have been key 
                                                                                                                                               
6 In the context of Palekar’s writings, the notion of ‘passion free’ refers to Indian yogic tradition of freedom from passions 
and attachments as a goal for an ascetic lifestyle. It does not refer  to boring farming without passion.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 757 
 research institution s for the expansion of tropical plantation crops across the colonial world. The globalizatio n 
of cultivars like rubber, tea or coffee has been synonymous with Green Revolution research and extension.  
With the introduction of the Green Revolution in 1966, each state in India was given a centrally funded 
State Agriculture University as part of the National Agricultural Research System. In 1971 the Kerala 
Agricultural University (KAU) was founded, incorporating two earlier state -run institutions, the Agricultural 
College and Research Institute at Vellayani , and the College of Veterinary and Animal Sc ience at Mannuthy .7 
Since then, the state of Kerala has installed a wide network of research and extension institution s. Kerala 
Agricultural University includes six colleges, six Regional Agricultural Research Stations (RARS), seven KVK, 15 Research Statio ns and 16 Research and Extension Units across the state.  
As became evident during my research on farmers ' suicides, rural publics in India are increasingly 
unhappy with agricultural recommendations and 'packages of practices .' The ag riculture officers and the 
researchers at Wayanad 's KVK and RARS stations did little to discourage farmers from shifting to monocultures 
and overusing chemicals and were seen as helpless when it came to fighting the pathogens and drought that ruined so many fields in Wayanad. Re search and Extension has to a great exten t lost legitimacy among small-
scale producers. During the Nilambur workshop, small farmers would cheer statements like Palekar 's calls to  
"boycott  all the techniques of Agricultural Universities ", and his sentiment that  "Agricultural Universities have 
no any right to say that chemical farming is a science and truth. It is a fraud " (2013: 15) . While disaffection 
with state extension is very widespread in Wayanad, not all farmers criticize it for th e same reasons. Natural 
Farmers  constitute only a tiny fraction of the settler farmers in Wayanad. A more widespread r esponse to the 
agrarian crisis is the practice of speculative cropping of ginger  (Zingiber officinale ) with the intense use of 
fertilizers and biocides  (Münster 2015b). This practice also runs a gainst agronomists'  recommendation s, and 
ginger growers are also critical of governmental extension work. To assess the unique contribution by natural 
farming, I thus turn to their performances of cultivating " with nature ." 
 
5. Recuperation:  soil ontologie s in Natural Farming  
 
One way to live and die well as mortal critters in the Chthulucene is to join forces to reconstitute 
refuges, to make possible partial and robust biological -cultural -political-technological 
recuperation and recomposition  […]. (Haraway 2016: 101) 
 
Palekar and other contemporary and historical critics of the '"actually existing " science'  (Kloppenburg 
1991) of agronomy and of technoscientific interventions in agricultural production have much in common .  This 
includes a rejection of an increasing chemicalization of agriculture in favor o f biological dynamics ; critique of 
the mechanical understanding of soil fertility and plant health in favor of symbiotic and microbial processes; 
uneasiness about the loss of tacit and  local/traditional knowledge in processes of deskilling and loss of 
biocultural diversity; and dismay at  the increasingly exploitative integration of small farms in to industrial 
complexes 'upstream ' and 'downstream ' of farming (Levins and Lewontin 1985), among numerous other  issues.  
Despite the shared concerns among activists and critics of agriculture, I hope to show that  Palekar 's 
position of critique is also very specific and differs from many other alternative agricultures —permaculture, 
biodynamic, organic —in its insistence that agrarian technoscience is  not so much a hybri d of high modernism 
(Scott 1998) and capitalist development but first of all ' Western ', 'foreign ', and alien to India. According to 
Palekar most practitioners of  alternative agriculture s other than his own are also part of the foreign exploiter 
system: 
 
Friends, attention please, how much dangerous is chemical farming, more dangerous is this 
Organic or Biodynamic or Sustainable Farming. These alternative farming systems ar e more 
exploiter than Green Revolution techniques. We have to strongly protest against these 
                                                                                                                                               
7 For the history of KAU see http://www.kau.in/basic -page/about -kerala -agricultural -university . Accessed 10/12/ 2016.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 758 
 alternatives. These both, chemical and organic farming systems are a preplanned array or 
conspiracy arranged by this exploiter system. (Palekar 2010b: 39 , emphasis in original)  
 
Subhash Palekar 's movement is arguably the largest and most successful among several agroecological 
systems in India that call themselves n atural farming  and work toward a specifically Indian system . These 
communities of oppositional theory and alternative practice are united in their opposition to both Green 
Revolution agriculture, in the widest sense of the word, and  the conventionalization trends in the certified 
organic agriculture of exporters, NGOs, and sustainable developers , which are deemed Western. Indian 
alternative agricultures have since the beginning struggled to find the proper balance between an embrace of 
Western science and a revival of Indian agronomical heritage. There seems to be a shared tendency to glorify 
the agrarian past, as is evident in this statement from Claude Alvares ' popular Organic Farming Sourcebook:  
 
In contrast [to the Green Revolution], agricultural practice in India dates back more than 4,000 
years. Indian agriculture therefore could be called a self -sustaining agriculture simply because it 
has maintained soil fertility over this enormously huge period of time. This is permaculture at its 
best. (Bajaj and Srinivas 1996: 10)   
 
Alternative agricu ltural  movements beyond organic operate across India, with highly variegated 
numbers of followers and impact s. Their oppositional understandings of agriculture and  practices of farming 
have complex transcultural influences  that include  Mahatma  G andhi's (1869–1948) ideas of rurality and ascetic 
lifestyle (Jodhka 2002) , the agrarian ecocritique of Rachel Carson (1907 –1964), Albert Howard (1873–1947) 
and Masanobu Fukuoka (1913–2008),  and the  travelling technol ogies of al ternative agricultural  movements 
like Permaculture or Biodynamic farming. Palekar is also only one among several charismatic agrarian gurus  
of natural farming in India ; other important names include  L. Narayana Reddy,  Shripad Dabholkar (1924–
2001), G. Namm alvar (1938–2013) and Baskar Save (1922 –2015) , who each innovated their own style of 
farming and have regional groups of followers . It may not come a s a great surprise that Palekar rejects them all:  
 
They have given the name for their alternative technolo gy as 'Organic Farming ', 'Eco Friendly 
Farming' , 'Agro Ecological farming ', 'Jaiva Krishi ', 'Alternative Farming ', 'Sustainable Farming ', 
'Saawaya Krishi ', 'Aero Greens Technology ', 'Biodynamic Farming ', 'Rhishi Krishi Technology ', 
'Agnihotra Farming ', 'Rekki Farming'  and so on. All these techniques are alternative techniques, 
but unnatural and non -scientific techniques. (Palekar 2010b: 120)  
 
The reason for rejecting them – being unnatural –  points to the central theorem in the recuperative si de 
of Palekar 's system: the nature of nature.  
 Which is in existence in the nature is natural and which is not in existence in nature is unnatural. 
(…) What is natural, it will be not certified by Agricultural University or Organic University or 
any third party. It will be certified only by the Nature. Nature will define. Nature can discuss with it's mouth, in it's language. What is nature's language? Forest trees are the forest's language . 
(2013: 60)  
 
Palekar 's idea of Nature (capital N  intended) is based on an idealized forest  as a model ecosystem . In the 
forest, he claims, we can observe plants growing and bearing  countless fruits without any interference from  
humans. In the same way , natural farming has to follow the example of the fore st: "How nature is self -
developing, self -nourishing and sel f-sufficient, our Spiritual Farm ing is also self -developing, self -nourishing 
and self -sufficient " (Palekar 2010b: 184) . In the forest plants don 't need any farm management techniques, 
mainstream or organic, in order to bear fruit: " That means, both chemical and organic farming are totally absent 
in the nature " (Palekar 2013: 15) . Observing forests is also th e preferred scientific method: " What are existed 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 759 
 in the nature are the knowledge, science, truth and non -violence. Forest is the nature. Nature is the system of 
the God, eyes of the God " (Palekar 2 013: 14). Looking at the actual performances of nature (Abram and Lien 
2011)  in ZBNF, the centrality of domesticated plants and animals, most notably the native cow , is a significant  
blind spot to the forest as model ecosystem. The forest seems to be little more an allegory , than an actual 
reference to forest ecology , warning against Promethean hubris  in agricultural technology that decenters  the 
human in agriculture . 
The scorn and bi le Palekar has reserved for the sciences and biologies of mainstream farming are 
mirrored by his exuberant praise for the techniques and multispecies assemblages enrolled in Natural Farming. 
He activates all his poetic capaci ties when he speaks  of "beautif ul and marvelous biodiversity ", the grace  of 
native cows, their urine  and dung, and the amazing liveliness of soil , or compares  the necessity for mulching to 
the need for covering the body of your mother with a saree . His wit is then also sometimes combine d with 
ironical anthropomorphism, like when he calls microbes nature 's "input industries " that have been given 
"contracts " by G od to fix nitrogen, or speaks of " Potash the wanderer ." When it comes to his allies in the fields  
of academia , he has no  issue sp eaking the language of science and  even claim s that certain principles are " basic 
science"  or have been "proven by science ." On stage, he lectures  extensively in the ' scientific ' language of 
nutrient cycles,  microbial symbioses between plants and bacteria,  nitrogen  fixing,  soil biota,  phosphate 
solubilizing bacteria , mycorrhiza e, and so-on. Palekar 's system of farming  thus rests on the principle of 
consciously designing farm plots for multiple c rops and maximum diversity of species. The "five layer Palekar 
model " (Palekar 2010a) follows Palekar 's principle that plants  do not compete for water, but only for sunlight, 
and hence  arranges plots vertically for the best utilization of sunlight and shade.  
The main onto -epistemological shift happens when natural farmers learn a novel apprec iation of soil as 
a living being , or as Palekar puts it , as annapurna, mother soil . ZBNF is all about building and maintaining the 
health and fertility of soil with the help of microbial agents . The microbial turn in soil care is a remarkable shift 
from mainstream practices in Wayanad. Soil care is a fundamentally relational activity that requires humans, 
cows, plants and microorganism to work symbiotically for mutual benefit. The cows of ZBNF need to be 
absolutely native , dēśi cows as Palekar calls them or nāṭan paśu in Malayalam. Only Bos i ndicus , they claim , 
has the miraculous high microbial count in their dung and urine that makes it possible to cultivate 30 acre s (12 
ha) with one cow. As the movement is vegan , the cows ar e only kept for their dung and urine . The ir excrements 
are fermented  for several days with sugar, water and pulses into Palekar 's 'miracle prepation ' Jiwamrita   
(jīvāmṛta) — Sankrit for  'nectar of life ': 
 
Jiwamrita is an Amrit. Jiwamrita is a deathless, immortal beatitude of nectar. Jiwamrita has not 
only a microbial saturation; it has a spiritual power, make the soil saturated and spiritual, make 
the crops saturat ed and spiritual, make the food eater (naturally grown) nutrition saturated and 
spiritually saturated, powerful, potent, valiant, a mighty person. Jiwamrita is not only a culture; 
it is a message of God. Jiwamrita is a saver, protector of the life . (Palekar 2013: 131)  
 
When applied to the soil,  Jiwamrita  (jīvāmṛta) does not act as a fertiliser – which means it is not absorbed 
by the plants. Instead, it feeds and acti vates the soil microorganisms: " countless beneficial and effective 
microbes are divided speedily and activated; soil becomes bio -diversitically saturated, soil becomes alive 
animate; all creative forces and spiritual forces are activated in the soil " (Palekar 2010b: 128). Microorganisms 
in turn attract (native) earthworm s, who in turn cycle macronutrients  from deep layers of the soil  to topsoil . 
Earthworms and microbes feed on t he organic matter that is placed as mulch cover  on the ground. This entire 
process produces  humus near the roots and feeds the plants with nutrients. Plants grow and feed humans with 
healthy and nourishing grai ns and vegetables.  
These technologies are of course specified and refined by Palekar and his followers to suit the needs of 
particular crops and landscapes. But the transformation of practices and subjectivities actualizes a recuperative 
ontology of care . The performances of Natural  Farming are growing alternative worlds, they are " staging ", in 
Natasha Myers ' words , "livable fut ures for both plants and people " (Myers 2017: 299). One could call it a 
relational ontology of agriculture  (Goodman 2001) . It is all about working with  'nature ' and about enacting – 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 760 
 seeing, knowing, and doing –  an agriculture of abundance in which farmers stand on an 'ocean of nutrients ' 
under their f eet that simply needs to be activated by allowing microscopic processes and symbiotic principles 
to unfold as they would  naturally occur in forest ecologies. This is one side of the coin. But ZBNF is also about 
the claim that only native biologies (cows, e arthworms, seeds, microbes) have the capacity to recuperate India' s 
rural health and prosperity. And it further cla ims that India had mastered the science of agriculture thousands 
of years ago, with  the god Krishna as the first agronomist  (Pale kar 2010b: 165) , and that India 's Golden Age 
was destroyed by a conspiracy of foreign forces.  
 
6. Conclusion : performances a gainst purity  
 
Western philosophers are in very wrong confident mentality that, only they, have absolute truth. 
But, it is not co rrect. There is only [one] absolute philosophy that is In dian philosophy . (Palekar 
2013:  21) 
 
Slightly overstating the case, this quote  may be interpreted to indicate that Palekar replaces the violence 
of scientism with the chauvinism of Hindu supremacy. H e counters putative Western claims to universal 
'absolute ' truth with the equally disturbing (and false) claim that " there is only [one] absolute philosophy  [and]  
that is Indian philosophy " (Palekar 2013 : 21). To be sure, agrarian environmentalism, agroecology and food 
sovereignty movements have always tended to posit the belonging of species and technologies to specific places 
and to celebrate locality, authenticity, community, and indigenous knowledge as resources for the sustainable 
renewal of agrarian l ivelihoods. Alternative agricultures may need alternative sciences, as Kloppenbu rg put it: 
"Material resourc es for the reconstruction of a ' successor science'  are to be found in the 'local knowledge ' that 
is continually produced and reproduced by farmers a nd agricultural workers " (Kloppenburg 1991: 519). I follow 
Sivaramakrishnan and Cederlöf  (2006)  in asking what  is distinctive about South Asian discourses about 
authentic knowledge, belonging and affinity to landscape ( Sivaramakrishnan and Cederlöf 2006: 4)?  They 
doubt whether all references to tradition should necessarily  be understood as reactionary and nostalgic visions 
of the p ast. Instead, claims  are often " made to define and assert rights that were promised by the liberal state " 
(Sivaramakrishnan and Cederlöf 2006: 9) . 
Essentialist claims to the putative purity of indigenous, traditional or local knowledge have been 
effectively deconstructed (Agrawal 1995)  as "invented space of authenticity " (Gupta 1998: 229) . Palekar 's 
statement thus exemplifies Akhil Gupta 's point about the dangers of a politics of purity and continuity: 
"Discussion or efforts to " preserve " indigenous knowledge end up privileging certain kinds of knowledge over 
others " (Gupta 1998:  289). My hope is that the case of Palekar 's blunt and outspoken nationalist rhetoric may 
open up future conversations about environmentalism and questions of belonging. ZBNF may serve as a 
magnifier of the " false consciousness of place"  (Plumwood 2008) and the reliance on unhelpful purities and 
unacknowledged nationalisms that may be part of agrarian environmentalisms in more subtle ways .  
My aim is not simply  to 'expose ' nativist thinking or criticize  a false consciousness of place  (Plumwood  
2008)  in agrarian environmentalism. I hope to have been able to show that Zero Budget Farming is also a 
valuable contribution to theoretical and practical problems regarding food and agriculture in the contemporary 
world. This ambivalence makes Natural Farming a valuable case for the political ecology o f agriculture . The 
politically reactionary, economically naïve, and ecologically progressive traits cohabit in this movement. ZBNF 
makes uncomfortable  claims about mul tispecies belonging and  ecological nationalism, raises important 
questions about  epistemic violence in developmental  knowledge  impositions , imperial science, and the 
scientification of lifeworlds . It is visionary in attuning cultivators to  ecological  proce sses of symbiosis, 
coevolution, fermentation, and nitrogen cycling . 
Palekar 's very specific response – rejecting and selectively embracing modern science and technology – 
lacks epistemological and political purity (Shotwell 2016) . It is partially  articulated  in a backward -looking and 
chauvinistic idiom. At the same time, some of its critiques are  not unlike  the critical positions developed in 
political ecology and agricultural anthropology against  'Big Agriculture, Big Science and Big Capital ' (cf. 
Haraway 2016). ZBNF  makes sense to many small -scale farmers . Farmers in Wayanad  who have adopted it, 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 761 
 whether partially or fully, attest to its efficacy,  for increased yields  and availability of healthy and tasty  food, 
and to reduced costs and labour requirements. But most imp ortantly , they are certain that i t has restored their 
pleasure for working  in the field without having to handle toxic substances. A nd they blame  bad extension 
advice  for the dire situation of the agricultur al sector . South Indian farmers have  seen agricultural systems 
reorganized  in the name of science and for productivity  since colonial times  (Gupta 1998) . Mistrust of 
mainstream agricultural extension and agronomy is widespread among farmers in Wayanad , and usually backed 
by stro ng anecdotal evidence about clueless officia ls, easily noticeable evidence of the ecological costs of 
agrochemicals , and close experiences with the financial risks of growing cash crops .  
Palekar teaches the need to be attentive to metabolic relations and microbial worlds , and speak s at the 
same time of a scientific orientation and the joy of experimentation. This cautious embrace of  science is, again, 
not unlike the theoretical inspiration many anthropologists and political ecologists derive from cutting -edge 
corners of the sciences, such as the spe culative possibilities of "homo microbis " (Sagan 2013)  and the biology 
of "ecological evolutionary developmental worlding and unworlding"  (Haraway 2016: 97). Agriculture is about 
growing plants and raising an imals . Its performances include the world -making activities of  many species on 
the land and in the soil, some of them invisible, some of them chemical . A relational  political ecology of 
agriculture  can learn from natural farmers to take a closer look at hu man-microbial and other multispecies 
relations.  
However , theoretical and ethical traps are manifold in an ontological politics that combines biophilic 
relationality with place -based identity politics . Palekar frames his  critique of the State-Capital -Scienc e nexus 
in obscurantist idioms of conspiracy theories, cultural nationalism,  and Hindu chauvinisms.  He counters the 
justified critique of the violence of hybridization with a celebration of native cows that bring s him very clos e 
to forces of the Hindu Righ t. To farmers, for sure, only results – performances  – matter. Palekar 's Malayalee 
followers , not least because many of them are Syrian Christians,  translate and 'sanitize ' Palekar 's sweeping 
claims about spirituality, ancient Hindu wisdom and  the idiocy o f state-run extension into a pragmatic 
methodology ; into recipes and instructions  that have the potential of recuperating agrarian livelihoods. They do 
so by " tinkering " (on tinkering as care , see Mol 2008)  and experimenting with his blueprint. In their actual 
enactments, Palekar 's recommendations  get adapted, transformed , and contextualize d for the needs of the 
farmers and their biotic and abiotic environments. To fully and fairly appreciate the impact of alternative 
agricultures in postcolonial contexts, it is thus necessary to look at both their performances of critique and of 
recuperatio n. 
 
 
References  
Abram, S . and M .E. Lien. 2011. Performing nature at world's e nds. Ethnos  76(1): 3– 18. 
Agrawal, A. 1995. Dismantling the d ivide between indigenous and s cientific knowledge . Development and 
Change  26(3): 413– 439. draft 
Bajaj, J .K., and M.D. Srinivas. 1996. Annam bahu kurvīta: r ecollecting the Indian discipline of growing and 
sharing food in plenty . Madras: Centre for Policy Studies.  
Blaser, M. 2016. Is another cosmopolitics possible?  Cultural  Anthropo logy 31(4): 545 –570.  
Borlaug, N.E. 2000. Ending w orld hunger: t he promise of b iotechnology and the t hreat of antiscience zealotry . 
Plan t Physiology  124(2): 487– 490. 
Brockway, L .H. 2002. Science and colonial expansion: t he role of the British royal b otanic g ardens . New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
Cullather, N . 2013. The h ungry world: America's cold w ar battle against poverty in Asia . Cambridge : Harvard 
University Press.  
Dave, N .N. 2017. Something, e verything, nothing; or, cows, dogs, and m aggots. Social Text  35(1): 35- 57. 
Douglas, R .M. 2009. The green backlash: scepticism or s cientism?  Social Epistemology  23(2): 145–163.  
Flachs, A. 2017. "Show f armers ": transformation and performance in Telangana, India. Culture, Agriculture, 
Food and Environment 39(1): 25– 34. 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 762 
 Foucault, M . 2008 [1973]. The birth of the clinic: an archaeology of medical perce ption. New York: Vintage.  
Friedmann, H. 2005. From colonialism to green capitalism: s ocial movements and emergence of food regimes . 
In F.H. Buttel and P. McMichael (eds.) . New directions in the sociology of global development . 
Amst erdam: Elsevier.  Pp. 227–2 65. 
Gilbert, S .F., J. Sapp  and A .I. Tauber. 2012. A symbiotic view of life: w e have never been individuals.  Quarterly 
Review of Biology 87(4): 325–341.  
Goldman, M ., P. Nadasdy, and M .D. Turner ( eds.). 2011. Knowing nature: conversations at the i ntersection of 
political ecology and science studies . Chicago: University of Chicago P ress. 
Goodman, D. 2001. Ontology m atters: The relational materiality of nature and agro-f ood studies.  Sociologia 
Ruralis  41(2): 182– 200. 
Gupta, A . 1998. Postcolonial developments: agriculture i n the making of m odern India . Durham : Duke 
University Press.  
Haraway, D . 2016. Staying with the trouble: m aking kin in the Chthulucene . Durham: Duke University Press.  
Henke, C . 2008. Cultivat ing science, harvesting power: s cience and indust rial agriculture in California . 
Cambridge:  MIT Press.  
Jodhka, S .S. 2002. Nation and village: images of rural India in Gandhi, Nehru and Ambedkar . Economic and 
Political Weekly 37(32): 3343–33 53. 
Khadse, A. , P.M. Rosset, H . Morales  and B .G. Ferguson. 2017. Taking agroecology to scale: t he zero budget 
natural farming peasant movement in Karnataka, India . The Journal of Peasant Studies  45(1): 192 –219.  
Kloppenburg, J . 1991. Social theory and the de/reconstruction of agricultural science: local k nowledge f or an 
alternative agriculture . Rural Sociol ogy 56(4): 519–548.  
Law, J . 200 4. After method: m ess in social science research . New York: Routledge.  
Levins, R.  and R. C. Lewontin. 1985. The dialectical biologist. Cambridge:  Harvard University Press.  
Li, T.M. 2010. To make live or l et die? Rural dispossession and the protection of surplus populations . Antipode . 
41(s1): 66-93.  
Lockeretz, W.  (ed.). 2007. Organic farming: an international history . Wallingford: CAB  International . 
Lorimer, J . 2017. Pr obiotic e nvironmentalities: rewilding with wolves and wo rms. Theory, Culture and Society  
34(4): 27–48.  
Mann, C . 2011. 1493: uncovering the new world Columbus created. New York: Knopf.  
Mawdsley, E . 2006. Hindu nationalism, neo -traditionalism and environmental discourses in India . Geoforum 
37(3): 380– 390. 
Maye, D. 2016. Examining innovation for sustainability from the bot tom up: a n analysis of the permaculture 
community in England . Sociologia Ruralis  58(2) : 331–35 0. 
Mol, A . 1999. Ontological politics. a w ord and some questions . The Sociological Review  47(1): 74–89.  
Mol, A.  2002. The body multiple: ontology in medical practice . Durham: Duke University Press.  
Mol, A. 2008. The logic of care: h ealth and the problem of patient choice . New York: Routledge.  
Münster, D . 2015a. Farmers ' suicide and the moral economy of a griculture: victimh ood, voice, and agro-
environmental responsibility in South India.  In L. Broz and D . Münster  (eds.).  Suicide and agency: 
anthropological perspectives on self -destruction, personhood , and power . Burlington, VT: Ashgate.  Pp. 
105–125 . 
Münster, D . 2015b. " Ginge r is a gamble ": crop booms, r ural uncertainty, and the n eoliberalization of agriculture 
in South India.  Focaal: Journal of Global and Historical Anthropology  71: 100– 113. 
Münster, D . 2016. Agro-ecological double movements? Zero budget n atural farming and a lternative 
agricultures after t he neoliberal crisis in Kerala.  In B.B. Mohanty (ed.).  Critical perspectives on agrarian 
transition: India in the global de bate. New Delhi: Routledge.  Pp. 222– 244. 
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 763 
 Münster, D . 2017a. Frontier in ruins: internal colonization a nd the m aking of an agricultural landscape in South 
India. In  P. Zemisch, U . Münster, J. M. Zickgraf, and C.  Lang  (eds.).  Soziale ästhetik, atmosphäre, 
medialität: beiträge aus der et hnologie . Münster: Lit.  Pp. 97–107.  
Münster, D. 2017b. Zero budget natural farming and bovine entanglements in South India . Rachel Carson 
Center Per spectives  1: 25–32.  
Myers, N . 2017. From the anthropocene to the planthroposcene: desig ning gardens for plant/people involution . 
History and Anthropology  28(3): 297 –301.  
Nanda, M. 2 003. Prophets facing backward: postmodern critiques of science and Hindu nationalism in India . 
New Brunswick, N.J. Rutgers University Press.  
Nanda, M . 2006. Again st social de(con)struction of science: cautionary tales from the t hird w orld. In  E.M. 
Wood and J.B. Foster (eds.).   In defense of history: Marxism and the postmodern agenda . Delhi: Aakar. 
Pp. 74–96. 
Palekar,  S. 2010a. Five layer Palekar model's: m ixed Lash yadhisha pattern . Amravati: Zero Budget Natural 
Farming Research, Development and Extension Movement.  
Palekar,  S. 2010b. The p hilosophy of spiritual farming: zero b udget natural f arming – part 1 . 5th rev ised 
renewal ed . Amravati : Zero Budget Natural Farming Research, Development and  Extension Movement.  
Palekar,  S. 2011. The symbiosis of spiritual f arming:  zero budget natural farming – part 3. Amravati: Zero 
Budget Natural Farming Research, Development and  Extension Movement.  
Palekar,  S. 2013. The p rinciples  of spiritual farming: zero b udget spiritual farming – part 2 . Amravati: Zero 
Budget Natural Farming Research, Development and  Extension Movement.  
Plumwood, V. 2008. Shadow places and the politics of d welling.  Australian Humanities Review  44: 139– 150. 
Puig d e la Bellacasa, M. 2 015. Making time for s oil: technoscientific f uturity and the pace of c are. Social Studies 
of Science  45(5): 691–716.  
Puig de la Bellacasa, M.  2017. Matters of care: s peculative ethics in more than human worlds . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.  
Richards, P. 1993. Cultivation: kn owledge or performance?  In M. Hobart (ed.). An anthropological critique of 
development: the growth of ignorance . London: Routledge. Pp. 61–78.  
Sagan, D. 2013. Cosmic apprentice: d ispatches from the edges of science . Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Pr ess. 
Schneider, M. , and P . McMichael. 2010. Deepening, and r epairing, the metabolic  rift. The Journal of Peasant 
Studies  37(3): 461–484.  
Scott , J.C. 1998. Seeing like a state: how  certain s chemes to improve the human  condition have f ailed . New 
Haven: Yale University Press.  
Shear, B.  and B. Burke. 2013. Beyond c ritique: anthropology of and for non -capitalism . Anthropology  News . 
Jan-Feb. 
Shiva, V. 1991. The violence of  the Green Re volution: third world agriculture, ecology , and politics . London: 
Zed. 
Shotwell, A . 2016. Against purity: l iving ethically in compromised times . Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press.  
Sivaramakrishnan, K. and G. Cederlöf. 2006. Ecological nationalism: claiming nature for making h istory. In  G. 
Cederlöf and K. Sivaramakrishnan  (eds.). Ecological nationalism: nature, livelihoods, and identities in 
South Asia. Seattle:  University of Washington Press. Pp. 1–40 . 
Smil, V . 2001. Enriching the Earth: Fritz Haber, Carl Bosch, and the transformation of world food production. 
Cambridge:  MIT Press.  
Stone, G.D. 2007. Agricultural d eskilling and the spread of genetically modified cotton in Warangal . Current 
Anthropology  48(1): 67–103.  
Münster                                                                                                               Performing alternative agriculture  
Journal of Political Ecology                                         Vol. 25, 2018                                                                 764 
 Thirsk, J . 2000. Alternative  agriculture: a history from the Black D eath to the present day . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.  
Thottathil, S .E. 2014. India's organic farming revolution: what it means for our global food system . Iowa City: 
University of Iowa Press.  
Weis, T. 2007. The global food economy: the battle for the future of farming. New York: Zed.  
Wilson, G .A. and J . Rigg. 2003. ' Post-productivist ' agricultural regimes and the South: discordant concepts?  
Progress in Human Geography  27(6): 681–707.  
 
