CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY,  Vol. 36, Issue 3, pp. 400–427, ISSN 0886-7356, online ISSN 1548-1360. © American 
Anthropological Association 2021. Cultural Anthropology  journal content published since 2014 is freely available to 
download, save, reproduce, and transmit for noncommercial, scholarly, and educational purposes. Reproduction and transmission 
of journal content for the above purposes should credit the author and original source. Use, reproduction, or distribution of 
journal content for commercial purposes requires additional permissions from the American Anthropological Association; please 
contact permissions@americananthro.org . DOI: 10.14506/ca36.3.07
EMILY REISMAN
University at Buffalo
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0199-5746
Almonds were once “the gold of Mallorca,” a source of modest wealth and a 
pillar of diversified farming systems for smallholders on the largest of Spain’s Bale -
aric Islands. Today researchers believe that nearly every rainfed almond tree on 
the island will be dead within as few as five years. An introduced bacteria, Xylella 
fastidiosa , enabled by its spittle-bug vector, and emboldened by climate change, has 
flooded the xylem of these rainfed trees, impeding the flow of fluid and nutrients 
to the point where the tree can no longer survive. As a localized island issue, 
the plant epidemic was a contained tragedy. Once detected in mainland Spain, it 
provoked a sense of rural crisis. As almond farmers, farm advisors, government 
officials, and scientists grappled with this new reality, often with sharp disagree -
ment and blame, their words were threaded together by a common fundamental 
concern: care, or cuidado . 
“They should apologize to the farmers. The almond trees were not poorly 
cared for [ mal cuidados ]” quoted a headline in the local newspaper ( Cortés 2017 ). 
The featured interview reflected the frustrated exhaustion of an agronomist and 
almond farmer who had tracked the disease early in its emergence. When Tomeu 
Melis welcomed me to his farm, we passed through the gate and immediately 
came upon the carcass of an enormous infected almond tree, cut cleanly at the PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF 
CARE: Xylella fastidiosa  and the Intra-active Breakdown of 
Mallorca’s Almond EcologyCULTURALANTHROPO LOGY
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE401base and severed into segments to facilitate removal. The hillsides beyond were 
dotted with a contrast of vibrant carob trees and decaying almond trees navigated 
by a small flock of sheep. Carob trees, unaffected by the new disease, would be 
planted in place of almonds, Tomeu explained pragmatically. The lingering sting 
of accusations that farmers lacked care for their land would require a more com -
plex and uncertain remedy. What does it mean for farmers to care for trees? For 
a government to care for farmers? For trees to care for a diverse agroecological 
landscape? What does it mean to fail to care in these contexts? Or to be careless? 
This essay elaborates a distinctly feminist account of Spain’s faltering almond 
assemblage using two tools: María Puig de la Bellacasa’s (2017)  theorization of 
care and Karen Barad’s (2007)  notion of “intra-activity.” Puig de la Bellacasa offers 
a theorization of care that does not entirely correspond to its vernacular usage. 
Rather than benevolent concern, care is a form of maintenance work. Research 
on care follows in the feminist tradition of drawing attention to unrecognized 
labors, such as Silvia L ópez Gil’s (2007)  description of care as largely unseen work 
“without which life does not function.” It is embedded in everyday practice ( M. 
Barnes 2012 ), so seamless a process that it lacks a clear beginning or end. Center -
ing care is a feminist approach regardless of the gendered dimensions of the lives 
in question, as examinations of interdependence, maintenance, and more-than-hu -
man relations have been marginalized by Western patriarchal values privileging 
individuality, invention, and human dominance ( Wynter 2003 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 
2012 ; Mattern 2018 ; Russell and Vinsel 2018 ). Consonant with new materialist 
approaches, care for Puig de la Bellacasa (2015 , 2017 ) includes not only human 
acts but the activities of an assemblage that promote ongoingness—irrespective of 
scale, aliveness, or species. 
As Annemarie Mol (2008 , 84) elaborates, “articulating ‘good care’ is an inter -
vention rather than factual assessment.” As feminist scholars introducing a special 
issue on the politics of care argue, “practices of care are always shot through with 
asymmetrical power relations” ( Martin, Myers, and Viseu 2015 , 3). “Care orga -
nizes, classifies and disciplines bodies,” the authors note, with colonial governance 
as an instructive illustration ( Martin, Myers, and Viseu 2015 , 3). They encourage 
a critical approach to care that situates care practices within relations of power 
and privilege. Care is non-innocent. It is a form of more-than-human biopolitics, 
privileging the maintenance of certain lives over others. Care is, to quote Puig de 
la Bellacasa (2017 , introduction), “a thick, impure  involvement in a world where 
the question of how to care is posed.” She suggests that as researchers we look for 
where this question is not easily answered. 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3402Barad’s (2003)  theory of agential realism provides an ontological foundation 
for thinking with care. She insists that entities do not preexist their relatings. 
Whereas interaction  implies a prior state of independence between distinct actors, 
her term intra-action  maintains their ongoing mutual co-constitution. This blur -
ring of subject-object distinctions becomes palpable in the circling blame of a plant 
epidemic where causal mechanisms are multiple and uncertain, simultaneously ex -
ternal and internal. Indeed, some farmers confronting Xylella  ultimately argued 
for “living with” the disease by deepening the long-term engagement of scientists 
and policymakers in their community. Their plea underscores how the narrow 
agronomic view of disease fails to acknowledge, and may even undermine, the 
relational maintenance work and interdependence at the core of an agroecological 
system’s resilience.
Environmental anthropology has long attended to the intimacy of interspe -
cies linkages in agrarian lifeways ( Evans-Pritchard 1940 ; Conklin 1957 ; Netting 
1974 ). Recent work highlights the interacting agencies of organisms across scales, 
from microbes ( Paxson 2008 ) to forests ( Kohn 2013 ; Tsing 2015) . Yet despite the 
significance of plant diseases to empire-making ( Crosby 2004 ) and their suspected 
amplification by climate change, these life-altering encounters have received little 
attention ( Seshia Galvin 2018 ). Anthropological scholarship on pathogenesis has 
predominantly focused on the threats animal confinement poses to more-than-
human lives ( Dunn 2007 ; Lowe 2010 ; Porter 2013 ; Blanchette 2015 ). In studies of 
agricultural plants, much like their animal counterparts, vulnerability to disease 
is described largely as a product of industrial conditions of density and unifor -
mity ( Soluri 2005 ; McCook 2006 ; Guthman 2019 ). The case of Xylella  in Spain, by 
contrast, reveals the pathogenic vulnerabilities of a diversified agricultural system 
struggling to persist amid capitalist pressures near and far, both within agriculture 
and beyond. 
The socio-ecological devastation of plant disease is well known. Plant dis -
ease famously provoked mass migration during the Irish potato famine ( Yoshida 
et al. 2013 ), forever changed the ecology of North America during the chestnut 
blight ( Biermann 2016 ), and nearly eliminated European wine cultivation ( Camp -
bell 2004 ). As global transportation networks become increasingly fluid ( Chapman 
et al. 2017 ), resistance to agrochemicals becomes more common ( Gould, Brown, 
and Kuzma 2018 ), socioeconomic change refashions landscapes ( Meentemeyer et 
al. 2008 ), and climate change alters the ranges and populations of organisms ( Jones 
2016 ; Trębicki et al. 2017 ), experts expect plant diseases to become more frequent 
and possibly more destructive.
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE403Epidemiological accounts of plant disease used by scientists and policymakers 
tend to reify boundaries, positioning pathogens as an outside threat or invasion. 
Here, I want to draw attention to how pathogens, no matter their origin, are pro -
duced from within. Pathogenicity describes “the relational ways in which infec -
tious diseases are made” ( Hinchliffe et al. 2017 , xiv). I detail how Spain’s Xylella  
epidemic is produced not only by bacteria but also by the conditions of possibility 
created by tourism, unstable land tenure, histories of marginalization, and the re -
treat of government from farm advising. Theorizing a plant epidemic through care 
allows us to uncover the intra-action of pathogenicity and shift from a politics of 
purification toward a politics of more-than-human care.
To admit the intra-active quality of pathogenicity requires acknowledging 
that containing the pest is only part of the picture. Such an admission requires a 
political reckoning that goes beyond trade restrictions or government-funded tree 
removal and replacement. It broadens the scope of dialogue to reflect long-term 
commitments to the land. Understanding landscape care as non-innocent avoids a 
good-bad dichotomy, asking difficult questions about how to care. Answers to this 
question may be incommensurable, as political projects often are ( Tuck and Yang 
2012 ), and carry uneven effects. Care is not a shorthand for universal values. It is a 
call to give relational maintenance work the political weight it is due.
WORKING WITH CARE
How does one observe and classify care? One way is by listening for the 
multiple interpretations of care articulated by interlocutors. I did not begin this 
research seeking to examine care, nor did I anticipate encountering an epidemic of 
such dramatic proportions. It was the voices of my companions repeatedly deploy -
ing the word cuidado  and detailing the decline in rural maintenance work inherent 
to the Xylella  outbreak that drew me to revisit and deepen my engagement with 
theories of care in order to make sense of an unexpected phenomenon. While 
emic uses of cuidado  and the etic theoretical concept of care are not perfectly 
equivalent, their resonance felt too strong to be ignored. Cuidado  has a rich variety 
of uses, including as a common exclamation of caution (“watch out!”) and a way 
of describing nurturing, attentiveness, concern, or support. In the case of Xylella , 
my interlocutors often deployed cuidado in the negative to signal neglect and assign 
responsibility, while in the positive it marked connections and investments among 
people and with the land. Importantly, care is not normatively positive as it sus -
tains particular forms of agrarian political economy that benefit some at the ex -
pense of others. Both the emic and etic concepts evoke interdependency, responsi -
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3404bility, caution, and a compilation of actions neither unidirectional nor discrete nor 
exclusively human that hold a lifeworld together—for better or for worse.
Care as a situated analytical practice ( Murphy 2015 ) is not limited to dis -
course analysis ( J. Barnes and Taher 2019 ). I read care as relational maintenance 
work, often at a scale that passes unnoticed until interrupted. It is the compound -
ing impact of microlevel engagements that cumulatively sustain a way of being. To 
do something carefully is to be atypically mindful of its subtleties and implications. 
Articulations of care are often voiced when seeking to remedy an undesirable 
quality of existing patterns of maintenance work, imploring others to pay atten -
tion to (care about) something otherwise taken for granted. While care operates 
discursively, it need not be stated to be recognized. Garbage collectors may not 
characterize their labor as care, yet it keeps urban life flowing and its cessation 
would quickly raise alarm. Earthworms cannot use words, yet their daily digestion 
maintains the fertility of soils, facilitating continued farming. The politics of care 
constitute a politics of relational maintenance: what relations are being sustained, 
and to what ends? 
This article derives insights from interviews with farmers, managers of al -
mond grower cooperatives, government officials, and scientists in Mallorca (Bale -
aric Islands Autonomous Community) and Alicante (Valencia Autonomous Com -
munity); participant observation at farmer organizing meetings to discuss the 
epidemic; and analysis of archival records and secondary sources relevant to Spain’s 
almond ecology. Through these engagements I drew the landscape itself into walk -
ing interviews ( Bergeron, Paquette, and Poullaouec-Gonidec 2014 ), seeking to 
understand the multiple ways my interlocutors read the landscape for relations 
between people, trees, bacteria, insect vectors, climate, and more. A landscape, 
rather than land, is an assemblage of more-than-human relations rich with history, 
economy, cultural practice, and aesthetic values. The orchard form itself—pruned, 
spaced, and distinctively assembled—reveals histories of more-than-human social -
ity (Tsing 2014 ; Mathews 2018 ). The material contours of Spain’s almond ecologies 
thus served not only as objects of study but also as key participants in the research 
process.
In examining the intricacies of landscape care, I build on multispecies ethno -
graphic approaches ( Kirksey and Helmreich 2010 ; Ogden, Hall, and Tanita 2013 ) 
and more-than-human geographic thought ( Braun 2006 ; Whatmore 2006 ; Pan-
elli 2010 ; Robbins and Marks 2010 ), fields deeply indebted to, though often lack -
ing engagement with, Indigenous thought ( TallBear 2011 ; Sundberg 2014 ; Todd 
2017 ). Such approaches serve to decenter humans as exclusive protagonists, and 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE405instead bring relations among beings—plant, animal (humans included), mineral, 
and otherwise—to the foreground. I find this approach particularly necessary 
because plant disease is inherently relational across species categories. Xylella  fas-
tidiosa  alone is simply a bacterium; disease , as a phenomenon, exists as a patho -
gen-host-vector-environment complex ( Scholthof 2007 ). As a matter of ethics, 
this approach proffers a modest and imperfect attempt to break from patterns of 
human exceptionalism that have enabled socio-ecological violence ( Wynter 2003 ; 
Weheliye 2014 ). To be clear, this is not a matter of demonstrating nonhuman 
agency, but rather an effort to eschew bounded objects in favor of relations, which 
are always more-than-human. I do not intend to prove that Xylella  fastidiosa  can 
“speak” ( Mitchell 2002 ) through its impacts; rather, I show how the materiality of 
a disease event exposes a deterioration of more-than-human relations. It is those 
relations, not the bacteria or the almond tree as discrete organisms, that demand a 
more explicit politics of landscape care.
EL ORO DE MALLORCA
Xylella  fastidiosa  is a bacterium named for its habitat, the xylem of plants, and 
for its “fastidiousness”: it is notoriously difficult to culture ( Purcell 2013 ). While 
scientific convention calls for referring to the bacterium as X. fastidiosa , I will use 
the name Xylella , as it circulated among my interlocutors. While Xylella  dislikes 
laboratories, it finds a plethora of comfortable homes within the xylem of vascular 
plants: it has 359 known plant hosts from 75 different plant families ( Baldi and La 
Porta 2017 ). Like most bacterial pathogens it is asymptomatic in the rain forests of 
South and Central America, where it has co-evolved as an amiable endophyte that 
inhabits but does not kill its host. This makes sense as tropical plants benefit from 
abundant water, and a bit of bacteria is unlikely to restrict their flow. Killing the 
host is generally bad for business. Once introduced to a new environment, Xylella  
rather easily finds a xylem-feeding insect whose mouth and foregut it can colonize, 
thus hitching a ride to the next juicy xylem the insect seeks out. 
Almond trees are unlike the plants of Xylella ’s tropical origin. They are 
adapted to arid lands, with wild relatives native to the region stretching from Cen -
tral Asia westward to the Levant ( Ladizinsky 1999 ). For the past few millennia al -
monds have accompanied farmers throughout the Mediterranean basin, as they are 
particularly well suited to the long, hot, and dry summers characteristic of the re -
gion. While almonds have long been present in Mallorca, they did not gain a prom -
inent place in the landscape until the turn of the twentieth century. At that time 
a global grain glut and new industrial substitutes for olive oil made agriculture less 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3406profitable for aristocratic landlords ( Tello et al. 2018 ). Political changes during the 
previous century had already eroded the power of noble estates. To save them -
selves from bankruptcy, landlords began selling off parcels, and an emerging class 
of merchant capitalists bought the land at bargain prices before subdividing and 
reselling it to peasants through long-term annuities ( Ferrer Guasp 2000 ). During 
the late nineteenth century, this emerging class of diversified peasant farmers ini -
tially favored wine grapes as a cash crop, since the global shortage produced by the 
phylloxera blight in continental Europe promised spectacular profits. Yet a bust 
quickly followed the boom. A surplus of grapes drove a steep decline in prices, and 
phylloxera eventually made its way to Mallorca. Many chose to replace vineyards 
with a polyculture of tree crops in which almonds held a prominent place. The 
land that peasant farmers had been sold was often at the agricultural margins, 
much of it formerly forested and on steep slopes, and wage work was an important 
compliment to subsistence production ( Molina de Dios 2012 ). Almonds made for 
an ideal choice: a drought resistant tree able to thrive in dry, rocky, low-nutri -
ent soils; easily intercropped with grains and legumes; producing fuelwood, fod -
der, and fertilizer in addition to marketable nuts; and requiring little maintenance 
while peasant farmers engaged in wage labor elsewhere. While large estates also 
benefited from the profitability of almonds ( Morey Tous and Fornés Comas 2021 ), 
almond trees proved an indispensable lifeline for peasant producers.
In 1930, the Balearic Islands commanded more area in almonds than any 
other Spanish province, despite its relatively small size. Almond trees served as 
pillars within a sophisticated diversified rainfed farming system. A typical farm 
would include a mix of trees (including varying proportions of almonds, olives, 
carob, and figs, depending on the local pedoclimatic conditions) pruned at chest 
height to allow sheep grazing in the understory, which was seeded with a rotation 
of winter grains, legumes, and fodder crops. Limited agrochemical inputs due to 
embargoes placed on the Francoist regime maintained a largely organic agroeco -
logical system ( Murray et al. 2019 ). Almond plantings grew increasingly popular. 
By 1975, according to government records, 15 percent of the Balearic Islands’ to -
tal surface area was planted with almonds, with an additional 206,365 individual 
trees scattered across the landscape along field edges, roads, or hillsides ( Instituto 
Nacional de Estadística 1977 ). While other regions of Spain’s Mediterranean coast 
grew almonds, nowhere were they quite as economically significant as in the Bale -
aric Islands, where they earned the title el oro de Mallorca , the gold of Mallorca. 
While grains, olive oil,1 and meat provided sustenance for small farmers, almonds 
were primarily sold for export. As one farmer explained, almond harvest was the 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE407time of year for buying new clothes and gifts. It was the crop that put money in 
peasants’ pockets.
When commercial airline travel brought an influx of tourism to Mallorca 
beginning in the 1960s, the landscape of almonds in bloom served as a stunning 
visual spectacle attracting visitors ( Bardolet 1980 ). Yet most tourists came for the 
beaches, not the almonds. Fueled by substantial German investments, tourism has 
come to dominate the island’s economy. An estimated ten million tourists visit 
Mallorca annually ( Balearic Islands Tourism Board 2017 ), whose resident popu -
lation remains less than one million. Mallorcans I spoke with often repeated a 
striking statistic: in summertime, an airplane leaves or takes off from the island 
every minute. Almond farmers I spoke with felt that the landscapes they tended 
were valued as photo fodder, while they themselves were forgotten. “ Xylella  didn’t 
kill the almonds,” one man told me, “tourism did.” 
Historically, peasant farmers’ daily activities constituted care for networks 
of relations between plants, animals, and others. Preparing soil, herding sheep, 
harvesting nuts: these activities are never purely human, but rather a complex in -
tra-action that would not function without the decompositional chemistry of the 
soil’s biotic-abiotic interface, the digestive enzymes of the sheep gut, and the sug -
ar-producing propensity of the tree. This more-than-human maintenance work, 
while easy to romanticize in retrospect, sustained not only an agroecology but also 
the reproduction of a stratified social structure. Particular arrangements of care 
in agrarian landscapes enabled the dominance of landowning elites for centuries, 
“shot through,” as always, with asymmetrical power relations ( Martin, Myers, and 
Viseu 2015 , 3). The shift toward coastal tourism in the late twentieth century 
swiftly reoriented Mallorca’s dominant landscape-maintenance intra-actions. Road 
construction and repair, water and waste infrastructure, and beachfront amenity 
activities accelerated. Political leaders, planners, machine operators, and entre -
preneurs intra-acted with palm trees, ocean waves, turf grasses, gravel quarries, 
timber forests, aquifers, decomposing refuse and more, collectively caring for this 
landscape of transitory leisure. In doing so, the agrarian character of the landscape 
eroded. Landscape care operates as part of a political economy, prioritizing certain 
relations over others as a new oro de Mallorca  takes the place of the old. 
THE OUTBREAK: A Crisis of Care
When I arrived in Mallorca in January of 2018, Xylella  had been officially 
detected only fifteen months earlier. Once it had been identified, the Consejería 
de Agricultura, Pesca y Alimentación (Ministry of Agriculture, Fishing and Food) 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3408studied the issue internally while trying to calm concerned farmers. According to 
the European Union’s protocol (Directive 2000/29/EC), all trees within a hun -
dred-meter radius of the infected site were to be removed. A team of plant pa -
thologists soon found that infected trees spanned the entire island ( Olmo et al. 
2021). While almonds suffered most visibly, the bacterium was found in wild and 
cultivated olives, wine grapes, and several shrubs. To follow protocol would be 
to denude the island. With the island naturally quarantined by the surrounding 
waters, the Mallorcan government pleaded their case to the EU Commission and 
received an exception.
Xylella  was first confirmed present in a cherry tree in a plant nursery, and 
many believed the international nursery trade was responsible for its arrival in 
Mallorca. Most farmers suspected that it arrived from California, their al -
mond-growing rival, in the 1990s, when government officials had traveled there 
to learn about improved almond varieties and intensive growing techniques. When 
asked, a ministry official quickly dismissed the possibility that a scientist would 
carry plant material from overseas. A longtime farm advisor remembered return -
ing with a small sample of the Texas variety from California in the 1990s, but 
nothing since. Another agronomist described pocketing a few almonds on research 
visits and propagating them back home as a matter of course inherent to scientific 
curiosity. Regardless of whether such research trips were to blame, the rumor 
resonated with farmers’ perceptions of the ministry as careless and naive, under -
estimating a single plant’s infectious power. Further complicating matters, plant 
pathologists identified three distinct subspecies of the bacterium, suggesting mul -
tiple independent introductions ( Olmo et al. 2018 ). As Natalia Gutkowski (2021) 
notes, unwanted organisms are often described as blind to borders, yet their enact -
ment is profoundly territorial. 
The first thing I encountered when entering the ministry’s office was a large 
vertical banner illustrating the symptoms of Xylella . Plant quarantine notices for 
airports and the cruise ship and ferry docks had been swiftly circulated. I was 
shown boxes of freshly printed color pocket guides to identifying and managing 
the disease awaiting distribution. The booklets illustrated best practices, recom -
mending that farmers plow their fields or use herbicides to remove any understory 
vegetation that might harbor the insect vector. The ministry was in a flurry of 
activity to address this putatively new disease, but farmers scoffed at the claim that 
this was anything new. 
Almond farmers told me they had noticed abnormalities for more than fif -
teen years but lacked the support to address the issue. There has been no agricul -
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE409tural extension service providing agronomic advice since the 1980s. No one at the 
island’s only university was actively studying almond diseases. In fact, an enthusias -
tic plant pathologist working at the airport conducted much of the early investiga -
tion into Xylella  pro bono in his spare time. A lack of official research employment 
at a university or research institution may have limited his credibility, potentially 
delaying action on the issue. When consulting the ministry, farmers were either 
told incorrectly that the problem was a fungus or that they had not properly cared 
for their trees. According to many at the ministry, the real problem was falta de 
cuidado , a lack of care. 
This accusation of lack of care felt deeply unjust to many. “The administra -
tion comes back saying, ‘they are poorly cared-for almond trees’ [ son almendros mal 
cuidados ]. Obviously when your trees are dying and people have told you there’s 
no solution, you stop taking care of them. Why would you invest?” The assertion 
seemed out of touch, as farmers were quick to note that the man who first identi -
fied the seriousness of the problem with almonds was himself a trained agronomist 
praised for his carefully tended land. It also put a heavy burden on individuals 
swimming against the current of the tourism-driven economy. Even the most me -
ticulously cared-for orchard could be surrounded by farms abandoned because of 
economic opportunity elsewhere or turned into vacation rentals prioritizing aes -
thetics over tree health. How could more pruning, weeding, or pest treatments 
possibly compete with “strangulation” by neighboring fields, they asked.
We have a thirty-three-hectare planting, rainfed, old, traditional, organic, 
that I’m wondering . . . this year should I pull it all out? . . . For the past two 
years I don’t know whether to prune, not to prune, what to do, because no 
one gives you anything, no breaks. . . . Now they’re saying off the cuff that 
what you should do is tear everything out because if you hadn’t had that 
single weed, because if you hadn’t had that single insect, because whatever. 
Right. But in Mallorca you can have a half hectare of perfectly cared-for al -
monds, without a single weed, but the neighbor’s farm left you with it aban -
doned. You’ll be in the same situation. That’s what we told the ministry. 
Abandoned orchards signaled a shift in more-than-human relations, with im -
plications spilling over beyond property boundaries. Spittle bugs carrying Xylella  
could proliferate freely in the leafy understory of a neglected orchard. Trees har -
boring the bacterium undetected would act as perpetual reservoirs of the bacteria. 
The disease assemblage itself proved the limits of an individualist approach. 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3410Almond farmers fumed at the notion that they had not cared for their trees 
because it seemed to negate the systemic disruptions of rural life. Farmers had 
found their economic base gradually dissolving as hotels multiplied. Their regional 
government had long touted tourism as the saving grace of an island once known 
for its antiquated agrarian ways. Their children had chosen more comfortable and 
secure urban lives, often catering to visitors at hotels or restaurants. Their neigh -
bors had abandoned the land, leaving trees that were uncared for and giving pass -
ersby the impression that agrarian lifeways had already disappeared into the his -
tory books. Agriculture, cared for by a community not so long before, found itself 
excluded from the cares of most Mallorcans. As one farmer noted, 
The image of those almonds, many of them already dead, or those trunks, 
the big ones on the side of the highway, farms, some abandoned, all the dry 
wood that’s dying. For me this is the graphic image of our agricultural soci -
ety, of rural society, or what’s left of it.
While the ministry’s pamphlets detailed tactics to triumph over a novel bac -
terial invader, farmers confronted a crisis much broader in scope. In the grand 
scheme, the care work of maintaining almond trees being contested—to prune 
or spray or mow or not—felt nearly insignificant in the face of a widespread col -
lective failure to maintain agrarian lifeways. The Xylella  outbreak merely caused 
those more distanced from agriculture to take notice and perhaps share momen -
tarily in the experience of grief. The large decaying trunks, yellowed leaves, and 
lifeless limbs in such an iconic species, the materiality of the disease, demanded 
attention in ways that a dwindling group of aging farmers did not. The faltering 
trees grabbed a few fleeting headlines in the local press and insisted the ministry 
show some kind of effort. Their desiccated bodies posed questions of landscape 
care much more publicly than such matters would have been discussed if healthy 
almond trees had continued their gradual fade with economic change. The disease 
intra-action opened opportunities for care as reflection and consideration of how 
landscapes are maintained, by and for whom, and to what end.
POLITICAL ECONOMIES OF CARE: “People would care if it 
affected tourism”
Almond production went from being the island’s agricultural jewel to a husk 
of its former splendor in less than thirty years, an almond cooperative manager 
reflected. In that time tourism had transformed every corner of the island’s econ -
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE411omy. Three distinct phases mark Mallorca’s transition from agriculture to tourism: 
the mid-century boom (1953–1972), the early neoliberal boom (1979–1987), and 
the financialization boom (1993–2008) ( Murray 2012 ). Each boom has been fol -
lowed by years of global economic crisis and restructuring. The year 1953 ended 
an era of economic isolation for Spain. Allied governments after World War II 
had maintained embargoes against the fascist-controlled country until the United 
States, seeking allies in the fight against communism, signed a series of pacts with 
Franco. The warming of diplomatic relations, the abundance of capital and paid 
holidays in nearby industrial economies, the comparatively cheap cost of labor, 
and the triad of sun, sand, and sea made Mallorca an attractive destination for an 
emerging class of leisure consumers. After the recession of the 1970s and Spain’s 
1986 integration into the European Union, tourism picked up its pace, with con -
solidated resort chains benefiting under deregulatory regimes. A map of tourist 
accommodations in 1996 shows a dense concentration of hotels along the beaches 
and large coastal cities with very few locations in the island’s agricultural interior. 
By 2010 tourist lodgings permeated the island. During this most recent construc -
tion boom, new policies prioritized rural lodges and five-star hotels, a move ad -
vocated by established hoteliers protecting themselves against competition ( Pons, 
Rullán Salamanca, and Murray 2014 ). Farmers had long felt the economic pull of 
tourism, but now it seemed inescapable. 
Farmers I spoke with felt that agriculture had become an after-thought for 
public officials:
You can’t compete with the quantity of money generated by an activity as 
powerful as tourism, which requires investments in infrastructure, airports, 
sea ports, highways, hotels, streets, sidewalks, [compared] with an agricul -
tural sector where people are aging, where there’s no relief, where there’s not 
much interest in change.
A few farmers I met had begun incorporating agritourism into their activi -
ties, enticing visitors with the authenticity of rustic lodgings or freshly prepared 
lamb. They had always juggled multiple roles, often selling their labor as a tractor 
driver or in a factory to make ends meet. “You have to be polyvalent here. You 
can’t live from one thing,” one man explained. Most farmers felt the wealth gener -
ated by tourism remained highly concentrated. “For all this tourism, it seems like 
we should be the wealthiest place in Europe. But only three or four people are 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3412really earning . . . the hotel owners. We work very hard now in the summers [in 
the tourism industry] and we’re still just as poor.” 
Political economic change had shifted relations of care. Tourism’s economic 
heft now demanded wide-ranging forms of infrastructural maintenance and plan -
ning, from macro-level public works to household-level chores. The ongoingness 
of activities like agriculture had become almost incidental. Frustration toward 
tourism reflected concerns not only over the decline of agriculture but also over 
the concentration of wealth in Mallorcan society. The inability of agriculture to 
“compete” for attention was also an inability to challenge a pattern of deepening 
inequality. What counts as good care among public officials, be it smooth roads or 
plentiful harvests, echoed shifting power relations. Care is thus constituted within 
and through political economy. Maintenance work, or lack thereof, reflects and 
shapes social configurations. 
I met a doctoral student who had begun carefully cataloguing more than two 
hundred Mallorcan almond varieties five years earlier, and suddenly found himself 
documenting a dying race. “There’s a wealth that will be lost forever,” he said, but 
“it’s no big deal  [no pasa nada ]. . . . People would care if it affected tourism.” In -
stead he saw the almonds decaying with only a passing sigh. But that did not stop 
his research. His countless conversations with farmers and detailed documentation 
of each variety’s unique form were acts of care: minor, momentary, more-than-hu -
man engagements that worked to sustain Mallorcan agroecologies if not in practice 
then at least in memory. To care about something deemed a lost cause made some 
question his sanity, he commented. I sensed the satisfaction in his actions as a form 
of subtle resistance to the apathy sustaining the status quo. Paying attention is 
political. 
CONFLICTED LEGACIES OF CARE:  No One Left to Consult
Despite their frustration with the ministry’s handling of the Xylella  epidemic, 
most farmers did not actively display their discontent or make demands on the 
government. Franco’s dictatorship had likely contributed to a sense of resignation 
toward administrative dismissiveness. Despite forty years of democratic gover -
nance since, fascism was in most farmers’ living memory. The regime had cared 
for farmers, providing advising services they now missed. But as a retired farm 
advisor explained, this was a paternalistic kind of care, expecting obedience. As 
scholars of colonialism underscore ( Martin, Myers, and Viseu 2015 ; Murphy 2015 ), 
care is non-innocent. It shapes and is shaped by power relations, in this case re -
inforcing a deference to technocratic authority characteristic of Franco’s regime. 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE413The Servicio de Extensión Agraria (SEA), or Agricultural Extension Service, 
was established during the late 1950s as part of U.S. aid to Franco’s regime. Span -
ish officials traveled to the United States and returned with an agenda to replicate 
the American model of farm advising. The program aspired to a green revolution 
for Spain, prioritizing economic efficiency through mechanization, intensification, 
and irrigation. In line with Franco’s technocratic model, farmers were expected 
to passively receive the wisdom delivered by technical experts ( Díaz Geada et al. 
2012 ). Yet due to its decentralized model, the institution enjoyed significant au -
tonomy. Its workers lived alongside farmers, and they gradually adapted their ac -
tivities to meet community needs, developing a suite of rural social services that 
evolved to recognize rural populations as the engines of their own development 
(Benito and Pulgar 2007 ). Care provided by the extension service proved com -
plex, navigating a tension between its paternalistic mission and a more grassroots 
manifestation.
During the transition to democracy, between Franco’s death in 1975 and 
the approval of the Spanish constitution in 1978, political power was decentral -
ized from Madrid to seventeen autonomous communities ( comunidades autónomas ), 
leaving the SEA in limbo. When Spain entered the European Union in 1986, SEA 
agents became responsible for administering benefits through the EU Common 
Agricultural Policy, transforming agricultural advisors into bureaucrats. 
Mallorcan farmers recalled the SEA with nostalgic praise. Nearly everyone 
I spoke with remembered one enthusiastic farm advisor who had dedicated his 
career to troubleshooting almond trees, even though it was not his original assign -
ment. Unlike the ministry’s representatives hidden away in offices shuffling stacks 
of paper, this man was out in the fields, running trials of new techniques and 
answering farmers’ questions. Many felt that the money flowing in from the EU 
fundamentally changed public perceptions of farming, from a livelihood to a paper 
chase. They wondered how the detection of and response to Xylella  might have 
gone differently if SEA were still active. When I asked farmers where they went 
when they needed advice, they often responded with a dry laugh. Occasionally 
they might consult someone at the cooperative, but these advisors had often spent 
far less time in the field and their priorities lay elsewhere.
Agricultural cooperatives were yet another institution many farmers felt had 
ultimately failed them despite the best of intentions. For farmers to receive benefits 
from the EU, they needed to organize into agricultural cooperatives. Cooperatives 
were intended to allow farmers’ greater economic power through bulk purchases 
of inputs at lower prices and collective sales of their product at higher prices. Al -
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3414monds require processing equipment to remove the hull and shell, and a coopera -
tive would allow farmers to own the expensive processing equipment themselves, 
capturing a greater share of the sales value. While farmers appreciated these gains 
in the short term, many felt that they had been tricked in the long term. The 
cooperatives were not run by farmers concerned with preserving the land, they 
said, but by businesspeople seeking to satisfy their customers. As evidence, farmers 
explained that when California almonds became cheaper, some cooperatives began 
importing and processing large quantities of them for sale, arguing it was to every -
one’s economic benefit. The orders were filled, and the cooperative’s profits were 
shared by its farmer members, but ultimately the global dominance of California 
almonds forced Mallorcan growers to accept lower prices. The retired farm advi -
sor said that in the early days, he had proposed forming a cooperative composed 
only of farmers, but the administration had rejected the idea, saying that this kind 
of cooperative could not feasibly market their product. 
The decline of institutional support through the SEA, as well as the lack 
of full alignment between farmers and cooperative employees, left farmers with 
fewer people to consult when they encountered something strange in their al -
monds. When they did call on the ministry or their cooperative, a degree of dis -
tance, distraction, or distrust seemed to limit the connection. Institutional net -
works of care for farmers themselves require regular care to maintain. The shift 
from farm advising to farm administrating revealed just how crucial relationships 
had been to the daily troubleshooting of living from the land. Yet nostalgia for the 
care provided by SEA proved complex, unable to be disentangled from the dis -
honor of Franco’s legacy. Care is always relational, contextual, and political. Care 
can be conservative, sustaining existing structures. Recognizing the significance of 
care work does not presume inherent benefits flow in all directions. 
WANING CYCLES OF CARE: Little Reason to Invest
“The farms aren’t actually mine,” one farmer mentioned as an aside after our 
lengthy conversation discussing the rhythms of his days and years pasturing sheep 
among the almond groves. It was an afterthought to explain because the situation 
is so common. The small parcels farmers could afford to buy in the early twentieth 
century were not big enough to sustain a family. Most full-time farmers were ef -
fectively sharecroppers splitting the harvest fifty-fifty with various landlords under 
informal agreements. As profits from agriculture declined, those who continued 
working the land stayed afloat by cultivating a dozen or more parcels belonging to 
various owners. Precarious land-tenure dynamics made it difficult to justify invest -
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE415ments in new almond trees. Wheat gives an annual harvest, so fertilizer costs are 
easily recuperated at the end of the season. Almond trees take five to eight years to 
begin producing under rainfed conditions, reaching their full productive capacity 
around fifteen years. Long-term arrangements with landowners were difficult to 
secure. With tourism rapidly raising property values, farmers never knew when 
they might not have their agreement renewed. Tree growth could not conform to 
the abrupt temporalities of tourism. 
A manager at a small almond cooperative told me he had suspected a new 
disease in 2010, but had had difficulty distinguishing between drought, aging 
trees, and lack of care. People were not renewing their orchards but merely keep -
ing older, weaker, trees from a previous generation, he explained, valuing them as 
antiques rather than living landscapes. As John Hartigan (2017 , 230) notes, among 
Catalan botanists, older generations see the lack of tree replacement as sending a 
dangerous message that “we are a disorderly, careless people.” Many urban-dwell -
ing families inherited land from their elders with little knowledge of how to main -
tain the landscape. According to almond growers and their advisors, this younger 
generation comes back just to harvest the nuts, without knowledge of how to care 
for and renew the orchard. As the aforementioned graduate student of almond di -
versity explained, “There’s no generational renewal. Xylella  will make all this faster 
and more traumatic.”
As in many parts of the world, the agrarian workforce in Mallorca is aging. 
Some commentators suspected that almonds had suffered neglect because pruning 
trees is more physically demanding than other farming tasks. Others noted that 
farmers in their seventies and eighties were unlikely to plant trees because they 
might not live to see them bear fruit. The temporality of tree bodies and human 
bodies were intertwined. Many felt less invested in organizing to combat the Xy-
lella epidemic because they saw no one who would take care of the land when 
they passed away. As an elder farmer explained, “We haven’t put up much of a fuss 
because there’s no social weight forcing us to do things otherwise . . . after me 
there’s no one else.” 
In 2018 the island’s young farmers association had just four members. The 
young member I met expressed a sense of obligation to care for the land, while 
acknowledging that such care takes more than just the work of farmers: “We un -
derstand that maintaining the environment is our responsibility, that it benefits 
everyone, and we want to do it. What happens is that alone, alone it’s impossible.” 
Others echoed the significance of almond trees as essential to the Mallorcan land -
scape and valued for “more than just production,” slipping fluidly in and out of the 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3416commodity form ( Tsing 2015 ). Landscape care, a far more expansive notion than 
agricultural output, was a task that demanded more than the actions of increas -
ingly scarce farmers. 
As feminist theorists point out, care reveals interdependency ( Fischer and 
Tronto 1990 ; Martin, Myers, and Viseu 2015 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). Xylella ’s 
spread was in many ways a disease thriving in the wake of disconnections. Gaps in 
intergenerational knowledge and practice left trees more vulnerable. Farmers’ mo -
tivation declined as continuity into the future became increasingly elusive, both for 
their land-tenure arrangements and for their families. A younger group of farmers 
valuing agriculture for its ecological and cultural role found their ambitions frus -
trated by isolation. As an intra-action, the devastation of the Xylella  outbreak could 
not be separated from its conditions of possibility. The disease complex managed 
to spread due not only to the combination of species and climate but also to the 
weakening of relationships experienced by the agricultural community, a relational 
breakdown encoded in the ecology as aging trees and overgrown orchards.
MODERNIST CARE: Irrigated Hopes
In 2018, irrigation was emerging as a new form of almond tree care, an act 
once considered unthinkable for such a drought-resistant species. Because Xylella  
affects the fluid artery of the tree, the xylem, its effects are much less severe in 
irrigated trees. Intensive modernist agricultural practices were promoted as a new 
regime of care, one that might secure a future for the Mallorcan almond industry, 
though not necessarily for most Mallorcan almond farmers. After I interviewed 
the man handling the Xylella  case at the Ministry of Agriculture, he offered to 
take me on a tour of recently planted orchards. “I want to show you the best,” 
he said, “not the stuff by the roadside.” He took me to visit a new, irrigated, and 
intensively managed planting owned by a wealthy doctor and assured me that the 
trees received abundant fertilizer, interpreted as a sign of care. At the next stop, 
we marveled at a large orchard owned by a hotelier. My guide felt responsible for 
performing progress, explaining that Xylella  was not the real problem. For him it 
was old trees and lack of care. As we drove along, he pointed out the window to 
trees with lichen growing on almond branches as evidence. While lichens are not 
harmful to trees, he found them unsightly. Not enough pruning or treatment with 
copper fungicide, he explained. Farmers had not taken care of their trees. 
The largest cooperative on the island was also planting an irrigated orchard. 
The beneficiaries would be the farmer-members, the cooperative manager ex -
plained, but not all growers celebrated the innovation. “There is not enough water 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE417for everyone,” several stated frankly, including those who had planted the newly 
irrigated orchard. Mallorca has no permanent rivers, and threats of water short -
age are constant. Tourism puts serious strain on water supplies, particularly as 
the government has incentivized higher-end resorts with golf courses and exten -
sive landscaping ( Kent, Newnham, and Essex 2002 ). Overexploitation of aquifers 
has produced saltwater intrusion, a terrifying prospect for an island depending 
on groundwater for 75 to 95 percent of its supply. And then there are the omni -
present manifestations of climate change. Hydrologists predict reduced water sup -
plies. Higher winter temperatures and intense heat episodes are also suspected to 
boost Xylella ’s virulence. Many believe the record temperatures of recent summers 
triggered Xylella  to rapidly multiply and kill its almond host. One farmer noted 
skeptically,
Now they are doing irrigation, but in my opinion, they are going to end up 
without water, because it doesn’t rain. Every year we surpass record summer 
temperatures. Every year we set records. It doesn’t rain. Every day more 
people, more human pressure, more tourists, more pools, more needs, and 
we are going to end up without water. I don’t know if they are going to be 
able to irrigate, though they say they will use recycled water.
Another cooperative manager described hopes for a mixed system. Some 
intensively managed, irrigated orchards could generate enough almonds to keep 
production facilities moving and allow farmers to revitalize rainfed almond land -
scapes, “for the environment more than anything.” For those with access to water, 
capital, and land to secure their investment, irrigation presented a modernist fix 
that could keep the almond industry afloat and possibly avert land abandonment 
in the near future. Strangely, many agronomists expected the polyculture of rain -
fed almond production to be saved (at least temporarily) by the monoculture of 
irrigated, fertilized, and pesticide-controlled plantations. For rainfed farmers and 
others anxious about Mallorca’s water future, betting the future of almond culti -
vation on irrigation seemed careless, lacking in consideration of how it might be 
sustained in the long term.
Freshwater’s unique material properties conjured hopes and fears as its role 
in landscape care was variously considered. It could flush the vascular tissues of 
plants, providing life support to a dying industry, and it could retreat from the 
skies and subterranean stores, jeopardizing future possibilities. Water exposed un -
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3418deniable interdependencies, not only among Mallorcans but also between all living 
beings on the island and the atmospheric cycles extending beyond its bounds.
LIVING WITH XYLELLA : A Call for Care
While Mallorca mourned its losses, infected almonds were detected on the 
Spanish mainland in Alicante Province. Here, too, farmers faced accusations of 
lack of care, but unlike in Mallorca, spared by its geography, in peninsular Spain 
EU protocols mandated mass tree removals to stem Xylella ’s spread. “If they tear 
out the trees, they will tear out the last of rural life,” one farmer told me. In a 
region fighting wave after wave of rural depopulation, these almond trees—not 
to mention rosemary, myrtle, and the many native shrub hosts potentially slated 
for removal—rooted people to a sense of place. While these farmers did not rely 
primarily on almonds for their income, losing vegetation meant losing a landscape 
whose maintenance was crucial to their identities. “The work of my father, my 
grandfathers, I can’t see it torn out because some guy thinks it’s the right idea,” 
one man objected. Much as in Anna Tsing’s (2015)  account of mushroom foragers, 
the prospect of tree removal underscored how memory and identity were con -
stantly enacted through more-than-human relations.
A small group of farmers organized, protested in the streets, and lobbied 
their case with every political party that would listen. They argued that the 
eradication of Xylella  was impossible given the range of hosts. Mass tree removal 
might also hurt the economic lifeline of the community: tourism. According to 
EU guidelines, once trees were removed landowners would be restricted from 
planting anything for five years. They would receive nineteen euros per tree for 
their loss. An already aging farming population might not replant, many feared, 
accelerating rural abandonment. The weeds that regrow on untended land might 
also raise the risk of fires, another anticipated consequence of rural depopulation 
and a warming climate.
When I met the group, united under the title Plataforma de Afectados por 
la Xylella fastidiosa  de la Provincia de Alicante (AXFA, Platform for Those Affected 
by Xylella  fastidiosa in Alicante Province), researchers had recently discovered the 
sixth distinct focus of Xylella  infection. In the previous months, they had fanned 
out over the province to conduct microbial analyses of trees at risk. As in Mal -
lorca, farmers in Alicante told me they had noticed symptoms for many years and 
that the disease was nothing new. The woman who first detected Xylella  in her 
orchard had been sending samples to a laboratory for four years. Given the patho -
gen’s historic absence in Europe, it took extended, persistent efforts to identify 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE419the culprit, as Xylella  is renowned among bacteriologists for its resistance to lab 
culture. Now facing the proposed uprooting of her surroundings, she regretted 
the persistent care she had taken to send in so many samples. 
Landscape purification was simply a futile bureaucratic performance, farm -
ers claimed, advocating for a shift from attempts at eradication to containment. 
They cited scientific reports detailing the growing list of known plant hosts and 
insect vectors, the years that the disease had likely spread undetected, and the lack 
of successful eradication anywhere in the world. Farmers believed that the ad -
ministration based its decisions more on budget than on biology: the EU provided 
funding for eradication measures but not for containment. Tree removal was also a 
business, which some suspected might have financial or political benefits for those 
in office. Administrators dismissed rainfed almonds as unprofitable, failing to see 
the trees as integral to the rural landscape. Unlike more powerful capital-intensive 
agroindustries in the region—such as citrus and olives—small-scale rainfed al -
mond growers felt they were treated as disposable. “The administration only cares 
about productivity. The smell of almonds turns to pine and they say, ‘oh, well.’”
Farmers advocated for “living with” ( convivir con ) Xylella ,2 even though no 
one knew what that would mean. The difference, for them, was the care it would 
take. Learning to live with Xylella  and contain its impacts would require long-
term engagements with farmers and other landowners. This call for a broadening 
of socio-ecological scope resonates with the “360° approach” proposed by Italian 
olive growers grappling with Xylella (Colella, Carradore, and Cerroni 2019 ). Living 
with would require iterative, locally situated research and decision-making pro -
cesses that addressed agroecologies holistically, with considerations not limited to 
targeting the bacterium or vector. It would require more thorough planning and 
continuous involvement across many levels; uprooting almond trees, by contrast, 
appeared to many as a means for the administration to act quickly and then walk 
away. 
While I empathized with the affected farmers, I also empathized with ad -
ministrators acting under extreme uncertainty. Swift action to stem an epidemic 
might prove the most effective tactic for sparing the region and the entire Euro -
pean continent from widespread harm. Failing to act quickly presented greater 
risks. Yet ultimately I saw farmers less interested in saving their trees than in find -
ing a collaborative path forward to long-term landscape care. This would require 
an emphasis on ongoing relations, strengthening the interconnections that allow 
agrarian landscapes to weather new challenges, which might include scientific en -
gagement, secure land tenure, support for young farmers, or other collective prac -
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3420tices yet to be imagined—rather than discrete one-time actions. These relations 
extend beyond the human, enrolling healthy soils, biodiversity, and a more stable 
climate to sustain ways of being. Such care work would always yield uneven con -
sequences. Care itself is not a solution but a perpetually open and deeply political 
question of how relational maintenance takes place. 
TOWARD A MORE-THAN-HUMAN POLITICS OF CARE 
Plant epidemics, like Xylella , often produce cycles of blame, resentment, and 
deepened community divides. This may stem in part from treating the phenome -
non (1) as an interaction between separate biological and social actors—the patho -
gen is the enemy and the people respond well or poorly; and (2) as a unidirectional 
causal chain—a single event introduces a pathogen that wipes out a species.
If the pathogen were the clear enemy, then its eradication might be simpler 
to manage. But like heat, intensifying bacterial activity within a tree, the patho -
gen’s virulence is provoked by a broad assemblage of facilitating conditions. The 
vector of time in epidemiology illustrates disease spread as a series of discrete 
events. Yet in the eruption of an epidemic, past wounds, present transformations, 
and future fantasies or fears permeate one another. To embrace a pathogen as in -
tra-active, emerging from within, means to exchange the causal chain inherent to 
blame for collective response-ability. While blame points to discrete individuals 
and actions, care indicates the continuous relationships that might be repaired or 
reimagined.
Care, by its subtle and sustaining nature, is often most perceptible in its ab -
sence. Farmers felt a lack of care by government and a tourism-oriented culture. 
Bureaucrats interpreted trees with minimal management as lacking care. When 
the prospect that almond trees might disappear from the landscape was raised, 
either gradually by disease or suddenly by bulldozers, the agroecological main -
tenance work—a form of care—they provided became clear. The trees not only 
produce almonds; they root more-than-human lives in place and across time. Just 
as Bruno Latour (2011)  argues that we cannot abandon our monstrous technolo -
gies, we cannot abandon our plant epidemics as mere unintended consequences 
or strictly biological phenomena to be contained and controlled. The intra-action 
of disease demonstrates that our relations bring a pathogen into being, no matter 
where on the globe it may originate.
Understanding disease as emerging within an existing whole seems at first 
glance antithetical to agricultural biosecurity tactics that serve to shield unaffected 
areas from biological intruders. Yet the two approaches can be complementary, 
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE421while also pushing responses to become more comprehensive. A more-than-human 
politics of landscape care requires us to pay attention to the entanglements that 
allow an epidemic to exist and to respond to each relation accordingly. Eradica -
tion, while potentially worthy, is perpetually reactive. And while agroecological 
production practices, like crop diversification, are popularly understood to confer 
disease resilience, they do not suffice. When more-than-human maintenance work 
is rendered visible and valued, it can be more intentionally directed toward desir -
able, if unpredictable, ends.
There is no saving Mallorca’s almonds, at least not in the form they once took. 
What rural landscapes living with Xylella  on the Iberian Peninsula might look like 
remains an open question, potentially requiring dramatic reconfigurations of rural 
life. The Xylella  epidemic was always about more than almonds. A politics of land -
scape care is not a call for protecting, preserving, or proliferating any particular 
beings—plant, animal, or otherwise. It is a call to see the web of relations  among 
plants, farmers, insects, aquifers, bacteria, governments, petrochemicals, scientists, 
soils, and matter of all kinds as the site of politics where the ongoingness of spe -
cific configurations of existence is negotiated. It is a call to question the focus on 
an individual actor—be it a bacterium or a bureaucracy—as uniquely blamewor -
thy, for the solutions thus proposed likely remain far too narrow. A more-than-
human politics of care demands that we examine the slow processes at work in 
transforming landscapes—like tourism, land tenure, and climate change—as well 
as the sudden, discrete shocks. Care as politics does not presuppose any normative 
qualities: forms of maintenance and relation-building will always create differen -
tiated effects. Pathogenic conditions are not anomalous—they are endemic to late 
capitalist life. Confronting them requires not only swift bold actions but also the 
subtle, gradual maintenance work of understanding and transforming inherited 
relationships, broadening imagined constituencies, acknowledging bonds of mutual 
responsibility, and in doing so weaving new fabrics of more-than-human care.
ABSTRACT 
Almonds were once “the gold of Mallorca,” a source of modest wealth and a pillar of 
diversified farming systems for smallholders on the largest of Spain’s Balearic Islands. 
Now researchers believe nearly every rainfed almond tree on the island will be dead 
within as few as five years. The introduced bacteria Xylella fastidiosa , enabled by its 
spittle-bug vector, and emboldened by climate change, has flooded the xylem of these 
rainfed trees, impeding the flow of fluid and nutrients to the point where the tree 
can no longer survive. This article enrolls feminist theorizations of care and agential 
realism to broaden the political scope and stakes of a plant epidemic. I argue that by 
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3422attending to the care relations underlying pathogenicity we can shift from narratives 
of landscape purification toward a more-than-human politics of care. [care; more-
than-human; agential realism; epidemic; agriculture; Spain]
ABSTRACTO
Una vez las almendras eran “el oro de Mallorca,” una fuente de riqueza modesta y 
un pilar de un sistema de agricultura diversificada para los payeses (campesinos) de 
la isla más grande del archipiélago balear de España. Actualmente los investigadores 
creen que casi todos los almendros de la isla pueden morir dentro de cinco años. Una 
bacteria introducida, Xylella fastidiosa, apoyada por su insecto vector, el salivazo, 
y animada por el cambio climático, ha inundado la xilema de los almendros de 
secano, impidiendo la circulación de fluidos y nutrientes hasta el punto de que el 
árbol no puede sobrevivir. Este artículo emplea teorizaciones feministas del cuidado 
y del realismo agencial para ampliar el alcance político de una epidemia de plan -
tas. Argumento que teniendo en cuenta las relaciones de cuidado subyacentes de la 
patogenicidad, podemos pasar de los temas de purificación del paisaje a una política 
más-que-humano del cuidado. [cuidado; más-que-humano; realismo agencial; 
epidemia; agricultura; España]
NOTES
Acknowledgments  I owe immense gratitude to my interlocutors for their time and gen -
erosity. This article was shaped by keen insights from Jaume Fornés Comas, Eduardo Moralejo, 
Andrew Mathews, Jessica Cattelino, Jerry Jacka, and the careful attention of anonymous re -
viewers—along with that of Cultural  Anthropology  editor Brad Weiss. All shortcomings are my 
own. Funding for this research was provided by the Wenner-Gren Foundation.
1. Olive oil also had an important export role, though it was superseded by almonds in the 
mid-twentieth century ( Morey Tous and Molina de Dios 2016 ). 
2. This emic call for “living with” resonates strongly with Donna J. Haraway’s (2008 , 2016 ) 
calls for more intimately “living-with” other species and Martin Heidegger’s (1962) 
 theory of “being-with.”
REFERENCES
Baldi, Paolo, and Nicola La Porta
2017  “Xylella fastidiosa : Host Range and Advance in Molecular Identification Techniques.” 
Frontiers in Plant Science  8: 944. https:/ /doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00944 .
Balearic Islands Tourism Board
2017  “Balearic Islands Regional Context Survey.” Interreg Europe. h t t p s : //
www.interregeurope.eu/fileadmin/user_upload/tx_tevprojects/library/
file_1508251726.pdf .
Barad, Karen
2003  “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes 
to Matter.” Signs  28, no. 3: 801–31. https://doi.org/10.1086/345321 .
2007  Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and 
Meaning . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE423Bardolet, Esteban
1980  “Tourism in the Balearic Islands.” Tourist Review  35, no. 4: 18–21. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.1108/eb057827 .
Barnes, Jessica, and Mariam Taher 
2019  “Care and Conveyance: Buying Baladi Bread in Cairo.” Cultural Anthropology  34, 
no. 3: 417–43. https:/ /doi.org/10.14506/ca34.3.05 .
Barnes, Marian
2012  Care in Everyday Life: An Ethic of Care in Practice . Bristol: Policy Press.
Benito, Cristóbal Gómez, and Emilio Luque Pulgar
2007  “Modernización agraria, modernización administrativa y franquismo El modelo 
educativo y administrativo del Servicio de Extensión Agraria (1955–1986).” Areas: 
Revista Internacional de Ciencias Sociales  26: 131–49. https:/ /revistas.um.es/areas/
article/view/118551 .
Bergeron, Julie, Sylvain Paquette, and Philippe Poullaouec-Gonidec
2014  “Uncovering Landscape Values and Micro-geographies of Meanings with the 
Go-along Method.” Landscape and Urban Planning  122: 108–21. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2013.11.009 .
Biermann, Christine
2016  “Securing Forests from the Scourge of Chestnut Blight: The Biopolitics 
of Nature and Nation.” Geoforum  75: 210–19. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/j.
geoforum.2016.07.007 .
Blanchette, Alex
2015  “Herding Species: Biosecurity, Posthuman Labor, and the American Industrial 
Pig.” Cultural Anthropology  30, no. 4: 640–69. https:/ /doi.org/10.14506/ca30.4.09 .
Braun, Bruce
2006  “Environmental Issues: Global Natures in the Space of Assemblage.” Progress in 
Human Geography  30, no. 5: 644–54. https:/ /doi.org/10.1177/0309132506070180 .
Campbell, Christopher
2004  Phylloxera: How Wine Was Saved for the World . London: Harper Perennial.
Chapman, Daniel, Bethan V. Purse, Helen E. Roy, and James M. Bullock
2017  “Global Trade Networks Determine the Distribution of Invasive Non-Native 
Species.” Global Ecology and Biogeography  26, no. 8: 907–17. https:/ /doi.org/10. 
1111/geb.12599 .
Colella, Christian, Roberto Carradore, and Andrea Cerroni
2019  “Problem Setting and Problem Solving in the Case of Olive Quick Decline 
Syndrome in Apulia, Italy: A Sociological Approach.” Phytopathology  109, no. 2: 
187–99. https://doi.org/10.1094/PHYTO-07-18-0247-FI .
Conklin, Harold C.
1957  Hanunóo Agriculture: A Report on an Integral System of Shifting Cultivation in the 
Philippines . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Cortés, Alexander
2017  “Crisis en el campo: ‘Se debería pedir perdón a los payeses: Los almendros no 
estaban mal cuidados.’” Diario de Mallorca , July 2. https:/ /www.diariodemallorca.
es/mallorca/2017/07/01/tomeu-melis-deberia-pedir-perdon-3381262.html .
Crosby, Alfred W.
2004  Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900–1900 . 2nd ed. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Díaz Geada, Alba, Ana Cabana Iglesia, Lourenzo Fernández Prieto, and Daniel Lanero Táboas
2012  “Agricultural Extension Programmes in Post-War Europe: A Comparative Study 
of Two Extreme Cases: Spain and the Netherlands (1946–1973).” Paper presented 
at the 9th European Social Science History Conference, Glasgow, April 11–14.
Dunn, Elizabeth
2007  “Escherichia coli , Corporate Discipline and the Failure of the Sewer State.” Space 
and Polity  11, no. 1: 35–53. https:/ /doi.org/10.1080/13562570701406568 .
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3424Evans-Pritchard, E. E.
1940  The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and Political Institutions of a Nilotic 
People . New York: Oxford University Press.
Ferrer Guasp, Pere
2000  Joan March: El inicis d’un imperi financer, 1900–1924 . 2nd ed. Palma de Mallorca: 
Edicions Cort.
Fischer, Berenice, and Joan C. Tronto
1990  “Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring.” In Circles of Care: Work and Identity in 
Women’s Lives , edited by Emily K. Abel and Margaret K. Nelson, 40–62. Albany: 
State University of New York Press.
Gould, Fred, Zachary S. Brown, and Jennifer Kuzma
2018  “Wicked Evolution: Can We Address the Sociobiological Dilemma of Pesticide 
Resistance?” Science  360, no. 6390: 728–32. https:/ /doi.org/10.1126/science.
aar3780 .
Guthman, Julie
2019  Wilted: Pathogens, Chemicals, and the Fragile Future of the Strawberry Industry . 
Oakland: University of California Press.
Gutkowski, Natalia
2021  “Bodies That Count: Administering Multispecies in Palestine/Israel’s 
Borderlands.” Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space  4, no. 1: 135–57. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1177/2514848620901445 .
Haraway, Donna J.
2008  When Species Meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
2016  Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, N.C.: Duke 
University Press.
Hartigan, John, Jr.
2017  Care of the Species: Races of Corn and the Science of Plant Biodiversity . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Heidegger, Martin
1962  Being and Time . Translated by John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson. New York: 
Harper and Row.
Hinchliffe, Steve, Nick Bingham, John Allen, and Simon Carter
2017  Pathological Lives: Disease, Space and Biopolitics . RGS-IBG Book Series. Chichester, 
West Sussex: Wiley Blackwell.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística
1977  “Cultivos arbóreos y arbustivos: Superficie, producción y valor, a ño 1975.” Anuario 
Estadistico. Madrid, Spain: Instituto Nacional de Estadística.
Jones, R.A.C.
2016  “Future Scenarios for Plant Virus Pathogens as Climate Change Progresses.” In 
Advances in Virus Research  95: 87–147. https:/ /doi.org/10.1016/bs.aivir.2016.02.004 .
Kent, M., R. Newnham, and S. Essex
2002  “Tourism and Sustainable Water Supply in Mallorca: A Geographical 
Analysis.” Applied Geography  22, no. 4: 351–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0143-
6228(02)00050-4 .
Kirksey, S. Eben, and Stefan Helmreich
2010  “The Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography.” Cultural Anthropology  25, no. 4: 
545–76. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01069.x .
Kohn, Eduardo
2013  How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology beyond the Human . Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Ladizinsky, G.
1999  “On the Origin of Almond.” Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution  43: 143–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008690409554 .
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE425Latour, Bruno
2011  “Love Your Monsters.” In Love Your Monsters: Postenvironmentalism and the 
Anthropocene , edited by Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus. Oakland, Calif.: 
Breakthrough Institute.
López Gil, Silvia
2007  “Las lógicas del cuidado.” Diagonal , March 15. https:/ /www.diagonalperiodico.
net/humor/logicas-del-cuidado.html .
Lowe, Celia
2010  “Viral Clouds: Becoming H5N1 in Indonesia.” Cultural Anthropology  25, no. 4: 
625–49. https:/ /doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01072.x .
Martin, Aryn, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu
2015  “The Politics of Care in Technoscience.” Social Studies of Science  45, no. 5: 625–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715602073 .
Mathews, Andrew S.
2018  “Landscapes and Throughscapes in Italian Forest Worlds: Thinking Dramatically 
about the Anthropocene.” Cultural Anthropology  33, no. 3: 386–414. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.14506/ca33.3.05 .
Mattern, Shannon
2018  “Maintenance and Care.” Places Journal , November 2018. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.22269/181120 .
McCook, Stuart
2006  “Global Rust Belt: Hemileia  vastatrix  and the Ecological Integration of World 
Coffee Production since 1850.” Journal of Global History  1, no. 2: 177–95. h t t p s : //
doi.org/10.1017/S174002280600012X .
Meentemeyer, Ross K., Nathan E. Rank, Brian L. Anacker, David M. Rizzo, and J. Hall 
Cushman
2008  “Influence of Land-Cover Change on the Spread of an Invasive Forest Pathogen.” 
Ecological Applications  18, no. 1: 159–71. https:/ /doi.org/10.1890/07-0232.1 .
Mitchell, Timothy
2002  “Can the Mosquito Speak?” In Rule of Experts: Egypt, Techno-Politics, Modernity , 
19–53. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Mol, Annemarie
2008  The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . London: Routledge.
Molina de Dios, Ram ón
2012  “De pan de pobres a sofisticado aditivo. Tecnología e innovación en torno a la 
industria de la algarroba: El caso balear (1930–2010).” Revista de Historia Industrial  
21, no. 49: 147–79. https:/ /doi.org/10.1344/rhi.v21i49.20932 .
Morey Tous, Ant ònia, and Jaume Fornés Comas
2021  “El cultivo tradicional del almendro en el Mediterráneo. Baleares en el contexto 
Español (ca. 1770–2017).” Historia Agraria  84.
Morey Tous, Ant ònia, and Ram ón Molina de Dios
2016  “El retroceso del olivar en las Baleares: Un itinerario a contracorriente de 
la evolución española (1800–1960).” Historia Agraria  68: 71–101. h t t p s : //
historiaagraria.com/en/issues/antonia-morey-tous-ramon-molina-de-dios-
el-retroceso-del-olivar-en-las-baleares-un-itinerario-a-contracorriente-de-la-
evolucion-espanola-1800-1960 .
Murphy, Michelle
2015  “Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational Itineraries of Care in Feminist 
Health Practices.” Social Studies of Science  45, no. 5: 717–37. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.1177/0306312715589136 .
Murray, Ivan
2012  “Geografies del capitalisme balear: Poder, metabolisme socioeconòmic i petjada 
ecològica d’una superpotència turística.” PhD diss., Universitat de les Illes 
Baleares.
CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY 36:3426Murray, Ivan, Gabriel Jover-Avellà, Onofre Fullana, and Enric Tello
2019  “Biocultural Heritages in Mallorca: Explaining the Resilience of Peasant 
Landscapes within a Mediterranean Tourist Hotspot, 1870–2016.” Sustainability  
11, no. 7: 1926. https:/ /doi.org/10.3390/su11071926 .
Netting, Robert McC.
1974  “Agrarian Ecology.” Annual Review of Anthropology  3: 21–56. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.1146/annurev.an.03.100174.000321 .
Ogden, Laura A., Billy Hall, and Kimiko Tanita
2013  “Animals, Plants, People, and Things: A Review of Multispecies Ethnography.” 
Environment and Society  4, no. 1. https:/ /doi.org/10.3167/ares.2013.040102 .
Olmo, Diego, Alicia Nieto, David Borràs, Marina Montesinos, Francesc Adrover, Aura 
Pascual, Pere A. Gost, et al.
2021  “Landscape Epidemiology of Xylella fastidiosa  in the Balearic Islands.” Agronomy  11, 
no. 3: 473. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy11030473 .
Olmo, Diego, Alicia Nieto, David Borr às, Marina Montesinos, Francesc Adrover, Alejandro 
Urbano, Aura Pascual, et al.
2018  “Panorama Actual de Xylella Fastidiosa En Las Islas Baleares.” Paper presented 
at the XIX Congreso de la Sociedad Española de Fitopatología, Toledo, Spain, 
October 10.
Panelli, Ruth
2010  “More-than-Human Social Geographies: Posthuman and Other Possibilities.” 
Progress in Human Geography  34, no. 1: 79–87. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0309132509105007 .
Paxson, Heather
2008  “Post-Pasteurian Cultures: The Microbiopolitics of Raw-Milk Cheese in the 
United States.” Cultural Anthropology  23, no. 1: 15–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1548-1360.2008.00002.x .
Pons, Antoni, Onofre Rullán Salamanca, and Ivan Murray
2014  “Tourism Capitalism and Island Urbanization: Tourist Accommodation Diffusion 
in the Balearics, 1936–2010.” Island Studies Journal  9, no. 2: 239–58. https:/ /doaj.
org/article/1746046538be484aa848f8ade6001929 .
Porter, Natalie
2013  “Bird Flu Biopower: Strategies for Multispecies Coexistence in Việt Nam.” 
American Ethnologist  40, no. 1: 132–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/amet.12010 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María
2012  “‘Nothing comes without its world’: Thinking with Care.” Sociological Review  60, 
no. 2: 197–216. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.2012.02070.x . 
2015  “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care.” Social Studies 
of Science  45, no. 5: 691–716. https:/ /doi.org/10.1177%2F0306312715599851 .
2017  Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. Kindle.
Purcell, Alexander
2013  “Paradigms: Examples from the Bacterium Xylella fastidiosa .” Annual Review of 
Phytopathology  51: 339–56. https:/ /doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-082712-  
102325 .
Robbins, Paul, and Brian Marks
2010  “Assemblage Geographies.” In The SAGE Handbook of Social Geographies , edited by 
Susan J. Smith, Rachel Pain, Sallie A. Marston, and John Paul Jones, 176–95. Los 
Angeles: SAGE. 
Russell, Andrew L., and Lee Vinsel
2018  “After Innovation, Turn to Maintenance.” Technology and Culture  59, no. 1: 1–25. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1353/tech.2018.0004 .
Scholthof, Karen-Beth G.
2007  “The Disease Triangle: Pathogens, the Environment and Society.” Nature Reviews 
Microbiology  5: 152–56. https:/ /doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro1596 .
PLANTS, PATHOGENS, AND THE POLITICS OF CARE427Seshia Galvin, Shaila
2018  “Interspecies Relations and Agrarian Worlds.” Annual Review of Anthropology  47: 
233–49. https:/ /doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anthro-102317-050232 .
Soluri, John
2005  Banana Cultures: Agriculture, Consumption, and Environmental Change in Honduras and 
the United States . Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sundberg, Juanita
2014  “Decolonizing Posthumanist Geographies.” Cultural Geographies  21, no. 1: 33–47. 
https:/ /doi.org/10.1177%2F1474474013486067 .
TallBear, Kim
2011  “Why Interspecies Thinking Needs Indigenous Standpoints.” Fieldsights , November 
18. https:/ /culanth.org/fieldsights/why-interspecies-thinking-needs-indigenous-
standpoints .
Tello, Enric, Gabriel Jover, Ivan Murray, Onofre Fullana, and Ricard Soto
2018  “From Feudal Colonization to Agrarian Capitalism in Mallorca: Peasant Endurance 
under the Rise and Fall of Large Estates (1229–1900).” Journal of Agrarian Change  
18, no. 3: 483–516. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12253 .
Todd, Zoe
2017  “Fish, Kin and Hope: Tending to Water Violations in amiskwaciwâskahikan  and 
Treaty Six Territory.” Afterall: A Journal of Art, Context and Enquiry  43: 102–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/692559 .
Trębicki, Piotr, Beatriz Dáder, Simone Vassiliadis, and Alberto Fereres
2017  “Insect-Plant-Pathogen Interactions as Shaped by Future Climate: Effects on 
Biology, Distribution, and Implications for Agriculture.” Insect Science  24, no. 6: 
975–89. https://doi.org/10.1111/1744-7917.12531 .
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt
2014  “More-Than-Human Sociality: A Call for Critical Description.” In Anthropology 
and Nature , edited by Kirsten Hastrup, 27–42. London: Routledge.
2015  The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins . 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Tuck, Eve, and K. Wayne Yang
2012  “Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor.” Decolinization: Indigeneity, Education and 
Society  1, no. 1: 40. https:/ /jps.library.utoronto.ca/index.php/des/article/
view/18630/15554 .
Weheliye, Alexander G.
2014  Habeas Viscus: Racializing Assemblages, Biopolitics, and Black Feminist Theories of the 
Human . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
Whatmore, Sarah
2006  “Materialist Returns: Practising Cultural Geography in and for a More-
Than-Human World.” Cultural Geographies  13, no. 4: 600–9. h t t p s : //d o i .
org/10.1191/1474474006cgj377oa .
Wynter, Sylvia
2003  “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards the 
Human, after Man, Its Overrepresentation—An Argument.” CR: The New 
Centennial Review  3, no. 3: 257–337. https:/ /doi.org/10.1353/ncr.2004.0015 .
Yoshida, Kentaro, Verena J. Schuenemann, Liliana M. Cano, Marina Pais, Bagdevi Mishra, 
Rahul Sharma, Chirsta Lanz, et al.
2013  “The Rise and Fall of the Phytophthora infestans  Lineage That Triggered the Irish 
Potato Famine.” ELife 2: e00731. https:/ /doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00731 .
