ARTICLE
Plastic pigs and public secrets in translational
neonatology in Denmark
Mie S. Dam1✉, Per T. Sangild2,3,4& Mette N. Svendsen1
ABSTRACT This paper explores how a translational research platform in Denmark uses
piglets as infant models. Drawing on meanings of “public ”as“open ”and “visible, ”we track
how researchers and clinicians together and separately turn research piglets and prematureinfants into both public and un-public beings in laboratory and clinical settings. In thesecomplex multispecies relationships, researchers and clinicians alike create and retain certain“zones of unknowing ”in which intimate cross-species care relations are fostered. While
critical social scientists call for greater public recognition of animals in accounts of humanhealth, our study demonstrates that “zones of unknowing ”enable the involved professionals
to care simultaneously for neonatal beings and the greater public good. To account for theefforts involved in contributing to the greater public good, we introduce the term “publication
work. ”We argue that publication work relies as much on porosity between species and
spaces as on actively drawing boundaries between species and between public and privatespaces. Plastic pigs and public secrets are crucial to realise the ambition of more-than-humanpublic health.https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y OPEN
1Centre for Medical Science and Technology Studies, Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.2Department of
Comparative Pediatrics and Nutrition, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.3Department of
Neonatology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.4Department of Pediatrics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.✉email: mda@sund.ku.dk
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms 1
1234567890():,;
IntroductionThe extensive use of animals in biomedical experimentation
has allowed better understanding of basic biology, disease
mechanisms, and development of new medical interven-
tions. During the last 20 years, the process of turning animal-
based biomedical knowledge into human health has developed
into a rapidly growing biomedical sub ﬁeld termed “translational
medicine ”or“translational research ”(Marincola, 2003 ; Curry,
2008 ). The emergence of research that identi ﬁes as “translational ”
is informed by a global trend in research politics linking basic
animal science to the public good of human health and to public
missions of innovation, economic growth, and international
competitiveness (Curry, 2008). In Denmark, as in other European
countries and the US, funding agencies and governmental insti-
tutions have increasingly turned their attention to the process of
“translation ”between bench and bedside (Cooper, 2012 ). Despite
this renewed political focus on the connections between animal
experimentation and human healthcare, the central role of animal
models in translational research (Friese and Latimer, 2019 ) is not
reﬂected in public accounts regarding medicine and public health
more broadly. Biomedical publications consistently leave out the
life, suffering and death of research animals (Sharp, 2014 ,2019 )
and both in public health science textbooks and in public com-
munication on health, research animals are mostly invisible (Rock
et al., 2014 ; Svendsen, 2017 ).
The increasing attention to the absence of animals in public
accounts of human health has spurred a call for post-human
explorations of how a given “human public ”relies on other forms
of life (Friese and Nuyts, 2017 ; Svendsen, 2017 ), and how public
health, which tends to be equated with human health (Rock et al.,
2014 ), can be approached as a shared condition of human and
animal populations (Leonelli et al., 2014 ; Kirk, 2016 ; Cohn and
Lynch, 2017 ; Hinchliffe et al., 2018 ; Friese, 2019 ; Friese and
Latimer, 2019 ). Responding to this call for a more-than-human
public health, we explore ethnographically the production of
intimate and uneven relations across species and spaces that
potentialise research piglets (Svendsen and Koch, 2013 ) as models
for premature infants in translational neonatology research.
Paradoxically, maybe, our ethnography demonstrates that the
translational potential of the research piglets rests partly on their
un-public status. The invisibility of research piglets in public
spaces creates possibilities for interdisciplinary collaboration
between laboratory and clinic and for intimate cross-species carepractices, which enhance the piglet ’s value for public health and
embody its belonging in this public. Recognising this potentiality
of the research piglets ’“un-publicness ”prompts us to ask: How
does the invisibility and un-public status of research piglets
generate health for human infants? What is the relationship
between visibility and invisibility in carrying out translational
research across species and spaces?
To delve into to the relational aspects of these questions, we
engage the concept of “healthy publics ”(Hinchliffe et al., 2018 ).
This concept shifts the focus of public health away from human
target populations, towards a greater recognition of the hetero-
geneous and fragile collectives (of humans as well as nonhumans)
that contribute to health and well-being. Moreover, the concept of
healthy publics enables us to investigate the complex inter-
relationship between public and un-public beings in translational
research.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, being “public ”
can be de ﬁned as being “open to general observation, view, or
knowledge; existing, performed, or carried out without conceal-
ment, so that all may see or hear ”(Oxford English Dictionary,
2019 ). These meanings of visibility and openness are closely
associated with information, equity and societal trust; terms that
bear positive connotations in modern liberal democracies(Reardon, 2017 ). On the contrary, concealment, invisibility and
secrecy are left with negative associations (Birchall, 2011)o f
suppression, exploitation and antidemocratic governance. Incontemporary scholarship on science-society relations, openness
and visibility, often articulated as transparency, have become
ubiquitously tied to good science governance, public legitimacy,
and public trust (McLeod and Hobson-West, 2016 ). As Sheila
Jasanoff aptly observes, “it is almost an article of faith that
openness is essential both for the advancement of science and for
its bene ﬁcial interaction with society ”(Jasanoff, 2006 , p. 1). Yet,
in practice, Jasanoff adds, openness in science is almost always
limited and traded off against other social values (Jasanoff, 2006 ).
This is the case in the ﬁeld of animal experimentation, which has
a long history of public controversies (Asdal, 2008 ). Here, animal
researchers apply secrecy and closed doors as ways to protect
themselves from public stigma and animal activism (Birke et al.,
2007 ), and “selective openness ”(Holmberg and Ideland, 2010 )
serves as a tool for animal researchers to balance ideals of
openness against fears of public misunderstandings. In our case of
translational neonatology research in Denmark, the relationship
between animal science and the public outside the animal
laboratory was not a strong concern among the researchers and
clinicians we worked with. What did occupy them, however, was
how to turn their practices into (human) health and good lives; an
endeavour, which involved navigating invisibility and visibility. In
the following, we take the public invisibility of the research piglets
as a starting point for unravelling how practices of visibility and
invisibility contribute to the generation of
healthy publics in the
ﬁeld of translational neonatology.
To investigate this intertwinement of visibility and invisibility,
we bring our more-than-human approach to public health into
conversation with Poul Geissler ’s work on the anthropology of
unknowing. He refers to Michael Taussig ’s central argument that
unknowing relates to “that what is known but must not be
articulated in a given societal arrangement ”(Geissler, 2013 , p. 15)
and that “public secrets ”(Taussig, 1999 ) are constitutive of social
order in that they make domination unspoken, and silence cri-
tique and resistance. Inspired by Taussig ’s work on the political
importance of unknowing, Geissler ( 2013 ) explores the con-
tribution of unknowing to public health research —aﬁeld that, as
Geissler highlights “pursues epistemic and social transformation,
amelioration and justice ”(Geissler, 2013 , p. 16). He ﬁnds that in
public health research projects, unknowing plays a crucial role in
linking actors and institutions, and he argues that social science
needs to pay attention to unknowing as a practice. Likewise,
Lochlann S. Jain ( 2010 ) uncovers how the emphasis on future
thinking, hope, and progress in randomised controlled trials in
oncology results in “ghosting ”of patient lives, suffering and
deaths. We take orientation from these studies in tracing how
making publicly unknown the suffering and death involved in
translational neonatology research is decisive to the efforts put
into creating healthy publics and striving for good citizen lives.
Crucially, we argue, practices performed behind the closed doors
of the publicly ﬁnanced pig laboratory is not just cruel experi-
ments based on modernist ideas of human exceptionalism.
Rather, in the pig laboratory as well as in the human neonatal
intensive care unit (NICU), practices of unknowing enable and
guard private spaces of care and moral deliberation that con-
stantly challenge and transgress the moral boundaries between
experimental animal and human patient.
We begin by presenting the empirical ﬁeld and our study of
translational neonatology. Ethnographic descriptions of entering
the publicly unknown space of animal experimentation provide
the analytical starting point for the ﬁrst part of the analysis. Here
we direct attention to the ongoing relational work between theARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y
2 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms
research piglets and the researchers who work to turn them into
models of premature infants that can be represented as graphs
andﬁgures in scienti ﬁc conferences and publications. This leads
us to argue that the translational value of research piglets isbound to both their un-publicness and their relational and
material plasticity. Next, we enter the human NICU and show
how—also—the identity of a premature infant at the margins of
life is in some respects plastic and un-public. By juxtaposing the
care practices in the NICU and in the animal laboratory, we
unsettle the moral hierarchy between pigs and humans, and track
how researchers and clinicians turn piglets and infants into public
and un-public beings in different contexts. This unusual juxta-
position of research animals and human infants unfolds the
“publication work ”entailed in forming (human) healthy publics.
Etymologically, publication refers to “the act of making publicly
known. ”Our concept of “publication work ”builds on this
meaning, yet illuminates that publication also intrinsically
involves acts of unknowing.
Studying translational neonatology in Denmark
As one of the Nordic countries, Denmark is characterised by a
market economy existing alongside a strong welfare system,
including universal healthcare. Among Danes, there is a strong
trust in public institutions and most citizens do not distinguish
between state, nation, and people. In this world, the “public ”
constitutes a collective, which encompasses both state institutions
and citizens.
In this country, as elsewhere, the national infant mortality rate
is acknowledged as a crucial indicator re ﬂecting the level of
progress and welfare of a country. Modern liberal democraciesinvest heavily in providing and optimising intensive healthcare
for weak newborn infants. In the Danish NICUs, human infants
survive each day due to advanced medical technology and the
skilled work of highly specialised doctors and nurses; a public
investment, which testi ﬁes to a cultural understanding of the
newborn human infant as a “sacred ”and“untouchable ”being
holding intrinsic value.
The Danish welfare state also plays a key role in regulating and
coordinating the Danish pork production. However, the same
efforts are not put into survival within this ﬁeld. In Danish pig-
geries, 9% of all newborn piglets die every day (~10,000) due to
immaturity and lack of teats to accommodate the entire litter of
piglets (Andersen et al., 2011 ). Bred for meat consumption, the
Danish farm piglet holds almost no intrinsic value in Danish
society. Approximately 30 million pigs are produced each year in
industrial farms —almost ﬁve times the Danish population of <6
million people. In the capacity of export goods, Danish pork is
often publicly depicted as a crucial resource for the country.
Although many Danes have never visited a mass production farm
or a slaughterhouse, photos of pigs behind bars and carcasses
ready for shipment constitute a well-rehearsed reference point in
public discussions of agriculture and export. Pigs are best known
as a readily available resource for the national public, and the
economic value of pork, as well as the downside of its polluting
traces in Danish waters and soil, are frequent topics in public
debate.
Danish pork export success is based on breeding pigs with an
extra rib, leaner meat, and an increasing number of piglets per
litter. This breeding programme relies on decades of close colla-
borations between the meat production industry and Danish
veterinary science. Through this relationship, Danish veterinary
science has been in a unique position to mobilise the country
’s
extraordinary expertise on pork in developing pig models in
biomedical research (Svendsen, 2016 ). Also internationally, the
close proximity between pigs and humans in terms of genetics,organ size, and physiology have, in medical research, turned pigs
into popular models of many different human conditions (Miller
and Ullrey, 1987; Kuzmuk and Schook, 2011 ; Groenen et al.,
2012 ; Swindle et al., 2012 ). In a Danish context, the public
position of the pig as ﬁrst and foremost an important production
animal has led to the use of pigs in biomedical research being
uncontroversial, politically as well as publicly.
Biomedical research in the ﬁeld of translational neonatology
brings together the highly valued hospitalised infant and the
expendable farm piglet. In an animal laboratory at the veterinary
campus at the University of Copenhagen, a group of animal
researchers use Danish piglets, which otherwise would have been
nurtured for pork, as their primary animal model for premature
infants at risk of life-threatening gastrointestinal conditions such
as the in ﬂammatory bowel disease necrotising enterocolitis
(NEC) (Sangild et al., 2014 ). NEC is a common cause of death in
premature infants and thus a much-dreaded disease in NICUs
around the world. The disease has, unfortunately, featured as a
prominent problem within neonatal care since the advent of
neonatal intensive care in the 1960s and as a hindrance, therefore,
to the related improved survival of the smallest infants (Neu and
Walker, 2011 ). Thus, technological developments in neonatal care
and the strong imperative to save the lives of preterm infants
constitute the background for developing the preterm pig model.
Owing to “close similarities with preterm infants in body size,
organ development, and many clinical features ”(Sangild et al.,
2014 , p. 4713), the Copenhagen group argues that the preterm pig
model holds a greater translational potential than for instance
rodent models. To the researchers, the preterm pig may also
provide a sensitive model for weak farm piglets and they maintain
that they “care about piglets as piglets and not just as infant
models. ”
In the experimental setup that constitutes the preterm pig
model, a pregnant sow, brought to the pig facility from a pig farm
outside Copenhagen, undergoes a caesarean section 10 to 12 days
before the sow is due. Supervised by their professor, a group of
veterinarian students take turns making incisions in the belly ofthe sow. Washed, shaved and covered with a green surgical towel,
the sow looks just like a (human) patient, but as soon as the litter
of ~20 slippery little piglets has left her womb, the sow is
euthanized and discarded. Researchers and animal technicians are
focusing their efforts on making the piglets survive their preterm
birth, thus translating them from (unborn) pork to fragile pae-
diatric model animals “imbued with potential for human health ”
(Svendsen and Koch, 2013 , p. 118). The piglets are quickly and
carefully placed in heated and oxygenated incubators and for the
following ﬁve to 26 days fed different combinations of enteral
(oral) and parenteral (via the blood stream) nutrition (see Fig. 1).
The animal research group ’s experimental studies on preterm
piglets show consistently that bovine colostrum, the ﬁrst milk the
cow produces after giving birth, signi ﬁcantly reduces the risk of
NEC compared to infant formula and possibly also compared to
human donor milk (Jensen et al., 2013;S t ø ye ta l . ,
2014; Shen et al.,
2015; Rasmussen et al., 2016). Scienti ﬁc papers from the research
group always explicitly underscore the translational potential for
compromised human infants. However, despite >10 years of pub-
lication of scienti ﬁc articles based on the results from the preterm
pig model, the team comes to the conclusion that the evidence
published in these scienti ﬁc journals does not all by itself reach the
clinic. The director of the pig laboratory, Per T. Sangild who is the
second author of this article, therefore initiates a collaboration with
central clinical and industrial partners to translate pig-based
research on bovine colostrum into the next stage of clinical stu-
dies. In December 2012, the Danish Council for Strategic Research,
together with collaborating industries, grants 60 million DKK
(Danish Kroner) to the NEOMUNE Centre (2012 –2018) headed byPALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y ARTICLE
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms 3
Per Sangild. NEOMUNE Centre is a university-initiated research
platform primarily based on tax money, which aims to improve
clinical care of newborn infants, particular those born prematurely
or with developmental problems (NEOMUNE Centre, 2019). With
this grant, the Danish Council for Strategic Research aims to sup-
port public-private research collaborations “organised to meet the
challenges facing Danish society ”(Danish Council for Strategic
Research, 2013). By enroling NICUs and the infant formula
industry, the NEOMUNE Centre has succeeded into connecting
their translational ambition with the public mission of improving
clinical care for newborn infants.
In 2013, the NICU at Copenhagen University Hospital was the
ﬁrst clinic in which a bovine colostrum study was initiated (Li
et al., 2017 ; Juhl et al., 2018 ). The NICU is the largest and the
most specialised in Denmark and provides intensive care and
treatment to premature newborns (between gestational week 23
and 37) from all over the country. Since its establishment 50 years
ago, the Copenhagen NICU has maintained a strong tradition for
clinical research and the personnel are highly experienced in
clinical research on infants. Thus, the Copenhagen NICU is an
appreciated and indispensable partner in NEOMUNE. Yet, theNEOMUNE partners perceive the inter-species translation from
piglet to infant as potentially controversial and sensitive and a
social science work team is included in NEOMUNE to investigate
the ethical aspects of the translational processes across piglets in
the laboratory and infants in the NICU.
Theﬁrst author Mie S. Dam has carried out her Ph.D studies in
this work team supervised by the second author, Per Sangild,
heading the NEOMUNE Centre, and the third author Mette N.
Svendsen, who headed the social science work team and has
conducted ethnographic research in experimental and clinical
neonatology since 2009. In co-authoring academic publications
(Dam et al., 2017; Dam et al., 2018 ), the three of us seek to make
visible the critically engaged dialogue between social science and
natural science (Prainsack et al., 2010 ) that has enabled us to
explore inter-species translation in Danish neonatology. The
work presented in this paper results from our common engage-
ment in NEOMUNE drawing primarily on Mie ’sﬁeldwork
activities. As a natural scientist, Per has corrected and nuancedthe biomedical content and asked for clari ﬁcation when the social
scienti ﬁc analysis did not make sense to him. In this way, his
questions and comments spurred new analytical re ﬂections and
clarity. Danish research ethics regulations do not require ethics
approval for qualitative interview and observation studies.
According to Danish law, the study was approved by the Data
Protection Authorities ( Datatilsynet ).
From January 2013 to June 2014, Mie participated in
NEOMUNE-related activities taking place in and around the
preterm pig laboratory. Besides six intense weeks of participation
when experimental studies were running in the pig laboratory,
she passed the obligatory laboratory animal science course, par-
ticipated in monthly management group meetings, took part in
fortnightly team meetings, travelled with the biomedical
researchers to conferences, and followed the piglets and the
researchers across experimental spaces. Concurrently, Mie and
Mette interviewed researchers involved in the pig studies (seven
interviews) and the NEOMUNE steering group members (seven
interviews). Between July 2013 and January 2014, Mie followed
nurses and doctors in their clinical work life in the NICU at
Copenhagen University Hospital, where she observed the prac-tical preparations for the ﬁrst clinical colostrum study and con-
ducted interviews with parents to learn about their experiences
and expectations in relation to feeding bovine colostrum to pre-
mature infants (14 interviews).
Moving between the connected empirical activities and sites of
translational neonatology has enabled us to grasp the relations
across species (piglets; and humans –
both infants and researchers)
and spaces (laboratory, clinic, conference rooms) that contribute
to the formation of healthy publics in the ﬁeld of translational
neonatology. In observing and participating in “more than human
encounters ”(Lien, 2015), our ethnography was not only multi-
sited (Marcus, 1995) but also multispecies (Kirksey and Helm-
reich, 2010). Now, let us step into the preterm pig laboratory.
Caring for pigs and public health in the private space of the
animal laboratory
One Monday morning in March 2013, Mie arrived in the preterm
pig laboratory at the University of Copenhagen to participate in a
Fig. 1 The preterm pig laboratory. Piglets installed in incubator-like boxes and connected to feeding machines (Photo by Mie S. Dam March 2013).ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y
4 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms
ﬁve-day experiment. At that time, she had just received her
Master ’s degree in public health, and had had no idea that a place
like the preterm pig laboratory existed. She had indeed never
considered piglets in an experimental laboratory to belong to theﬁeld of public health. However, after the ﬁrst intense week in the
animal lab, she was overwhelmed by feelings of ambivalence. It
had been fascinating to watch biomedical researchers prepare a
sow for a caesarean section, and to observe the tiny piglets being
gently ﬁtted with feeding tubes and carefully installed in
incubator-like boxes, before —by the end of the experimental
week —being euthanised, and their organs turned into standar-
dised biological samples. However, during the long hours in the
animal laboratory, Mie could not help asking herself, “What am I
doing here? What shall I look for? How come that I, who take an
interest in core aspects of public health such as “people, ”
“society, ”“health and illness, ”end up watching insigni ﬁcant
animals literally isolated from “the real world ”behind the walls of
the laboratory? ”Mie was eager to turn her attention away from
the research piglets and towards the obviously ethically and
politically loaded activities of testing new nutritional regimes in
human infants at a renowned public university hospital. Likewise,
Mette recounted that she had also had similar experiences when
she initiated her ﬁrst research project on pig models in 2009. The
notion of the pig as simply a resource for humans, as just meat,
penetrated not only Mette and Mie ’s own initial experiences in
the pig laboratory, but also the reactions of their colleagues at the
Department of Public Health when they talked about their pig
research. In these conversations, it all seemed very simple, “Kill
the pigs, save the babies. Over and out! ”
In her classroom analysis of British science and technology
students and their reluctance to care for radiation-damaged
insects in the face of the human tragedy of the Chernobyl disaster,
Astrid Schrader ( 2015 ) contends that to her students, caring for
insects would come at the cost of caring for humans and thus
erase the ordained order of things and beings. Similarly, in the
face of the overwhelmingly sick premature infants, whom the pig
studies were aimed to save, Mette and Mie felt awkward to extendtheir empathy and engagement as public health researchers to the
piglets.
From conversations with clinically educated NEOMUNE
researchers Mette and Mie learned that they were not the only
ones who considered the pig an unusual research subject. Medical
doctors and human nutritionists had likewise been wondering
how they ended up working with pigs. Rasmus, a medical Ph.D
student, recounted how working in the laboratory with the piglets
as paediatric models became a “point of inversion ”for him.
Suddenly, he understood that most of the physiology and
pathology he had crammed in medical school was actually based
on animal studies. In an interview Rasmus re ﬂected, “The text-
books sometimes did say “this and this about the brain or the
kidney is based on studies in mice and rats ”, but somehow I never
took it in that what we know about the human is actually one big
puzzle pieced together from many different species in manydifferent situations. ”In an effort to respond to this situation and
make clinicians see and acknowledge the translational potential of
pig research, Per employed his position as director of NEOMUNE
to embark on a new translational strategy, which he referred to as
“visiting each other ’s houses ”(see Fig. 2). This translational
strategy built on close exchange of personnel between “the house ”
of the pig laboratory and “the house ”of the NICU.
In the NEOMUNE pig studies, animal scientists and medical
doctors from the Copenhagen NICU worked side by side. Often
visitors from other NEOMUNE work teams were also present:
international neonatologists, industry collaborators, graduate
students from other Danish NICUs, or from the NEOMUNE
mice studies. In this way, Per worked consciously to make visibleboth the animal facility and the piglets that populate this space.
However, he did so without turning the pig laboratory into a
publicly known space “open to general observation ”(Oxford
English Dictionary, 2019 ). Rather, as the terminology of “visitors ”
and “houses ”implies, he included the heterogeneous partners
involved in the translational research endeavour of NEOMUNE
in the private space, the household, of the pig laboratory. In
NEOMUNE, piglets and animal laboratory thus became a plat-
form for experiments on not only how bovine colostrum affectsthe guts of premature pigs, but also on how collaborative
encounters affect the translational path (Dam et al., 2018 ).
The plasticity of pigs and professionals
As part of the translational strategy, the interdisciplinary research
team also allowed Mette and Mie, the only two social scientists in
NEOMUNE, to take an active part in almost all of their activities
in the pig laboratory. Despite their initial reservations, Mette and
Mie did “begin to care about ”(Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015 ;
Schrader, 2015; Friese, 2019 ) the piglets. The kind of collabora-
tion they became part of is well captured by Joanna Latimer ’s
concept of “being alongside ”, which refers to “cooperating with
one another, even working together, but not necessarily to the
same ends ”(Latimer, 2013 , p. 80). In this form of relationship, in
which togetherness coexists with difference, Mette and Mie
experienced that the piglets in the laboratory space changed the
way they related to the pig in public health. Instead of feeling
strange about ﬁeldwork among research piglets, they felt the urge
to cover up the piglets ’tiny bodies with their little cloths before
closing the door to the animal laboratory after a late-night feeding
session; they were deeply engaged in the researchers ’dilemma of
whether or not to euthanise a weak and suffering piglet; and they
felt the adrenalin-rush when the researchers trusted them to take
care of the piglets and thereby the results of the study. Once, Mie
even found herself kissing the downy forehead of “little R, ”a
piglet that she had worried about during the night as he would
not eat and felt limp. Being alone with the piglets she sensed how
making her body available (Lien, 2015 , p. 16) to them was con-
stitutive of strong feelings of relatedness. As other researchers
have also pointed out, care in science fosters intimate relations,
which shape both the data holder and the scienti ﬁc quality of data
(Friese, 2013; Pinel et al., 2020). The piglets were far from being
just data, just as Mie was far from being just a data manager.
During the experimental weeks, such experiences provided us
with an understanding not only of the intimate entanglements
Fig. 2 “Visiting each other's houses ”.This ﬁgure is produced by Per
Sangild. He often presented the ﬁgure at peadiatric conferences and
NEOMUNE meetings to illustrate the translational strategy of NEOMUNE.PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y ARTICLE
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms 5
that evolved between the human researchers and the piglets
(Friese, 2019 ; Sharp, 2019 ), but also between the medical doctors
and animal scientists who worked together in the animal
laboratory.
Day and night, animal researchers and medical doctors cared
meticulously for each individual piglet. They made regular
checkups, treated weak piglets by adjusting the temperature in
their incubator, took out a little air from their stomach, and gave
them medication to stop their diarrhoea and other infections.
This kind of united individual care work was crucial to enable the
hypersensitive neonate piglets to survive in the laboratory
environment, and was thus absolutely integral to the experi-
mental practices (see Fig. 3). In this way, Mie and Mette ’s
engagement in the pig laboratory taught them that caring about
piglets does not come at the cost of caring about infants. Rather,
they came to see care for research animals and care for future
human patients as a mutual concern (Davies, 2012; Friese, 2013 ).
In the every day practices of the pig laboratory, the NEOMUNE
research team experienced how the urgency of attending to the
bodily needs of the hypersensitive piglets united animal
researchers, medical doctors, and social scientists in heterogeneous
care practices that blurred the boundaries between species and
disciplines in translational neonatology (Dam et al., 2018). When
the collaborating medical doctors were running studies with the
animal researchers in the laboratory, they suggested changes in the
laboratory set up based on their clinical experiences, but generally
conformed to the norms of the animal laboratory and partly
became animal researchers themselves. When treating a com-
promised piglet the animal researchers came to identify them-
selves as “mini-neonatologists ”. Medical doctors and animal
researchers, along with the two social scientists, were all ready to
care for the piglets almost as parents care for their child (Dam
et al., 2017), and in this spatial and social context the premature
piglets took on an identity almost as neonate patient (Dam and
Svendsen, 2018). These transformations resemble how Karen-Sue
Taussig, Klaus Hoeyer and Stefan Helmreich de ﬁne potentiality as
a“genuine plasticity —the capacity to transmute into something
completely different ”(Taussig et al., 2013, p. 6). The possibility of
shaping the piglet through material infrastructures and care work
was indeed linked to its potential as a translational model. How-
ever, whereas potentiality refers to “that which does not (and may
never) exist ”(Taussig et al., 2013,p .3 ) —for instance the future
promise of improved nutrition for human infants in the NICU —
our research revolved around the present and near future effects ofthe piglets ’material and relational plasticity. The plasticity we
observed cut across both professionals and piglets and was closely
related to the notion of “almost: ”From day to day, borders
between disciplinary ﬁelds blurred and opened a space for pro-
fessionals to almost become part of another discipline. Likewise,
borders between species blurred and opened up space for piglets to
become almost human patients. By “visiting each other ’s houses, ”
professionals were alongside each other (Latimer, 2013) and a
strong sense of solidarity —what Per referred to as “the musketeer
spirit ”of the “big NEOMUNE family, ”—emerged across dis-
ciplinary and species borders.
In their analysis of translation in biomedicine, Lowe et al.,
(2019 ) identify that biomedical researchers are increasingly fos-
tering collaborative relations across laboratory and clinic to align
practices of animal and patient care and hereby advance the
translatability of their preclinical animal research. However, while
the researchers interviewed by Lowe and his colleagues emphasise
changes in experimental setup and pharmaceutical agents, we
contend that the translational value of establishing the pig
laboratory as a “space of encounter ”with nonhumans (Johnson,
2015 ) was ﬁrst and foremost that it spurred an opening in
thought that enabled the research team, including Mette and Mie,
to respond more carefully to piglets (See also Bennet, 2010 ;
Haraway, 2008).
By taking on the identity of suffering neonate patients, and, by
being accepted by the medical doctors and researchers as having
done so, the piglets did at one and the same time appear as “better
models ”in the eyes of the medical doctors and also encouraged
the research team to work even harder to translate the pig-based
data into health for human infants. Following these efforts, Mette
and Mie noticed how the research team developed their “capacity
to read the other ”(Clark, 2007 , p. 62) and how they compas-
sionately treated the piglets as “respons-able ”subjects (Haraway,
2008 ). We may say that the piglets taught all of us how “practices
of knowledge can become practices of care ”(Despret, 2004 ,p .
130). Altogether, we came to engage in an “intimate knowledge
practice with an ethical relationship to more-than-human others ”
(Schrader, 2015 , p. 665) in which the position of the piglet as
(only) a tool, as well as the position of the infant as the (only)
patient shifted slightly (Dam et al., 2018 ). In the private space of
the laboratory, the piglets plastically transformed from farm
animals to become almost infants.
This was apparent in the care they received, but also in other
ways. In conversations among researchers in the laboratory andbetween Mette and Mie when discussing ﬁeldwork experiences,
the piglets were often unintentionally referred to as “infants; ”a
slip of the tongue, which expressed that the piglets were not only
passive “model ”receptors of procedures and care —through their
relational and material plasticity they brought about the forma-
tion of technical, affectionate, and ﬂeshly cross-species relation-
ships. These frail premature piglets profoundly paved the way for
translation by enabling medical doctors and animal researchers to
experience a joint ownership of the pig studies and a joint
responsibility for introducing bovine colostrum into the clinic.
Just as the medical Ph.D student Rasmus explained how his
work with piglets as neonate models had changed his way of
looking at the relationship between human and animal health,
Mette and Mie ’s intense experiences in the pig laboratory, in
which the eyes of everyone were on the piglets, provided them
with a greater understanding of the multispecies relations
involved in the health and illness of human and nonhuman
animals (Rock, 2013 ; Rock et al., 2014 ; Friese and Nuyts, 2017 ).
When leaving the animal laboratory to do ﬁeldwork in other
places related to translational neonatology, the “patientised ”
piglets (Dam and Svendsen, 2018 ) travelled with Mette and Mie
in their minds, and they became highly aware of the
Fig. 3 Individal care in the pig laboratory. A researcher cares for a
premature piglet in the pig laboratory. The green line provides the piglet
with enteral nutrition (Photo by Mie S. Dam June 2013).ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y
6 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms
“unrecognised entanglements ”(Tsing, 2015 , p. 274) between
research animals and human health and the ways in which these
entanglements were actively unknown in public spaces (Geissler,
2013 ).
Following the researchers from the pig laboratory at paediatric
conferences, Mette and Mie noticed how the NEOMUNE
researchers always began the narrative of their research in the
human clinic. For instance, they introduced their presentations of
pig-based data by showing pictures of newborn human infants
along with descriptions of the epidemiology and the clinical
consequences of severe and life-threatening conditions such as
NEC. These compelling accounts from the clinic were then
usually followed by graphs, tables and p-values based on quan-
titative data from the pig studies, providing the medical and
natural scientists in the audience with a generic statistical analysis
of laboratory results. In these talks, the demanding care work and
the biographical “patient lives ”of the preterm piglets preceding
those results, were always left out (Svendsen, 2020 ). Participating
in these events, Mette and Mie could not help seeing the piglets as
“ghosted ”lives (Jain, 2010).
However, in discussing this with Per and the research team,
Mette and Mie came to understand that this way of unknowing
the life, suffering, and death of the piglets was not motivated by a
wish to keep the laboratory practices secret. Rather, the
researchers acted in accordance with generally accepted scienti ﬁc
norms (in the natural and the medical sciences) in which their
enormous care work in the animal laboratory does not count as
science and in which their efforts to understand and treat the
clinical conditions of each individual piglet may even appear as
compromising scienti ﬁc ideals of standardisation (Dam and
Svendsen, 2018 ). Only as data, bearing no trace of the piglet ’s
“patient identity ”, could the pig research be published and
acknowledged in scienti ﬁc conferences and papers (Svendsen,
2020 ). By framing their research through references to infant
patients and adhering to statistical results based on pigs, the
biomedical researchers aimed for publications, which would live
up to the scienti ﬁc requirements of their ﬁeld and concomitantly
demonstrate the value of their animal research to clinical scien-
tists and to funding agencies stressing “societal relevance. ”While
the researchers ’felt a strong ethical responsibility for translation,
their efforts also resulted in their ghosting piglet lives and
unknowing ﬂeshly details about them. Here, piglet plasticity
enabled ﬂeshly animals to turn into standardised knowledge.
Altogether, ethnographic ﬁeldwork in the pig laboratory and in
conference rooms showed that translational neonatology research
is underpinned by complex practices of knowing and unknowing,
a kind of ethical boundary work (Wainwright et al., 2006 ), which
we conceptualise as “publication work. ”With this concept, we
seek to capture the work involved in making translational animal
science publicly available. Susan L. Star and James R. Griesemer
originally pointed to scienti ﬁc papers as central means of trans-
lation between different social worlds as scienti ﬁc papers ’
“structure is common enough to more than one world to make
them recognisable ”(Star and Griesemer, 1989 , p. 393). Our
ethnographic case adds to this insight by unfolding that pub-
lication work in translational research is conditioned on the
creation of private spaces for intimate cross-species care relations
and on protecting such private spaces of care from general
observation. That is, translational knowledge productions (such
as scienti ﬁc papers) rely on knowing the animal in ways that
momentarily dissolve the moral and existential borders between
research animal and human patient, and on unknowing this
relationship by absorbing the individual animal into statistical
representations of laboratory results, and presenting research
animals as standardised and unproblematic tools for human
health and survival. In skillfully creating these boundariesbetween knowing and unknowing, the involved researchers
strived to act ethically and realise the ambition of healthy publics.
The un-public infants at the margins of life
The ethnographic ﬁeldwork in the Copenhagen NICU added yet
another layer to our conceptualisation of publication work in
translational research. On a Friday afternoon in June 2013 Mie
followed Doctor Jonas into the room of a severely ill child, Mattie.
He was intubated and connected to a tangle of tubes and elec-
trodes. As Jonas and Mie stood by the incubator, Jonas said that
he was no longer convinced that it was ethically responsible to
continue Mattie ’s treatment. He then repeated what he had pre-
sented at the medical conference several times during the week:
Mattie would not be alive if it were not for resuscitation at birth
and the maximum level of intensive care he had subsequently
been receiving. As Jonas talked, Mattie ’s nurse approached and
Jonas introduced Mie saying, “This is Mie. She has nothing else to
do on a Friday night. ”They all three laughed quietly and con-
tinued chatting a bit about where to go on a Friday night these
days. As the nurse then assisted Jonas in the dif ﬁcult task of
providing Mattie with a new intravenous line, Jonas, highly
concentrated, asked Mie to bring him a syringe, to cut a piece of
gauze, and hand him a piece of cotton, and Mie felt happy for the
rare occasion of being asked to assist. While active participation
had been key to her ﬁeldwork in the pig laboratory, doing
ﬁeldwork in the NICU, where infants were at the margins of life
and their parents went through the crisis of having a severely ill
child and being confronted with the unbearable risk of losing
their newborn child, was mostly characterised by an intense kind
of attentive and re ﬂective observation. Mette and Mie had both
experienced their days of ﬁeldwork in the NICU as emotionally
burdensome and they had ascribed their feelings to being a
“natural reaction ”to the severe situation of the premature child.
However, despite of the presence of a severely ill child, that Friday
night the atmosphere in the room reminded Mie of the collegial
cosiness she had experienced so many times in the pig laboratory.
Also, Mattie ’s belly, swollen and bluish, resembled the many cases
of NEC she had observed in the pig laboratory and Mie could not
help thinking, “If Mattie was a piglet he would never have had to
suffer in this way. ”In that moment, withdrawing Mattie ’s treat-
ment seemed as the only right thing to do.
About 1 h later Mie was back in Mattie ’s room, this time sitting
on a chair by his parents. Owing to the of ﬁcial NICU policy of
family-centred care, the parents had a bed next to the incubator
of their child and they were routinely involved in daily care, as
well as in medical decisions. This Friday evening Mattie ’s mother
sat on the bed with her loose blouse turned aside to make room
for a breast pump that with a rhythmic sound worked to extract
breast milk for her son. Sitting next to Mie, Doctor Jonas initiated
the dif ﬁcult task of informing the parents about the severity of
Mattie ’s situation, “We have reached the point where we need to
consider what we can do for Mattie. I have to tell you that he is
critically ill. ”As Mie now looked towards Mattie ’s incubator she
suddenly noticed that pictures of his siblings decorated the wall.
Beneath one picture it said with childish letters, “Welcome to the
world, Mattie. We love you! ”Mie’s throat went dry and she had
to hold back her tears as she was overwhelmed by sadness and
compassion for Mattie and his family. The atmosphere in the
room was now dense with gravity and sorrow. The breast pump
was still pumping rhythmically while Jonas spoke softly saying
things like, “I am very worried about his brain as well. At some
point you will have to decide if you want to continue. Your life
will change, if Mattie survives. He will not be able to eat, talk or
walk. You have to think about what you consider to be a worthy
life and when you do that you will have to think about your otherPALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y ARTICLE
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms 7
children as well. However, you ’re not alone. It ’s my responsibility
too.”Mattie ’s mother started to move. Desperately fumbling she
freed herself from the breast pump and threw herself into the
arms her husband. “We will give you some peace, ”Jonas said, and
Jonas and Mie left.
Even though this situation appeared extremely intimate and
private, the presence of Mattie ’s parents in the hospital room did
also connect him to the world outside the clinic. As we describe,
their presence literally “activated ”the pictures on the wall as these
suddenly exhibited what Jane Bennet ( 2010 ) has termed their
“thing-power ”in that they provoked affect and together with the
other actors in the room enacted Mattie as a unique human infant
loved by his parents and siblings. In this situation, comparing
Mattie ’s life, suffering and imminent death to that of an
expendable research piglet was completely unthinkable. Hence,
the tough case of Mattie powerfully demonstrated how “socio-
moral-material ”practices shape how we understand and ascribe
value to living beings (Svendsen, 2011 ; Svendsen, 2015 ),
demonstrating also that the ways in which the premature infants
can be known depend on the situation. Like the piglets, the
premature infants were in some respects relationally and mate-
rially plastic.
Paradoxically however, the presence of Mattie ’s loving parents
conﬁrmed that it takes more than mere survival to live a life
outside the hospital as part of family and society and it became
painfully visible how even human survival is not always the
ultimate (public health) goal. From observing health professionals
in their daily work in the NICU, Mette and Mie knew that the
medical doctors agreed that keeping highly compromised infants
alive “just because we can ”was not always ethically sound.
Despite advanced technological possibilities for saving premature
infants, the doctors maintained their duty to prevent meaningless
suffering, sometimes also referring to the Hippocratic Oath. They
insisted on the need “to keep trying to do what we think is right. ”
Bearing in mind that some infants ’survival would lead to
extremely compromised lives —which would exhaust their parents
at the expense of their siblings, and moreover take away resourcesfrom other hospitalised infants —doctors strove to prevent this by
withdrawing futile treatments (Navne and Svendsen, 2018 ). Thus,
cases like Mattie ’s spelled out that differentiating and prioritising
human lives is also part of forming human healthy publics.
Monday morning, Mie received an e-mail addressed to Dr. Jonas
and to her. In this e-mail the NICU professor expressed that he
supported a decision of withdrawing Mattie ’s treatment as it was
now only prolonging his inevitable graduation towards death.
The following day Mattie died.
One week later, Mie was back in the pig laboratory. Confronted
with the tiny piglets installed in incubators with the direct pur-
pose of enabling more infants survive in the clinic, she could not
help thinking of Mattie and the suffering he had to endure due to
the maximum level of intensive care that had kept him alive.
However, Mie realised, infants like Mattie were unknown
(Geissler, 2013) in the pig laboratory. When the animal
researchers re ﬂected on their research, it was the healthy human
babies they pictured. During pig experiments, Mie occasionally
listened to expressions such as, “If only my work can save a single
infant then it ’s worth it. ”In a workshop, which Mette and Mie
arranged to facilitate a discussion around the ethical aspects of
translational research, an experienced post-doctoral researcher
reﬂected, “This morning I saw a poster against using mice in the
cosmetics industry. It said “Most mice die because of wrinkles. ”I
thought about this and I realised that for me it makes a huge
difference that I work with animals for the sake of the clinic ( …)
I’d have great dif ﬁculties working with animals for cosmetics. ”
Peter, another post-doc in the group smiled as he said in a soft
tone of voice, “babiiies!!! ”While Peter was clearly joking by introducing into the con-
versation the affective value of cute little babies, his comment
expressed how interactions between researchers in the laboratory
imbued the suffering of the research piglets and the hard work ofcaring for them with the value of human becoming and with
notions of public generativity. In other words, the risk of NEC in
premature infants and the need for prevention and cure, formed a
legitimate alliance between pig and researcher in order to
improve human health. This translational exchange of animal
suffering for human health, left no space for infants like Mattie,
who, if he had against all odds survived, would not have been able
to live what Doctor Jonas referred to as a “worthy life ”. In the
animal laboratory as well as in public presentations of the pig-
based research, the preterm human infant could only be known
and made visible as a being holding intrinsic worth and potential.
In these spaces, the life and worth of the human infant could not
be differentiated or plastic. It needed to be static. That is,
unknowing practices were not con ﬁned to interactions with
research animals. The conversation in the workshop —“not
working for cosmetics, ”but for “babiiies ”—constituted a form of
publication work in translational neonatology, which made par-
ticular infants unknown.
Likewise, most mortality measures, such as infant mortality
rates, present lives in a static and undifferentiated manner (Fas-
sin,2016 ). While such measures are recognised as strong indi-
cators of public health, and open to public view and assessment,
life-and-death decision-making in the NICU taught us that
creating healthy publics entails differentiating human lives.
Conclusion
This paper has explored the publication work involved in making
stories about research piglets and human infants available for
public view. We have argued that knowing and unknowing is
equally important to publication work. In the animal laboratory
as well as in the human NICU, creating and retaining certain
“zones of unknowing ”(Geissler,
2013 ) paved the way for parti-
cularly complex forms of knowing and caring for neonates. In the
private space of the publicly ﬁnanced pig laboratory, piglets
received almost the same meticulous care as hospitalised infants,
and plastically adapted to an almost infant patient identity. In
navigating this cross-species relationship, the researchers
enhanced the chances both of the survival of the piglets during
the experiment, and of their translational quality as neonate
models. Likewise, in the private space of public hospital rooms,
medical doctors carefully deliberated on how best to know and
care for infants at the fringes of life, sometimes reaching the
difﬁcult decision of withdrawing treatment and letting the infant
die. In the borderline situation of differentiating and prioritising
human lives, not only the well-being of the individual child, but
also the resources of the family and the greater societal collective
were taken into consideration. Hence, our ethnography, in which
we have entered these un-public spaces of translational neona-
tology, reminded us of the complexity of caring for liminal beings
as part of creating human healthy publics.
Is it so that it takes intimate and embodied experiences to
comprehend the complexities and the compromises involved in
care practices, which dissolve well-established public categories
such as human and animal, life and death? What would change if
all of this were made publicly available? While we have no
answers to these questions, we want to end this paper by a note
on public trust. In the introduction to this paper, we presented
the causal linking of transparency and public trust as key trope in
science-society literature. Interestingly, Mette and Mie ’s interac-
tion with researchers and clinicians in spaces that are not open to
the public points to alternative ways to comprehend theARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y
8 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms
relationship between public trust and (in)visibility. In every
aspect of their work, translational researchers and health pro-
fessionals were not just caring for neonates, they were also caring
immensely about living up to the expectations of public trust.Acting within societal frameworks decreeing that animals can be
used as tools for human health and that infants born as early as
gestation week 23 can be saved, researchers and clinicians did
their utmost to do what was best for the (human and animal)
beings in their custody, as well as for the societal collective as a
whole. The private spaces of care that help to realise the ambition
of healthy publics in translational research were created and
maintained by public trust and by publicly employed researchers
and clinicians striving to honour this trust. The publics were
always present in the animal laboratory and the human clinic in
which professionals managed commitments to society and the
neonates with whom they shared this society. As Jenny Reardon
notes in her study of public and private domains in connection to
genomics, privateness does not necessarily oppose publicness
(Reardon, 2017 , p. 167). In the Danish case, ways of knowing
piglets and infants in private spaces in, respectively, the animal
facility and the human NICU, and subsequently unknowing these
beings in public spaces, aimed at doing good for the public. The
ethical boundary work on the ground teaches us that knowing
and unknowing, public and private, cannot be seen as ﬁxed
dichotomous frames; but that in fostering healthy publics, they
are continuously being built, delineated and linked anew.
Data availability
The data generated during this study is not publicly available due
to privacy issues.
Received: 20 December 2019; Accepted: 6 April 2020;
References
Andersen IL, Nævdal E, Bøe KE (2011) Maternal investment, sibling competition,
and offspring survival with increasing litter size and parity in pigs (Susscrofa). Behav Ecol Sociobiol 65(6):1159 –1167. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00265-010-1128-4
Asdal K (2008) Subjected to parliament: experimental medicine and the animal
body. Soc Stud Sci 38(6):899 –917
Bennet J (2010) Vibrant matter: a political ecology of things. Duke University
Press, Durham, NC
Birchall C (2011) Introduction to ‘secrecy and transparency ’: the politics of opacity
and openness. Theory Cult Soc 28:7 –25
Birke L, Arluke A, Michael M (2007) The sacri ﬁce: How scienti ﬁc experiments
transform animals and people. Purdue University Press, West Lafayette, IN
Clark N (2007) Animal interface: the generosity of domestication. In: Cassidy R,
Mullin M (eds) Where the wild things are now: domestication reconsidered.Berg, Oxford, pp. 49 –70
Cooper M (2012) The pharmacology of distributed experiment –User-generated
drug innovation. Body Soc 18(3 –4):18 –43
Cohn S, Lynch R (2017) Posthuman perspectives: relevance for a global public
health. Crit Public Health 27(3):285 –292
Curry SH (2008) Translational science: past, present, and future. Biotechniques 44
(2):2–8
Dam MS, Juhl SM, Sangild PT, Svendsen MN (2017) Feeding premature neonates:
kinship and species in translational neonatology. Soc Sci Med 179:129 –136.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.02.039
Dam MS, Sangild PT, Svendsen MN (2018) Translational neonatology research:
transformative encounters across species and disciplines. Hist Philos Life Sci
40:21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40656-018-0185-2
Dam MS, Svendsen MN (2018) Treating Pigs: Balancing standardisation and
individual treatments in translational neonatology research. BioSocieties 13
(2):349 –367
Danish Council for Strategic Research (2013) http://ufm.dk/forskning-og-
innovation/rad-og-udvalg/tidligere-rad-og-udvalg/det-strategiske-forskningsrad/om-radet . Accessed 10 Mar 2013Davies G (2012) Caring for the multiple and the multitude: assembling animal
welfare and enabling ethical critique. Environ Plan D: Soc Space 30(4):623 –638
Despret V (2004) The body we care for: ﬁgures of anthropo-zoo-genesis. Body Soc
10(2–3):111 –134
Fassin D (2016) The value of life and the worth of lives. In: Han DasV (eds) Living
and dying in the contemporary world: a compendium. University of Cali-fornia Press, Oakland CA
Friese C (2013) Realizing potential in translational medicine. Curr Anthropol 54
(7):129 –138
Friese C (2019) Intimate entanglements in the animal house: caring for and about
mice. Socio Rev 67(2):287 –298. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038026119829753
Friese C, Latimer J (2019) Entanglements in health and well-being: working with
model organisms in biomedicine and bioscience. Med Anthropol Q 33
(1):120 –137. https://doi.org/10.1111/maq.12489
Friese C, Nuyts N (2017) Posthumanist critique and human health: how nonhu-
mans (could) ﬁgure in public health research. Crit Public Health 27
(3):303 –313
Geissler PW (2013) Public secrets in public health: knowing not to know while
making scienti ﬁc knowledge. Am Ethnol 40(1):13 –34
Groenen MA, Archibald AL, Uenishi H et al. (2012) Analyses of pig genomes
provide insight into porcine demography and evolution. Nat 491
(7424):393 –398
Haraway DJ (2008) When species meet. University of Minnesota, MinnosotaHinchliffe S, Jackson MA, Wyatt K et al. (2018) Healthy publics: enabling cultures
and environments for health. Palgrave Commun 4(57) https://doi.org/
10.1057/s41599-018-0113-9
Holmberg T, Ideland M (2010) Secrets and lies: ‘Selective openness ’in the appa-
ratus of animal experimentation. Public Underst Sci 21(3):354 –368
Jain SL (2010) The mortality effect: counting the dead in the cancer trial. Public
Cult 22(1):89 –117
Jasanoff S (2006) Transparency in public pcience: purposes, reasons, limits. Law
Contemp Probl 69:21 –45
Jensen ML, Sangild PT, Lykke M et al. (2013) Similar ef ﬁcacy of human banked
milk and bovine colostrum to decrease incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis
in preterm piglets. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 305(1):R4 –R12
Johnson ER (2015) Of lobsters, laboratories, and war: animal studies and the
temporality of more-than-human encounters. Environ Plan D: Soc Space 33(2):296 –313. https://doi.org/10.1068/d23512
Juhl SM, Ye X, Zhou P, Li Y et al. (2018) Bovine colostrum for preterm infants in
theﬁrst days of life: a randomized controlled pilot trial. J Pediatr Gastro-
enterol Nutr 66(3):471 –478.https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000001774
Kirk RW (2016) Care in a cage: materializing moral economies of animal care in
the biomedical Sciences, c. 1945-. In: Bjørkdahl K, Druglitrø T (eds.) Animal
housing and human-animal relations: Politics, practices and infrastructures.Routledge Animal Studies Series. Buller H (ed), London and New York, pp.167–185
Kirksey SE, Helmreich S (2010) The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cult
Anthropol 25(4):545 –576
Kuzmuk KN, Schook LB (2011) Pigs as a model for biomedical sciences. In:
Rothschild MF, Ruvinsky A (eds.) The genetics of the pig. Oxfordshire, UK,
pp. 426 –444
Latimer J (2013) Being alongside: rethinking relations amongst different kinds.
Theory Cult Soc 30:77 –104
Leonelli S, Ankeny RA, Nelson NC, Ramsden E (2014) Making organisms model
Human behavior: Situated models in North American alcohol research, since
1950. Sci Context 27:485 –509
Li Y, Juhl SM, Ye X et al. (2017) A stepwise, pilot study of bovine colostrum to
supplement the ﬁrst enteral feeding in preterm infants (Precolos): Study
protocol and initial results. Front Pediatr 5(42):1 –9
Lien ME (2015) Becoming salmon. Aquaculture and the domestication of a ﬁsh.
The University of California Press, Oakland
Lowe J, Leonelli S, Davies G (2019) Training to translate: understanding and
informing translational animal research in pre-clinical pharmacology. Tec-
noscienza 10(2):5 –30
Marcus GE (1995) Ethnography in/of the world system: the emergence of multi-
sited ethnography. Annu Rev Anthropol 24(1):95 –117
Marincola FM (2003) Translational medicine: a two-way road. J Transl Med
https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5876-1-1
McLeod C, Hobson-West P (2016) Opening up animal research and
science –society relations? A thematic analysis of transparency discourses in
the United Kingdom. Public Underst Sci 25(7):791 –
806. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0963662515586320
Miller ER, Ullrey DE (1987) The pig as a model for human nutrition. Annu Rev
Nutr 7(1):361 –382
Navne LE, Svendsen MN (2018) Careography: staff experiences of navigating
decisions in neonatology in Denmark. Med Anthropol 37(3):253 –266.https://
doi.org/10.1080/01459740.2017.1313841PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y ARTICLE
PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms 9
NEOMUNE Centre (2019) https://neomune.ku.dk/ Accessed 17 Dec 2019
Neu J, Walker WA (2011) Necrotizing enterocolitis. N. Engl J Med 364(3):255 –264
Oxford English Dictionary (2019) https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/154052?
rskey=K5JBzl&result =1&isAdvanced =false#eid Accessed 17 Dec 2019
Pinel C, Prainsack B, McKevitt C (2020) Caring for data: value creation in a data-
intensive research laboratory. Soc Stud Sci. https://doi.org/10.1177/
030631272090656
Prainsack B, Svendsen MN, Koch L, Ehrich K (2010) How do we collaborate?
Social science researchers ’experience of multidisciplinarity in biomedical
settings. BioSocieties 5:278 –286. https://doi.org/10.1057/biosoc.2010.7
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the
pace of care. Soc Stud Sci 45(5):691 –716
Rasmussen SO, Martin L, Østergaard MV et al. (2016) Bovine colostrum improves
neonatal growth, digestive function, and gut immunity relative to donor
human milk and infant formula in preterm pigs. Am J Physiol-GastrointestLiver Physiol 311(3):G480 –G491
Reardon J (2017) The postgenomic condition. Ethics, justice & knowledge after the
genome. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Rock MJ (2013) Pet bylaws and posthumanist health promotion: a case study of
urban policy. Crit Public Health 23(2):201 –212
Rock MJ, Degeling C, Blue G (2014) Toward stronger theory in critical public
health: insights from debates surrounding posthumanism. Crit Public Health
24(3):337 –348
Sangild PT, Thymann T, Schmidt et al. (2014) The preterm pig as a model in
pediatric gastroenterology. J Anim Sci 91(10):4713 –4729
Schrader A (2015) Abyssal intimacies and temporalities of care: how (not) to care
about deformed leaf bugs in the aftermath of Chernobyl. Soc Stud Sci 45
(5):665 –690
Sharp L (2014) The transplant imaginary: Mechanical hearts, animal parts, and
moral thinking in highly experimental science. University of California Press,
Berkely and Los Angeles
Sharp LA (2019) Animal ethos: the morality of human –animal encounters in
experimental lab science. University of California Press, Berkeley
Shen RL, Thymann T, Østergaard MV et al. (2015) Early gradual feeding with
bovine colostrum improves gut function and NEC resistance relative to infant
formula in preterm pigs. Am J Physiol-Gastrointest Liver Physiol 309(5):G310 –G323
Star SL, Griesemer JR (1989) Institutional ecology, ’translations ’and boundary
bbjects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley ’s Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology 1907-39. Soc Stud Sci 19(3):387 –420
Støy ACF, Heegaard PM, Thymann T et al. (2014) Bovine colostrum improves
intestinal function following formula-induced gut in ﬂammation in preterm
pigs. Clin Nutr 33(2):322 –329
Svendsen MN (2011) Articulating potentiality: Notes on the delineation of the
blank ﬁgure in human embryonic stem cell Research. Cult Anthropol 26
(3):414 –437
Svendsen MN, Koch L (2013) Potentializing the research piglet in experimental
neonatal research. Curr Anthropol 54(7):118 –128
Svendsen MN (2015) Selective reproduction: Social and temporal imaginaries for
negotiating the value of life in human and animal neonates. Med AnthropolQ 29(2):178 –195. https://doi.org/10.1111/maq.12149
Svendsen MN (2016) The spatial arrangements of making research piglets into
resources for translational medicine. In: Bjørkdahl K, Druglitrø T (eds.) Animalhousing and human-animal relations: politics, practices and infrastructures.Routledge Animal Studies Series. Buller H (ed), London and New York
Svendsen MN (2017) Pigs in public health. Crit Public Health 27(3):384 –390.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09581596.2017.1282155Svendsen MN (2020) Pig-human relations in neonatology: knowing and
unknowing in a multi-species collaborative. In: Seeberg J, Meinert L, Roep-storff A (eds) Biosocial Worlds. UCL Press, London
Swindle MM, Makin A, Herron AJ et al. (2012) Swine as models in biomedical
research and toxicology testing. Vet Pathol 49(2):344 –356
Taussig M (1999) Defacement: public secrecy and the labor of the negative.
Stanford University Press, Stanford
Taussig KS, Hoeyer K, Helmreich S (2013) The anthropology of potentiality in
biomedicine. Curr Anthropol 54(S7):S3 –S14. https://doi.org/10.1086/671401
Tsing AL (2015) The mushroom at the end of the world: On the possibility of life
in the capitalist ruins. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford
Wainwright SP, Williams C, Michael M et al. (2006) Ethical boundary-work in the
embryonic stem cell laboratory. Socio Health Illn 28(6):732 –748. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9566.2006.00465.x
Acknowledgements
Our sincere thanks to the research team in the pig laboratory and to the parents and
health professionals in the NICU, all of whom invited us into their daily practices. Thank
you, piglets for teaching us to care about nonhuman animals in public health. Thank youto the participants in the workshop with Lenore Manderson in Copenhagen in June 2019.For intellectual inspiration, we are grateful to Clémence Pinél who commented on anearlier version of this article. Thank you to Iben M. Gjødsbøl and Laura E. Navne for
continuous support and inspiration and to the entire MeInWe team. Finally, we
acknowledge the support from the research platform NEOMUNE Centre and TheCarlsberg Foundation (Grant number CF17-0016).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.S.D.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly fromthe copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2020ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y
10 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS |            (2020) 6:84 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-0463-y | www.nature.com/palcomms
