© 2017 by the author(s). This 
is an Open Access article 
distributed under the terms 
of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International 
(CC BY 4.0) License (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), allowing third parties 
to copy and redistribute the 
material in any medium 
or format and to remix, 
transform, and build upon the 
material for any purpose, even 
commercially, provided the 
original work is properly cited 
and states its license. 
Citation:  Marks, N. 2017. 
Population, Reproduction and 
IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring 
Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable 
Development. PORTAL 
Journal of Multidisciplinary 
International Studies , 14:2, 
6-26. http://dx.doi.org/10.5130/
portal.v14i2.5410
ISSN 1449-2490 | Published 
by UTS ePRESS | http://portal.
epress.lib.uts.edu.auPORTAL Journal of 
Multidisciplinary 
International Studies
Vol. 14, No. 2  
September 2017
Communities Acting for 
Sustainability in the Pacific 
Special Issue, guest edited by 
Anu Bissoonauth and Rowena 
Ward.RESEARCH ARTICLE
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New 
Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
Nicola Marks
University of Wollongong
Corresponding author:  Dr Nicola Marks, School of Humanities and Social Inquiry, Faculty of 
Law, Humanities and the Arts, University of Wollongong, Northfields Avenue, Wollongong NSW 
2522, Australia. nicola_marks@uow.edu.au  
DOI:  http://dx.doi.org/10.5130/portal.v14i2.5410    
Article History:  Received 12/02/2017; Revised 07/05/2017; Accepted 21/05/2017;  
Published 05/10/2017
Abstract
Both sustainability and sustainable development have multiple meanings that are underpinned 
by diverse normative visions. Nonetheless, sustainable development is currently centre-stage at 
the global level. The main goal of this paper is to critically examine these important concepts, 
in particular their social and cultural dimensions, and to make a conceptual offering: that of 
‘caring sustainable development.’ This way of thinking about sustainable development aims 
to grapple in a situated way with the different normative underpinnings of sustainability in 
order to support the building of a common future. The paper briefly examines populations, 
reproduction (both biological and sociocultural) and human in vitro fertilization (IVF), as 
important sites for thinking about caring sustainable development. It draws on research 
in New Caledonia examining which populations and which sociocultural practices are 
encouraged and sustained, or not. It finds that historically there are many examples of things 
and people being neglected and not cared for, or being encouraged to ‘develop’ in problematic 
ways. By contrast, recent practices associated with IVF suggest ways forward that would enable 
caring sustainable development.
Résumé
La durabilité et le développement durable ont des significations multiples, qui sont sous-
tendues par diverses visions normatives. Néanmoins, le développement durable occupe 
DECLARATION OF CONFLICTING INTEREST  The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. FUNDING  The research for this paper was funded 
by an ARC Discovery grant (DP 150101081), for a project entitled IVF and Assisted Reproductive Technologies: The 
Global Experience,  chief investigators Nicola Marks, Sarah Ferber and Vera Mackie.
6
actuellement une place centrale sur le plan mondial. Le but principal de cet article est 
d’examiner de manière critique ces concepts importants, en particulier leurs dimensions 
sociales et culturelles, et de faire une contribution conceptuelle qui est celle de la notion du 
‘care dans le développement durable.’ Cette façon de penser au développement durable vise à 
aborder ces différents fondements normatifs, de façon localisée, pour soutenir la construction 
à long terme d’un futur commun. L’article examine ensuite brièvement les populations, la 
reproduction (à la fois biologique et socio-culturelle) et la fécondation humaine in vitro  (FIV), 
en tant que sites importants pour penser à l’idée du ‘care’ dans le développement durable. 
Il s’appuie sur la recherche en Nouvelle Calédonie pour analyser quelles populations et quelle 
pratiques socio-culturelles sont encouragées voire soutenues ou pas. L’article trouve que du 
point de vue historique, il y a de nombreux exemples de choses et de personnes qui ont été 
négligées et dont on ne se préoccupait pas, ou alors qui étaient encouragées à se ‘développer’ de 
manière problématique. En revanche, les pratiques récentes associées à la FIV suggèrent des 
moyens d’aller de l’avant qui permettraient de favoriser le ‘care’ dans développement durable. 
Keywords
New Caledonia; ethics of care; caring sustainable development; stratified reproduction; 
postcolonialism; assisted reproduction; IVF
Sustainability and sustainable development are firmly on today’s international agenda. For 
example, in 2015 the United Nations (UN) released seventeen ‘Sustainable development 
goals’ or SDGs (United Nations 2015b ) to replace the eight ‘Millennium development goals’ 
or MDGs from 2000. The SDGs differ from the MDGs in a number of ways. In addition to 
targeting all states, rather than developing countries, they are more wide-ranging. They aim 
to promote sustainability in the areas of consumption, cities, industrialization and economic 
growth (SDG 8, 9, 11 and 12 [United Nations 2015b ]),1 and to combat hunger, illness, 
exclusion, discrimination, and environmental degradation (SDG 2, 3, 5, 6, 8 and 16 [United 
Nations 2015b ]). The SDGs include goals relating to sexual and reproductive health services 
(SDG 3 and 5 [United Nations 2015b ]), which were missing from the MDGs (Newman et al. 
2014 : 53). They also highlight the importance of sociocultural factors, by placing ‘culture’ at the 
centre of their aims (UNESCO n.d.) and by referring to three key dimensions of sustainable 
development: economic, social and environmental (United Nations 2015b : 3). 
Recognition by the UN that sustainability and its multiple dimensions are important is 
worth noting as it points to an appetite for nuanced and multi-faceted approaches to crucial 
global problems. However, the SDGs have also been criticized for not articulating how, 
in practice, different issues could be addressed to reach overarching goals, how different 
stakeholders would be involved, and how competing goals and trade-offs would be managed 
(International Council for Science & International Social Science Council 2015 : 5–9, 
85–86). This is an important limitation as there are many complex and sometimes competing 
interconnected aspects of sustainable development, for instance when economic development 
leads to environmental degradation and increased poverty and ill-health. 
Of particular relevance to this paper, sustainable development is entangled in intricate ways 
with reproduction, health and population dynamics; these are areas the UN has struggled with 
1  See also United Nations ( 2015a ). It is also worth noting that many of the SDGs are tightly interwoven 
(International Council for Science & International Social Science Council 2015 ).
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
7
for several decades. In 1994, the International Conference on Population and Development 
was held in Cairo. According to the conference report, women’s empowerment and improved 
health (which can be partly achieved through education leading to reduced fertility) were 
important goals in and of themselves, but they were also deemed to be ‘essential for the 
achievement of sustainable development’ (United Nations 1994 : 22, see also 76). Petchesky, 
however, identifies ‘fault lines’ in the Cairo report. Many arguments made by feminists and 
sexual health advocates seemed to have been heard, but their implementation was made 
impossible by the focus on ‘sustained economic  growth’ (Petchesky 1995 : 157, my emphasis) 
and by the failure to recognize the broader macro-economic conditions that increase maternal 
mortality, for instance, and maintain global racialized health and economic disparities. 
The above stratifying arrangements need to be ‘unsettled’ (M. Murphy 2015 ), and 
attempts at development, including sustainable development, need to be examined in specific 
sociocultural, political, economic and historical contexts in order to reveal potential ‘fault lines.’ 
In this paper, I first want to make a theoretical contribution to this unsettling by critiquing 
‘modernist’ approaches to sustainable development, such as those that focus on economic 
development only, and by highlighting why the sociocultural dimensions of development are 
important. With that aim I propose the concept of ‘caring sustainable development.’ While 
the concept does not offer ready-made solutions or lists of how to do sustainable development 
properly, the notion of caring sustainable development offers ways of noticing and caring for 
some of the people and sociocultural dimensions that are currently neglected or not sustained.2  
Second, I want to make an empirical contribution to current debates on sustainability by 
examining development, sustainability and reproduction in a specific place, New Caledonia, 
where the interconnectedness of sociocultural and other factors can be crucial. For instance, 
conservation projects need to be understood against the backdrop of diverse cultural identities, 
desire for land preservation and economic development, and complex colonial histories 
(Horowitz 2008 ). My case study focuses on which populations and which sociocultural 
practices have been sustained or encouraged to develop. 
In what follows, the first section critiques diverse understandings of sustainability and 
development, and highlights how they are underpinned by different, often competing, 
normative visions. I argue that the social and cultural dimensions of sustainability, as well 
as the need to include ‘caring,’ are important, and propose a concept of sustainability that is 
multi-faceted, and of development that is nonlinear and not predetermined: ‘caring sustainable 
development.’ This concept can work through multiple normative visions and aims to construct 
a shared world. The next section examines reproduction and population through the lens of 
caring sustainable development. Here I argue why reproduction, populations and sustainability 
should be considered together. It examines New Caledonia’s history, in particular relationship 
between settlers from Europe and Indigenous Kanak populations.3 The section suggests 
2  In this paper, culture is understood in a broad sense as a ‘set of beliefs, practices, rituals, and traditions 
shared by a group of people with at least one point of common identity (such as their ethnicity, race, or 
nationality)’ (Buchanan 2010 : 105). The term ‘culture’ denotes artistic practices, ways of working the 
land, ways of thinking about family and kinship, and also everyday practices and ‘the glue holding society 
together’ (2010: 105). ‘Society’ refers to ‘the ensemble of institutions, organizations, and relationships that 
give support to the individual’ (2010: 441). Although the labels ‘social’ and ‘cultural’ are not synonymous, 
strict distinctions between the two cannot be easily made (2010: 105). In this paper, moreover, I talk about 
sociocultural sustainability, for example, to signal the focus on maintaining the cultural heritage of diverse 
groups, and on the diverse institutions and practices that might sustain these groups.  
3  I use the label Kanak to refer to Indigenous Melanesian people of New Caledonia. This was the label 
used by Indigenous people I met there when referring to themselves.
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
8
that there are a number of problematic assumptions around what needs to be sustained, and 
little evidence of paying attention to those that are neglected. I then turn to recent practices 
in human in vitro fertilization (IVF) and assisted reproduction in New Caledonia; and I 
highlight instances of caring sustainable development. The final section concludes with 
reflections on how caring sustainable development, whilst not a panacea, can be useful in 
thinking about how New Caledonia might move forward in sustaining and developing diverse 
groups and sociocultural practices. Here I also make some suggestions about how ‘caring 
sustainable development’ might be useful in global discussions of sustainability.
A CONCEPTUAL OFFERING: ‘CARING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT’
The first formal formulation of sustainable development is usually traced back to the 1987 
report ‘Our Common Future’ (or Brundtland Report, after its chair Gro Harlem Brundtland) 
released by the UN’s World Commission on Environment and Development (or Brundtland 
Commission). It states:
Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. It contains 
within it two key concepts:
- the concept of needs , in particular the essential needs of the world’s poor, to which 
overriding priority should be given; and
- the idea of limitations  imposed by the state of technology and social organization 
on the environment’s ability to meet present and future needs. (United Nations 1987 : 
2.1)
This definition is sufficiently vague as to have been taken up in a number of domains, and a 
range of practices and institutions have been set up in the name of ‘sustainable development.’ 
However, this interpretive flexibility has been criticized for rendering the concept meaningless 
or at least unhelpful (Beckerman 1994 ; Daly, Jacobs & Skolimowski 1995 ; Luke 2005 ; 
Springett 2005 ; Vallance, Perkins & Dixon 2011 ). Nonetheless, I will argue here that 
sustainable development can be understood in practical and politically useful ways.
The idea of sustainability itself is meant to rest on the so-called ‘three pillars’: economic, 
sociocultural and environmental. These pillars are often conceptualized as compatible, but this 
is not necessarily the case (Boström 2012 : 3). For instance, a number of scholars argue that the 
main dimension of sustainability that was acted upon, especially in the 1980s and 1990s, was 
that of economic sustainability, understood as economic growth (Robert, Parris & Leiserowitz 
2005 : 11; Redclift 2005 : 215). They argue that actions taken in the name of sustainability, 
but with the goal of economic growth, can be at odds with ‘Green’ versions of sustainability 
that favour reduced consumption (Boström 2012 : 4). In turn more environmentally focussed 
versions of sustainability have been criticized for being detrimental to the world’s poor, for 
whom survival, rather than organic foods or hybrid cars, are important on a daily basis. Thus 
the normative assumptions that underpin different versions of sustainability can be quite 
contradictory (Redclift 2005 : 215).
The sociocultural dimensions of sustainability are arguably those that have been most 
sidelined (Beckerman 1994 ; Redclift 2005 ; K. Murphy 2012 ). It has been suggested that this 
is because of some of the inherent conflicts between the different dimensions of sociocultural 
sustainability. For example, Vallance, Perkins and Dixon argue that there are three types of 
social-cultural sustainability (they use the label ‘social sustainability’). The first aims to reduce 
‘poverty and inequity’; the second aims to modify ‘behaviours so as to achieve bio-physical 
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
9
environmental goals’; and the third is about ‘the preservation of sociocultural patterns and 
practices in the context of social and economic change’ (2011: 345). It is easy to see that some 
people’s desire to preserve a large residential block with room for a garden can be at odds with 
equity and access to housing for all, and with visions for high density sustainable urban living.
Because of the multiple perspectives on sustainability and its meanings, it becomes clear 
that when solutions for sustainability are imposed from above they often fail on a number 
of dimensions that were perhaps not considered relevant initially. This highlights the need 
to listen to diverse perspectives. As Irwin argues in his discussion of the Brundtland Report: 
‘there will be no “sustainability” without a greater potential for citizens to take control of 
their own lives, health and environment.’ He then adds that ‘success in this goal requires 
some careful thought about the relations between technical expertise, citizen needs and 
contemporary culture’ (1995: 7). This suggests the importance of locally relevant solutions to 
global problems. It also highlights how technical solutions alone will not be sufficient.4 The 
different dimensions of sustainability, including sociocultural ones, need to be considered, and 
voices from diverse people heard and acted upon. 
In addition to sustainability, the idea of ‘development’ has also been problematized. It 
is often seen to be part of neocolonial efforts whereby less ‘developed’ countries or peoples 
need to catch up with the so-called modern world. This conception is too linear, imposes 
unacknowledged normative views on populations with different perspectives and histories, and 
leaves very restricted options for ‘under-developed’ countries and people to become ‘developed’ 
(Escobar 1995 ; Leblic 1993 : 10–21). This can even be the case when locals are consulted 
as part of development efforts (Cooke & Kothari 2001 ). This version of development can 
be called ‘modernist development’ where new technologies are regarded as apolitical and 
automatically leading to improved lives for those who adopt them (Leach, Scoones & Wynne 
2005 : 7). Technology is contrasted to traditions, customs and culture, which are seen to be 
backward and in need of modernizing. However, there is increasing evidence that there are 
multiple ways of being ‘developed’ and of resisting imposed visions of development, multiple 
pathways to development, and multiple ways of re-appropriating technologies for development 
(Escobar 1995 ; Leach, Scoones & Wynne 2005 ). 
Therefore, we need a more dynamic conceptualization of development. The type of 
sustainable development I advocate here does not automatically reject old-fashioned practices 
as being underdeveloped; nor does it focus on freezing time or attempting to return to or 
sustain a nostalgic past in which everything seemed better. As Jolly ( 2002 ) argues, ‘traditional’ 
and ‘modern’ ways of doing should not be thought of as incompatible. Rather, sustainable 
development should consider old and new ways of doing, and recognize that practices can be 
sustained even as they change. In the case study considered below, this means not thinking 
of Kanak culture as static and ‘traditional,’ or in need of eradication through westernization 
or rescuing. It means thinking of settler and Kanak cultures as dynamic, evolving and 
inextricably linked. This understanding of culture as dynamic can also be found in the words 
of Jean-Marie Tjibaou, the famous Kanak independence leader, who led fights for political 
and cultural recognitions of Indigenous peoples in New Caledonia. He advocated a renewal of 
4  For example, some scientists and corporations have championed Golden Rice, genetically modified 
rice fortified in Vitamin A precursor, as a way to prevent blindness in malnourished infants. Jasanoff ( 2005 ) 
discusses how such specific technical approaches are rejected by Green groups, farmers and others who 
want broader conversations about the apparent corporate take-over of the food chain, postcolonial legacies 
of inequality, and whether genetically modified products are even desirable, let alone the magic bullets that 
they are sometimes painted in the media. 
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
10
Kanak artistic practices, which would include elements of settler and global practices (Tjibaou 
1996 : 154–156, see also 42). The measures of success for sustainable development are not 
simply increased use of technology or increased economic wealth, but are related to locally set 
community goals, as well as broader goals of equity and inclusion. I elaborate on this below by 
considering the importance of care and affect.
Caring and sustainability
Contrary to the modernist idea of development and to versions of sustainability that focus 
on economic growth, I want to think of sustainable development as flexible and locally-
situated (culturally, politically, historically, socially), and as underpinned by different normative 
visions and commitments. To do this, I draw on discussions about the ethics of care, since 
they shed light on ways of thinking through potentially conflicting normative visions of both 
development and sustainability. I draw on Tronto and Fisher, who argue the following:
we need an understanding of caring that allows for contradictions and encompasses 
the whole range of human activities that serve to sustain us … we suggest that caring 
be viewed as a species activity that includes everything that we do to maintain, continue 
and repair “our world” so that we can live in it as well as possible . That world includes our 
bodies, ourselves, and our environment, all that we seek to interweave in a complex, 
life sustaining web. (Fisher & Tronto 1990 : 40, original emphasis) 
This way of thinking about caring is particularly attuned to the fact that ‘needs’ (the word 
used by Fisher and Tronto, and by the UN) are diverse and variable across time and space. As 
such, ‘the caring process is not a gracefully unfolding one, but [rather it] contains different 
components that often clash with each other’ (Fisher & Tronto 1990 : 40). By grappling with 
these clashes, and with the ‘rich and knotty texture of our caring experience’ (Fisher & Tronto 
1990 : 40), we can hope to generate locally-situated ways of living in sustainable ways.
This idea of care has been built upon by Puig de la Bellacasa who advocates caring not 
as an ‘accusatory moral stance—if only you would care’ (2011: 95, original emphasis), but 
as a ‘commitment to neglected things’ (2011: 85; see also Marks & Russell 2015 ). Puig de 
la Bellacasa argues that we can care not only for and with humans, but also for and with 
multiple others (2011; 2015). In practical terms, this can mean observing instances of caring 
as a starting point. The next step is not to develop universal top-down norms since there is 
no ‘recipe’ for caring (Puig de la Bellacasa 2012 : 211), but instead to make a commitment to 
instances of ‘ethical doings’ (Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 : 162). This can involve inviting others to 
care, practicing care ourselves, making a ‘commitment to share troubles and burdens of those 
who are neglected,’ and maintaining the resources (affective and material) that enable caring 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 : 165, original emphasis). 
Caring puts affect at the centre of our ways of thinking and doing. Importantly, caring is 
not thought of here in the traditionally gendered way where care work is feminine work; nor is 
it something that involves an individual. Rather, caring is about everyday practices that might 
crystallize in institutions, cultures, or ‘even global levels of thinking’ (Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 : 
165–166; see also Tronto 1995 : 145). It is not only about doing pleasant things, or things that 
make us feel happy; caring can also be about culling or killing (Law 2010 ). Caring reminds us 
of ‘the joint fortunes of all forms of life under socio-technical becomings’ (Puig de la Bellacasa 
2011 : 98) and therefore is central to sustainable development, especially if we accept that there 
are ‘limits,’ as posited by the UN’s World Commission on Environment and Development 
(WCED) Brundtland Report (United Nations 1987 ).
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
11
In addition to caring involving negative affect, positive affect does not automatically lead 
to the type of caring I am proposing. Certain actions that make us feel good may ‘work with 
and through the grain of hegemonic structures, rather than against them’ (M. Murphy 2015 : 
719). For example, as Murphy demonstrates, some instances of feminist engagements with 
healthcare enabled positive affect by encouraging rich, mostly white US women to attend galas 
and donate money to support the health of poor, mostly brown women in Africa or Pakistan. 
These practices fail to attend to the stratified worlds these different groups inhabit, and do 
not address the colonial legacies that make some women in need of help (M. Murphy 2015 : 
727-9). Following Haraway ( 2010 ), both Murphy ( 2015 : 722) and Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2012 : 
704) advocate ‘staying with the trouble.’ This means paying attention to colonial, racialized 
and gendered histories, to privilege, and to stratification; it involves ‘historicizing’ and ‘stirring 
up’ ‘hegemonic histories’ and structures of privilege, and it involves ‘reckoning with’ them 
(M. Murphy 2015 : 731). 
To sum up, my suggestion for caring sustainable development is to examine specific 
attempts at sustainability or development, and to pull out context-based ways of caring (these 
may be conflicting), make them visible, and highlight what ways of being or doing are being 
sustained. It invites, as Puig de la Bellacasa puts it, people to respect each other’s ways of 
caring in order to ‘build a common world’ (2011: 88), to ‘foster caring relations’ (2011: 97), and 
to ‘share the burden of stratified worlds’ (2011: 94). These examinations need to consider and 
unsettle hegemonic structures, especially those that impose unsatisfactory ways of being onto 
silenced or oppressed others. Caring sustainable development is situated though, and criteria 
for success will vary. However, by tracing different instances of caring (and lack thereof ), one 
can extract what might be assembled to generate further caring relationships, and perhaps 
enable the equity and inclusion discussed in the previous section.
Reproduction, populations, culture and sustainability
Reproduction, including reproductive and sexual health, is worth examining through the 
lens of caring sustainable development because of its multiple interconnected dimensions, 
such as gender equity, cultural norms and population dynamics. Newman et al. (2014 ) argue 
that advocates for gender equality and reproductive rights need to find ways of talking 
effectively with those who are focussed on the environment, food security and demographic 
changes, including urbanization and household composition, because none of these issues 
can be understood in isolation. Indeed, reproduction can include individual access to 
contraception, pregnancy care, infancy care, or fertility treatments. However, reproduction 
is also about population birth rates and death rates, fertility rates, or fecundity rates. It is 
correlated with education levels and gender equality (educated women have fewer children), 
job opportunities and poverty (paternal and maternal income can influence fecundity), as 
well as environmental factors (semen quality can be affected by pollution) or cultural norms 
(expectations of bearing large or small numbers of children, or cultural taboos surrounding 
sexuality leading to increased sexually transmissible diseases and reduced fertility). There are 
many social determinants of human reproduction (ESHRE Capri Workshop Group 2001 ) as 
well as fertility changes due to environmental conditions (Association of Reproductive Health 
Professionals 2010 ). 
The environment can be affected by fertility. One of the earliest and perhaps most notorious 
discussion of this is in The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the 
Predicament of Mankind  (Meadows et al. 1972 ) which examined the interaction between global 
population growth and pollution, resources, industrialization and food production. The book 
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
12
received strong criticisms as well as support (Sandbach 1978 ; Turner 2008 ). The link between 
population and sustainability is still widely debated; some people advocate ways of curbing 
population growth (Smail 2002 ), whilst others see these approaches as impractical (Bradshaw 
& Brook 2014 ) or ethically problematic (Newman et al. 2014 ).
Assisted reproduction and infertility treatments have also been linked to sustainability. 
Richie ( 2015 ) argues that in order to be sustainable, countries need to stop supporting 
assisted reproductive technologies, especially where there is no biological reason for infertility. 
This stands in contrast to those who have raised concerns about the inequalities in access to 
infertility treatments and support in low resource countries (Inhorn 2009 ). An ‘infertility belt’ 
has been documented in Africa (Inhorn & van Balen 2002 ), and the silence from Western 
countries surrounding infertility in third world countries has been criticized, as has the ‘tacitly 
eugenic view that the infertile poor are unworthy of treatment’ (Birenbaum-Carmeli & Inhorn 
2009a : 6). There are also heavy social and economic consequences to remaining childless in a 
number of countries (Birenbaum-Carmeli & Inhorn 2009b ; Inhorn & van Balen 2002 ).
If we take seriously Bellacasa’s invitation to relate with multiple others and to foster ‘caring 
relations’ especially with those who are neglected, then the question of who is and who is 
not ‘worthy’ of reproducing becomes central to a caring, rather than modernist, approach 
to sustainable development. We also need to consider what  is being reproduced, both with 
assisted and non-assisted reproduction. A number of social scientists have argued that when 
we make kin, that is when we reproduce, we are reproducing much more than biological 
features such as genes: we are also reproducing society and culture (Strathern 1992 ; Franklin 
& Ragone 1998 ). For instance, we might be reproducing and normalizing specific assumptions 
about what the ideal family looks like (the nuclear family for instance), and these assumptions 
may be deeply racialized or exclusionary.
We can thus see the multiple, at times contrary, normative commitments underlying 
different visions of the relationship between sustainability and (assisted) reproduction. That 
relationship pushes us to consider who and what is being sustained or developed in different 
visions of sustainable development. Are certain modes of sustainable development reproducing 
particular cultural perspectives at the expense of others? Is the expansion of neo-liberal 
economics eradicating local cultures and ways of being? Are some versions of development 
too narrow, hegemonic, racist or stratifying? These are some of the questions I seek to answer 
through my case study of New Caledonia. 
I now turn to a selection of episodes from New Caledonia’s history to suggest some of 
the complex ways in which population control, reproduction, cultural practices, normative 
assumptions about specific people, and visions of development are connected in complex ways 
to sustainability. I then examine the contemporary example of IVF practice. I draw on a range 
of secondary sources including public health reports, reports on employment data, case studies 
of Indigenous development, and historical analyses of settler-Indigenous relations. I also draw 
on primary sources including census data, law texts and interviews. The interviews took place 
in 2016 with four key professionals who are involved in healthcare, three of them directly 
in IVF. While the interview numbers are very small they represent most of the core-set of 
people providing infertility services in New Caledonia, as they are the crucial gate-keepers to 
these services. One interview respondent was Kanak and provided very interesting insights, 
even though these clearly cannot be taken as representing the Kanak population in any way. 
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
13
Patients were not interviewed, as the data presented here are part of a broader project aimed at 
understanding professional  views on IVF.5 
A history of populations and sociocultural sustainability in New Caledonia
New Caledonia is a French Overseas Country: it has relatively high levels of administrative 
independence from France, but is on the UN list of countries in need of decolonization 
(United Nations 2016 ). A referendum is set to take place in 2018 on full independence. At 
the last census, people from a range of communities were counted: 39 percent Indigenous 
Kanak, 27 percent European, 8 percent from the Territory of the Wallis and Futuna Islands, 
8.6 percent ‘mixed communities,’ and 7.4 percent ‘Caledonians’ (ISEE 2014 ). The country is 
relatively rich and has a high GDP (especially in comparison to its Pacific Island neighbours), 
but the economy is strongly propped up by France. There is free education and free healthcare 
for all, following French principles of equality. However, income, mortality, employment, 
health and other factors are unevenly distributed, as I discuss below. To understand this, it is 
essential to consider New Caledonia’s colonial heritage, as well as present day socio-political 
configurations.
New Caledonia was settled by the French in 1853. It began mainly as a penal colony 
(discussed by Pascual [ 2017 ] in this issue), until the discovery of nickel in 1875. Today, New 
Caledonia is the world’s 5th largest nickel producer, and nickel accounts for 97 percent of the 
value of the country’s exports. If we were examining this history, paying attention only to 
economic growth, we would see multiple examples of economic development, especially with 
the nickel mine and the huge riches enjoyed by absentee landlords such as Maison Ballande 
who own much New Caledonian land but have never come to New Caledonia (Kohler & 
Shineberg 1992 ). Taking a caring sustainable development lens, we see a number of ways in 
which there were neglected others, hegemonic colonial structures, and heavy stratification; we 
can pay attention to ways in which some people and things were not  cared for. 
The French always had a fraught relationship with Indigenous Kanak populations. As early 
as 1856, Commander Testard, responsible for the colony, described the Indigenous person 
as ‘intelligent, but a monster of perversity.’ He then went on to argue: ‘We must start by 
destroying this population if we want to live in security in this country’ (cited in Goblot 1985 : 
108). From 1859, Kanak people were displaced by the settler government into reservations 
and there was an assumption that they would die out, partly because of natural evolution 
(Leenhardt, cited in Tjibaou 1996 : 49). While early census figures are unreliable (Shineberg 
1986 ; Leblic 1993 : 60), it seems that Kanak numbers dipped significantly after the arrival of 
European settlers, falling from an estimated 60,000 in 1853 to 27,100 in 1921 (Munholland 
2005 ). Kanak people still accounted for the majority of the population until 1956 (Leblic 
1993 : 30–32), except for the 1946 census when they briefly were a minority.
The Kanak were offered very few economic development opportunities. Under France’s 
‘Code de l’Indigénat’ [Code of the Indiginate], which lasted from 1887 until after the Second 
World War, they were subject to strict curfew and restrictions on movements. Kanak also had 
to pay taxes to settlers, usually in the form of free labour. Even though cheap/free labour was 
needed after the discovery of nickel, the French preferred to bring in other islanders who were 
seen as more reliable (Shineberg 1999 ). Indigenous people only became full French citizens 
and were able to vote in local, as well as French presidential and other elections, from 1953. 
5  The research was approved by the University of Wollongong Human Research Ethics Committee.
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
14
This mistreatment has led to a number of clashes between European and Kanak populations, 
and several strong calls for independence, most recently during ‘Les Évènements’ [The Events] 
from 1984 to 1988. Many revolts were violently crushed. Overall, there has been what Leblic 
(1993 : 53–74) calls ‘La Valse des Statuts’ [The Waltz of Statutes], whereby successive French 
governments have given and reclaimed powers to and from local authorities (including Kanak 
groups), have tried to include Indigenous people in New Caledonian life, but have also tried to 
quash calls for independence.  
Strategies to maintain French control over New Caledonia have partly focussed on 
populations and reproduction, as hinted at above. In 1972, there was an infamous directive 
from the then French Prime Minister, Pierre Messmer, to build an additional French country 
in the Pacific by encouraging migration of French nationals from mainland France, Tahiti and 
Reunion to New Caledonia, and by countering the nationalistic advances the Kanak people 
were making at the time. This directive aimed explicitly to reduce the overall percentage of the 
Kanak population so that it could not influence elections. The same year, the mayor of Nouméa 
(the capital of New Caledonia) asked French people to ‘faire du Blanc’ [make some white] 
(Leblic 1993 : 30–32). Reproduction and populations are thus key political sites in the territory.
In addition to vast reductions in the Kanak population, their ways of being and doing were 
threatened. For instance, the French language was imposed in all schools from 1853, and the 
teaching of all other languages was banned from 1863. We also see, contrary to Irwin’s ( 1995 ) 
urging raised above, little evidence of Kanak people being given opportunities ‘to take control 
of their own lives, health and environment,’ therefore making any goals of ‘sustainability’ 
harder to achieve. 
This is especially visible when we consider land rights. When European settlers seized 
New Caledonian lands and sent Kanak people off to reservations, they failed to consider the 
strong relationships Kanaks have with the land; these relations shape a range of sociocultural 
practices (see Pascual [ 2017 ] in this issue). This is, in part, because of a widely held belief that 
Kanak people did not know how to look after the land, and had neither agricultural practices 
(Shineberg 1986 ) nor a concept of land ownership (Leblic 1993 ). This has been shown to be 
untrue: Kanak people grow crops that are essential not only for food, but also for gifts and 
exchanges at important occasions (such as marriages). There are also codified ways in which 
people can work the land (with particular clans linked to particular lands) and complex 
irrigation systems that are integrated into the existing ecosystems.
Other moments of New Caledonian history do suggest attempts to bring Kanak and 
other populations together. There have been a number of attempts at ‘development’ as well 
as devolution of powers to Kanak leaders. However, these were often deemed failures by the 
European settlers or the French metropolitan sponsors. Such opinions reflect diverging criteria 
for success, a lack of recognition of the impact of colonization, and sometimes a lack of good 
will in acknowledging success. For example, in 1986, after a swell in support for independence, 
the French government devolved a number of responsibilities to local New Caledonian 
governments, including health. Local Kanak-led governments developed healthcare in many 
remote places, and invested in disease prevention and public health education. This was 
essential since outside Nouméa there were very few health facilities.6 Despite initial positive 
results, this devolution was soon reversed by the French government, due to a desire to block 
6  In addition, historically the Kanak had not been treated in the same hospitals as settlers, instead 
undergoing treatment in the Indigenous hospital in the capital.
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
15
further moves towards Kanak independence (Leblic 1993 : 218–24). So success from the point 
of view of improving Kanak health for instance was ignored, and the normative commitment 
to maintaining the integrity of the empire dominated; only colonial ways of doing were 
sustained and cared for.
Clashing normative commitments are also visible in attempts at Kanak economic 
development. Leblic ( 1993 ) argues that these were dominated by European visions of 
development, whereby Kanak people were thought of as archaic and needing better 
assimilation into the New Caledonian economy. Many of the solutions (grants for local 
projects to support economic development) did not lead to increased integration of Kanak 
people into the broader economy, or to commercial crops. The projects were deemed failures 
by the European sponsors. This can be attributed to a disregard for the historical stratification 
and colonial heritage of stolen lands, which was accompanied by the destruction of many 
dimensions of local culture. Most interestingly, however, many of the Kanak did not see these 
projects as failures, because they judged them by different criteria. For them the goal was often 
to regain their lands. If that meant having to apply to conduct a project on it, such as grow 
coffee, a crop not traditionally grown there and which locals said they did not ‘care’ for in the 
same way, so be it. Whether the coffee brought them money or not did not matter, only the 
land did. 
The above is an example of sustaining or regaining access to particular cultural practices 
(Leblic 1993 : especially 389–397). Even though the land practices were not the same as 
before colonization, if we accept that culture is dynamic rather than frozen, we can see Kanak 
culture being sustained through a cooptation of colonial structures. The festival Melanesia 
2000 can be understood in a similar light, although it is a much more obvious success story of 
sustainable Kanak ways of being and doing. Melanesia 2000 took place in 1975 in Nouméa 
(earlier than the above examples); it was the first festival in the world to celebrate Melanesian 
art. Over 2,000 Kanak people attended, and there were 50,000 audience members (Tjibaou 
1996 : 48). Kanak independence leader Jean Marie-Tjibaou explains that the festival occurred 
at a historical moment when Kanak people were excluded from social and economic life and 
when discussions of devolution were stalling. Nonetheless it ended up a huge success, and 
was recognized internationally and, perhaps more importantly, by local Kanak and regional 
Melanesian groups. Kanak people had initially been reluctant to participate because they saw 
this as a colonial project; it was funded through the colonial Administration and the French 
government initially saw it as a way to regain authority over Kanak people (Tjibaou 1996 : 
152). But the aims of Tjibaou and others to make this festival about the Kanak people and 
to enable cultural ‘renaissance’ were successful (Tjibaou 1996 : 42–43, 152). Increased Kanak 
recognition followed, and land reform proceeded, albeit slowly. However, in 1986, a new right 
wing president, Jacques Chirac, was elected in metropolitan France and reform once again 
stalled. 
Despite some examples of Kanak ways of doing being sustained, this section shows the 
significance of (post)colonial arrangements in neglecting Kanak people. The ways in which 
things were cared for, and the kinds of things that were cared for, often ran with the grain 
of these hegemonic structures, to use M. Murphy’s words ( 2015 ): they sustained economic 
enrichment (of some) and supported modernist sustainable development, usually at the 
expense of Kanak people. There were few attempts at ‘building a common world’ (Puig de la 
Bellacasa 2011 : 88) that included Indigenous peoples and their ways of being and living. 
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
16
Ethical doings for sustainability in relation to reproduction and IVF today
Given the episodes noted above, in which Kanak populations were seen as a threat to 
the French empire, it would seem likely that Kanak peoples would not be encouraged to 
reproduce, and would not be imagined as recipients of assisted reproductive technologies such 
as IVF. However, this is not the case today. 
Kanak populations, especially those living away from the capital are still over-represented 
in early deaths. But they have higher fecundity levels than European settlers (ISEE 2012 ).7 
Kanak people also have high levels of sexually transmitted diseases (Direction des Affaires 
Sanitaires et Sociales 2014 ). These diseases are considered either to be ‘white man’s disease’—
which reflects colonial historical contexts—or women’s diseases—which reflects local 
sociocultural contexts (Salomon 2000a ). This results in women carrying the burden for these 
diseases, in diseases not being treated in men, and in high rates of disease; this, in turn, can 
lead to decreased fertility. In parallel, there is strong pressure on Kanak women to become 
mothers, which Salomon calls ‘obligatory maternity’ (2002). In combination, it is likely that 
involuntary childlessness levels are high. However, being infertile is taboo, leading to delays 
in accessing treatment and further chances of reduced fertility. It is vital, then, to explore to 
what extent involuntary childlessness in a group of historically marginalized people is being 
addressed.
In many countries around the world assisted reproduction is big business (Spar 2006 ; 
Cooper & Waldby 2014 ), and its use is heavily stratified along ethnic or economic lines 
(Inhorn, Ceballo & Nachtigall 2009 ; Mamo & Alston-Stepnitz 2015 ). However, the situation 
is very different in New Caledonia. Because the health system is based on the French one, 
it is public, and there are very generous provisions for access to infertility treatment. This 
includes at least four cycles of IVF, reimbursed to 90 percent. This is much more than many 
European countries (Berg Brigham et al. 2013 ). In addition to this, beside the hospitalization 
for egg retrieval and then embryo implantation, all the drugs, early consultations and blood 
tests are covered. Also covered are transport costs for treatment, and this includes travel 
from the smaller islands to Nouméa where the fertility centre is located.8 From this we can 
see that all people, including those with lower incomes and who live further away from the 
capital, are able to access IVF. This includes many Kanak people who still have higher levels 
of unemployment and financial insecurity than the national average (Ris 2013 ), and marks 
a big difference from the 1970s when there was a wish for white people to migrate to New 
Caledonia and reproduce. 
In addition, during interviews, health professionals involved in infertility services expressed 
an explicit aim of ensuring Kanak people having access to treatment. This includes high-tech 
IVF, and IVF doctors regularly travel to the islands and their dispensaries in order to consult 
with a range of Kanak women. They do this in a culturally sensitive way, and do not advertise 
that they are infertility specialists, but rather set up more generic women’s health consultations. 
Local midwives and word-of-mouth are essential here in letting women know they can 
discuss their fertility concerns. There are also lower technology interventions such as education 
7  This is an estimate, based on using place of residence as a proxy for ethnicity, since collecting data 
linking ethic origin and health is problematic in New Caledonia.
8  There is only one infertility centre in Nouméa, with a chief biologist, a medical doctor and a technician. 
There are two main private IVF providers in the capital. Most of the medical interventions (egg retrieval and 
embryo implantation) take place in the hospital in Nouméa, regardless of whether the patient is private or 
public.
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
17
regarding sexually transmitted diseases. In addition, some IVF practitioners are conducting 
research in order to develop medical protocols for IVF that are specifically adapted to Kanak 
women (for example specially adapted drug dosages).
These examples clearly go against the historical attempts at eradicating Kanak populations; 
rather they indicate how the population is being sustained. But is this at the cost of Kanak 
ways of being and doing? The answer is complex. On the one hand, there are some shifts 
away from ‘traditional’ ways of doing towards Western ones. On the other hand, ‘traditional’ 
ways are evolving into new contemporary Kanak ways of doing. As I suggested above, it is 
artificial to separate ‘traditional’ and ‘modern’/’Western,’ or ‘under-developed’ and ‘developed’ 
(Leblic 1993 ). Therefore, it is problematic to assume that any adoption of new ways of 
doing is necessarily at the cost of Kanak culture. Rather, as with all cultures, Kanak culture 
evolves in dynamic ways. We saw an example of this above with the use of ‘modern’ economic 
development plans to regain access to land. The creation and renewal of ways of doing also 
need to be examined in the context of new reproductive technologies.
While those couples who consult for assisted reproduction are low in number, according to 
health practitioners in the island dispensaries there is some evidence of growing knowledge 
about IVF, and of interest in the options it offers to counter involuntary childlessness9. This 
does not mean, however, that customary medicine is being replaced by so-called Western or 
modern medicine. Indeed, while the two have had an uneasy co-habitation (Salomon 2000b ; 
Jolly 2002 ), traditional medicine is recognized and its qualities accepted in some circles 
(Lormée, Cabalion & Hnawia 2011 ). In many instances, old and new ways of doing medicine 
are blended (Lepoutre 2000 ).
In the context of reproduction and creating families, the Kanak health professional I 
interviewed suggested there was a shift towards more individualism amongst young Kanak 
people. Customary adoption, which still occurs in New Caledonia, places a different emphasis 
on biological ties, compared to ‘Western’ understandings of kinship. Indeed, it is common for 
children to be adopted by others in the community: by a childless couple; by a maternal uncle; 
by another group. These open adoptions are done according to complex social and cultural 
norms (Leblic 2000 ; 2003 ). Thus any move towards assisted reproduction with the expectation 
of creating genetically related kin can be interpreted as a move away from Kanak culture. 
However, this Kanak health professional emphasized that assisted reproductive technologies 
and Kanak culture were not incompatible. In fact she suggested the importance of moving 
forwards, as Caledonians, whether or not independence was the outcome of the 2018 
referendum, and of finding ways of doing biological, social and cultural reproduction to reflect 
Kanak as well as European practices. One suggestion was to rethink the anonymity of sperm 
donation (imposed from mainland France) to better take into account Kanak conventions 
of not masking one’s genealogy. Caring sustainable development, then, would be possible by 
assembling both Kanak and settler views into future practices and policies surrounding assisted 
reproduction. 
9  This interest parallels shifts seen more generally in young Kanak people, women especially, who 
are turning towards French laws rather than customary ones to resolve disputes about family violence 
(Salomon 2003 ).
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
18
Conclusions
This paper opened by discussing the UN sustainable development goals, as an illustration 
of the apparent international interest in sustainable development and its interconnected 
sociocultural, economic and environmental dimensions. However, these dimensions can 
be opposing and attempts at sustainable development may only support some dimensions, 
whilst failing to address broader stratifying elements. Therefore, it is timely to examine some 
examples of development and sustainability in practice and to conceptually refine the idea 
of sustainable development. This paper has attempted to do both these things, in order to 
contribute to unsettling stratifying arrangements. 
I have accordingly critiqued modernist versions of sustainable development, which tend 
to have a reductive focus on economic growth, and imagine development as linear, without 
recognising the dynamism of different cultures and ways of doing, and the multiple pathways 
to (and end-points of ) development. Instead, I proposed the concept of ‘caring sustainable 
development.’ This concept echoes the recent global recognition of the interconnectedness 
of economic, environmental and sociocultural factors, and their importance in trying to 
address complex issues such as poverty, sustainability and equity. To that, my concept adds 
a commitment to constructing and looking after a shared world, through ongoing support 
for caring practices. This builds on recent scholarship on caring and affect, which urges us 
to pay attention to multiple, often neglected, others, as well as to the historically-situated 
sociocultural arrangements that may stratify or exclude (Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 ; M. Murphy 
2015 ).
Caring sustainable development inspires us to observe examples of caring and sustaining in 
particular situations. Here, the case study was New Caledonia, specifically the ways in which 
populations and sociocultural practices are enmeshed in intricate ways and have (or not) been 
sustained. New Caledonia is a place with complicated (post-)colonial relations. Looking at 
historical events, we can see that policies and practices aimed at shifting Indigenous versus 
settler population numbers as well as Indigenous versus settler ways of being and doing have 
been key political sites, including during fights for independence. My analysis identified 
many instances when Kanak ways of being and doing were not sustained, but colonial ones 
were, for instance when Indigenous lands were seized by absentee landlords, or when white 
people were encouraged to immigrate to New Caledonia and to have children. These were 
examples of exclusion and many attempts at development reproduced settler colonial practices 
at the expense of Indigenous ones. There were examples of neo-liberal economics attempting 
to eliminate Indigenous ways of doing. These versions of development were narrow and 
hegemonic; some of them were explicitly racist.
There were also examples of colonial and neo-liberal arrangements being co-opted for 
Indigenous purposes. For instance, some Kanak people were successful at regaining access 
to their lands by applying for French-supported development funds and setting up coffee 
plantations. If we see Kanak culture as dynamic, rather than static, these examples show ways 
in which Kanak culture could be sustained, even though it changed. However, the modernist 
normative visions often took over again, and projects seen as successes by Indigenous people 
were labelled failures by their neo-liberal sponsors, and were not maintained (cared for and 
sustained) into the future. A more complex example is that of Melanesia 2000, which marked 
an important moment in Kanak cultural renaissance, but which also took place just before yet 
another halt in the devolution of powers to Kanak people. 
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
19
These aspects of New Caledonia’s history suggest many ways in which its Indigenous 
population’s sociocultural customs were not cared for, developed or sustained. However, recent 
practices in assisted reproduction offer possibilities for caring sustainable development. The 
core team responsible for fertility services in New Caledonia is committed to sustaining 
Kanak reproduction. The team is focused on biological reproduction, but in a way that does 
not dismiss Kanak ways of doing, and that is not hegemonic or stratifying. If we accept that 
Kanak culture can change without being lost, and that Indigenous ways of doing are not 
automatically in opposition to ‘modern’ or technical ways of doing, assisted reproduction in 
New Caledonia offers an example of caring practices: helping infertile people and sharing 
their burden, regardless of their ethnic and economic background, without dismissing cultural 
taboos about infertility.
New Caledonia is at a turning point in its history. There are multiple moments in which the 
future of the country will be discussed and decided upon, including the vote on independence 
scheduled for 2018. Based on the findings presented forward here, there are examples of 
ethical doings and of caring sustainable development that can be further built upon. This 
might include drafting a Caledonian Bioethics Law (rather than just importing a law from 
mainland France) that recognizes particular Kanak ways of thinking about kinship and 
genealogy when dealing with gamete donation for assisted reproduction. This is one way in 
which every day caring practices might crystallize into institutions (Puig de la Bellacasa 2010 : 
165–166).
In the 2009 census, a ‘Caledonian’ category was added to the section regarding to which 
community people belong. One interpretation of this (and certainly partly true) is a cynical 
one that suggests the shift was aimed at making it impossible to compare different census 
figures and see the relative decline in Kanak populations. However, this category, which is 
growing—it went from 5 percent in 2009 to 7.4 percent in 2014 (Broustet & Rivoilan 2015 )—
can perhaps be a symbol of moving to ‘build a common world’ (Puig de la Bellacasa 2011 : 88) 
in New Caledonia, and also more globally.
What broader lessons can we learn from these examples? A central message is that 
caring sustainable development will look different in different situations. However, there are 
elements that policy-makers in the UN with an interest in tackling complex problems like 
sustainability might find useful. The first is making spaces for and paying attention to multiple 
voices, especially those that are traditionally neglected, and recognizing that there are multiple 
normative visions for development and sustainability. This cannot be done with something 
like a one-off focus group: it requires enduring commitment. The second is highlighting 
arrangements that can be stratifying or exclusionary (such as colonial institutions), challenging 
them, and sharing the burdens they result in. The third is providing support for caring ways 
of doing. This includes ongoing financial support, but also more symbolic support such as 
recognising the importance of local practices and not treating ‘traditions’ as backward or in 
need of development. A final element important for caring sustainable development is the 
acknowledgement of different criteria for success, and the integration of these criteria into 
decisions on whether or not to continue with particular ways of doing. These suggestions are 
not offered as a list of things to do that, if ticked off, signal an end to our work because we 
are ‘doing things right’; rather they are meant to encourage us to worry about what ‘doing 
the right thing’ looks like ( Jansen & Roquas 2005 : 147). These elements can be assembled in 
diverse situated ways into a ‘life sustaining web’ (Fisher & Tronto 1990 : 40)
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
20
Acknowledgements
The research for this paper was funded by an ARC Discovery grant (DP 150101081), for a 
project entitled IVF and Assisted Reproductive Technologies: The Global Experience . I would like 
to thank my co-chief investigators Sarah Ferber and Vera Mackie for productive discussions 
about this work, and Rowena Ward and Anu Bissoonauth-Bedford who organized the 
round-table on sustainability in the Pacific where I presented an earlier version of this paper 
and who were fantastic in supporting my contribution to this special issue. Thanks also to the 
anonymous reviewers and the editor of Portal  for their useful and insightful suggestions. Most 
importantly, thank you to the people who accepted to be interviewed for this research.
References
Association of Reproductive Health Professionals 2010, Environmental Impacts on Reproductive Health. 
Online, available: http://www.arhp.org/Publications-and-Resources/Clinical-Proceedings/RHE  
[Accessed 3 February 2017].
Barrera, P . 2017, ‘10 Top Nickel-Producing Countries .’ Online, available: http://investingnews.com/daily/
resource-investing/base-metals-investing/nickel-investing/10-top-nickel-producing-countries/  [Accessed 
17 May 2017].
Beckerman, W. 1994, ‘“Sustainable Development”: Is it a Useful Concept?,’ Environmental Values , vol. 3, 
no. 3: 191–209. https://doi.org/10.3197/096327194776679700
Berg Brigham, K., Cadier, B. & Chevreul, K. 2013, ‘The Diversity of Regulation and Public Financing of 
IVF in Europe and Its Impact on Utilization,’ Human Reproduction , vol. 28, no. 3: 666–675. https://doi.
org/10.1093/humrep/des418  
Birenbaum-Carmeli, D. & Inhorn, M. C. (eds) 2009a, Assisting Reproduction, Testing Genes: Global 
Encounters with New Biotechnologies . Berghahn Books, Oxford.
Birenbaum-Carmeli, D. & Inhorn, M. C.  2009b, ‘Masculinity and Marginality: Palestinian Men’s 
Struggles with Infertility in Israel and Lebanon,’ Journal of Middle East Women’s Studies , vol. 5, no. 2: 
23–52. https://doi.org/10.2979/MEW.2009.5.2.23
Boström, M. 2012, ‘A Missing Pillar? Challenges in Theorizing and Practicing Social Sustainability: 
Introduction to the Special Issue,’ Sustainability : Science, Practice, & Policy , vol. 8, no. 1: 3–14. 
Bradshaw, C. J. A. & Brook, B. W. 2014, ‘Human Population Reduction Is Not a Quick Fix for 
Environmental Problems,’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 111, no. 46: 16610–16615. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1410465111
Broustet, D. & Rivoilan, P . 2015, Recensement de la population en Nouvelle-Calédonie en 2014: Une 
démographie toujours dynamique [2014 Population Census in New Caledonia: Still a Dynamic 
Demography].  Online, available: https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/1560282  [Accessed 30 January 
2017].
Buchanan, I. 2010, A Dictionary of Critical Theory . Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Cooke, B. & Kothari, U. (eds) 2001, Participation: The New Tyranny? Zed Books, London & New York.
Cooper, M. & Waldby, C. 2014, Clinical Labor . Duke University Press, Durham, NC. https://doi.
org/10.1215/9780822377009
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
21
Daly, H., Jacobs, M. & Skolimowski, H. 1995, ‘Discussion of Beckerman’s Critique of Sustainable 
Development,’ Environmental Values , vol. 4, no. 1: 49–70. https://doi.org/10.3197/096327195776679583
Direction des Affaires Sanitaires et Sociales 2014, Situation sanitaire en Nouvelle Caledonie: Les 
infections sexuellement transmissibles [The Public Health Situation in New Caledonia: Sexually 
Transmitted Infections]. Online, available: http://www.dass.gouv.nc/portal/page/portal/dass/librairie/
fichiers/32142252.PDF  [Accessed 29 January 2017].
Escobar, A. 1995, Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World . Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
ESHRE Capri Workshop Group 2001, ‘Social Determinants of Human Reproduction,’ Human 
Reproduction , vol. 16, no. 7: 1518–1526. https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/16.7.1518
Fisher, B. & Tronto, J. 1990, ‘Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring,’ in Circles of Care: Work and Identity in 
Women’s Lives,  (eds) E. K. Abel & M. K. Nelson. State University of New York Press, Albany: 36–54. 
Franklin, S. & Ragone, H. 1998, Reproducing Reproduction: Kinship, Power, and Technological Innovation . 
University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.
Goblot, L. 1985, ‘Un livre sur la Nouvelle-Caledonie: “ La terre est le sang des morts ”’ [A Book on New 
Caledonia: “ The Land is the Blood of the Dead” ], Peuples Noirs Peuples Africains , vol. 44: 103–142.
Haraway, D. 2010, ‘When Species Meet: Staying with the Trouble,’ Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space , vol. 28, no. 1: 53–55. https://doi.org/10.1068/d2706wsh
Horowitz, L. S. 2008, ‘“It’s Up to the Clan to Protect”: Cultural Heritage and the Micropolitical Ecology 
of Conservation in New Caledonia,’ The Social Science Journal , vol. 45, no. 2: 258–278. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.soscij.2008.03.005
Inhorn, M. C. 2009, ‘Right to Assisted Reproductive Technology: Overcoming Infertility in Low-
Resource Countries,’ International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics , vol. 106, no. 2: 172–174. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijgo.2009.03.034
Inhorn, M. C., Ceballo, R. & Nachtigall, R. 2009, ‘Marginalized, Invisible, and Unwanted: American 
Minority Struggles with Infertility and Assisted Conception,’ in Marginalized Reproduction: Ethnicity, 
Infertility and Reproductive Technologies , (eds) L. Culley, N. Hudson & F. van Rooij. Earthscan, London & 
Sterling, VA: 181–197.
Inhorn, M. C. & van Balen, F. (eds) 2002, Infertility Around the Globe: New Thinking on Childlessness, 
Gender, and Reproductive Technologies . University of California Press, Berkeley.
International Council for Science & International Social Science Council 2015, Review of Targets for 
the Sustainable Development Goals: The Science Perspective. Online, available: https://www.icsu.org/
cms/2017/05/SDG-Report.pdf   [Accessed 10 June 2017].
Irwin, A. 1995, Citizen Science: A Study of People, Expertise and Sustainable Development . Routledge, 
London.
ISEE 2012, Bilan 2012: Naissances-fecondité [2012 Evaluation: Births-Fertility]. Online, available: http://
www.isee.nc/population/demographie/naissances-fecondite  [Accessed 13 September 2017].
ISEE 2014, Recensement 2014: Structure de la population et evolutions [Census 2014: Population Structure 
and Trends]. Online, available: http://www.isee.nc/population/recensement/structure-de-la-population-
et-evolutions  [Accessed 13 January 2017].
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
22
Jansen, K. & Roquas, E. 2005, ‘Absentee Expertise: Science Advice for Biotechnology Regulation in 
Developing Countries,’ in Science and Citizens: Globalization and the Challenge of Engagement , (eds) M. 
Leach, I. Scoones, & B. Wynne. Zed Books, London: 142–155.
Jasanoff, S. 2005, ‘“Let Them Eat Cake”: GM Foods and the Democratic Imagination,’ in Science and 
Citizens: Globalization and the Challenge of Engagement , (eds) M. Leach, I. Scoones, & B. Wynne. Zed 
Books, London: 183–198.
Jolly, M. 2002, ‘Introduction: Birthing Beyond the Confinements of Tradition and Modernity?,’ in 
Birthing in the Pacific: Beyond Tradition and Modernity? , (eds) V. Lukere & M. Jolly. University of Hawai’i 
Press, Honolulu: 1–30.
Kohler, J.-M. & Shineberg, D. 1992, ‘Argent, religion et pouvoir en Nouvelle-Calédonie. A. Ballande 
et les évêques, 1885–1935’ [Money, Religion and Power in New Caledonia. A. Ballande and the 
Bishops, 1885–1935], Journal de la Société des Océanistes , vol. 95, no. 2: 151–183. https://doi.org/10.3406/
jso.1992.2617
Law, J. 2010, ‘Care and Killing: Tensions in Veterinary Practice,’ in Care in Practice: On Tinkering in 
Clinics, Homes and Farms,  (eds) A. Mol, I. Moser, & J. Pols. Transcript Verlag, Bielefeld: 57–72.  
https://doi.org/10.14361/transcript.9783839414477.57
Leach, M., Scoones, I. & Wynne, B. (eds) 2005, Science and Citizens: Globalization and the Challenge of 
Engagement . Zed Books, London.
Leblic, I. 1993, Les kanak face au développement: La voie étroite [Kanaks in the Face of Development : The 
Narrow Path]. Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, Grenoble. 
Leblic, I. 2000, ‘Adoption et transferts d’enfants dans la région de Ponérihouen’ [Adoption and Transfer 
of Children in the Ponérihouen Region], in En pays kanak; Ethnology, linguistique, archéology, histoire de la 
Nouvelle Calédonie  [In Kanak Country; Ethnology, Linguistics, Archaeology, History of New Caledonia], 
(eds) A. Bensa & I. Leblic. Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris: 49–68. https://doi.org/10.4000/
books.editionsmsh.2772
Leblic, I. 2003, ‘D’une famille à l’autre: circulation enfantine kanak en NC’ [From one family to another: 
The circulation of Kanak children], presented at 6ème congrès du GREPFA, 15–16 May, Grenoble.
Lepoutre, M. 2000, ‘Le pluralism médical à Lifou’ [Medical Pluralism in Lifou], in En pays kanak; 
Ethnology, linguistique, archéology, histoire de la Nouvelle Calédonie  [In Kanak Country; Ethnology, 
Linguistics, Archaeology, History of New Caledonia], (eds) A. Bensa & I. Leblic. Maison des Sciences 
de l’Homme, Paris: 293–310. https://doi.org/10.4000/books.editionsmsh.2797
Lormée, N., Cabalion, P . & Hnawia, É. S. 2011, Hommes et Plantes De Maré, Îles Loyauté Nouvelle-
Calédonie  [People and Plants of Maré, Loyalty Islands, New Caledonia].  Institut de recherche pour le 
développement, Marseille.
Luke, T. W. 2005, ‘Neither Sustainable Nor Development: Reconsidering Sustainability in Development,’ 
Sustainable Development , vol. 13, no. 4: 228–38. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.284
Mamo, L. & Alston-Stepnitz, E. 2015, ‘Queer Intimacies and Structural Inequalities: New 
Directions in Stratified Reproduction,’ Journal of Family Issues , vol. 36, no. 4: 519–540. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0192513X14563796
Marks, N. J. & Russell, A. W. 2015, ‘Public Engagement in Biosciences and Biotechnologies: 
Reflections on the Role of Sociology and STS,’ Journal of Sociology , vol. 51, no. 1: 97–115. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1440783314562503
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
23
Meadows, D. H., Meadows, D. L., Randers, J. & III, W. W. B. 1972, The Limits to Growth: A Report for 
the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind . Earth Island, London. https://doi.org/10.1349/
ddlp.1
Munholland, J. K. 2005, Rock of Contention: Free French and Americans at War in New Caledonia, 1940 –
1945 . Berghahn Books, New York.
Murphy, K. 2012, ‘The Social Pillar of Sustainable Development: A Literature Review and Framework 
for Policy Analysis,’ Sustainability: Science, Practice & Policy , vol. 8, no. 1: 15–29.
Murphy, M. 2015, ‘Unsettling Care: Troubling Transnational Itineraries of Care in Feminist Health 
Practices,’ Social Studies of Science , vol. 45, no. 5: 717–737. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715589136
Newman, K., Fisher, S., Mayhew, S. & Stephenson, J. 2014, ‘Population, Sexual and Reproductive Health, 
Rights and Sustainable Development: Forging a Common Agenda,’ Reproductive Health Matters , vol. 22, 
no. 43: 53–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-8080(14)43770-4
Pascual, F. C. 2017, ‘Le Musée du bagne en Nouvelle-Calédonie et ses constructions identitaires’ [The 
Penal Colony Museum in New Caledonia and its Identity Constructions], Communities Acting for 
Sustainability in the Pacific Special Issue, guest edited by A. Bissonauth & R. Ward. Portal Journal of 
Multidisciplinary International Studies , vol. 14, no. 2 (September): 1–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.5130/portal.
v14i2.5335
Petchesky, R. P . 1995, ‘From Population Control to Reproductive Rights: Feminist Fault Lines,’ 
Reproductive Health Matters , vol. 3, no. 6: 152–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/0968-8080(95)90172-8
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2010, ‘Ethical Doings in Naturecultures,’ Ethics, Place & Environment , vol. 13, 
no. 2: 151–169. https://doi.org/10.1080/13668791003778834
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2011, ‘Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assembling Neglected Things,’ Social 
Studies of Science , vol. 41, no. 1: 85–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312710380301
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2012, ‘“Nothing Comes without Its World”: Thinking with Care,’ The Sociological 
Review , vol. 60, no. 2: 197–216. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.2012.02070.x
Puig de la Bellacasa, M.  2015, ‘Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care,’ 
Social Studies of Science , vol. 45, no. 5: 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851
Redclift, M. 2005, ‘Sustainable Development (1987–2005): An Oxymoron Comes of Age,’ Sustainable 
Development , vol. 13, no. 4: 212–227. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.281
Richie, C. 2015, ‘What Would an Environmentally Sustainable Reproductive Technology Industry Look 
Like?,’ Journal of Medical Ethics , vol. 41, no. 5: 383–387. http://jme.bmj.com/content/41/5/383 . http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2013-101716
Ris, C. 2013, ‘Les inégalités ethniques dans l’accès a l’emploi en Nouvelle-Calédonie’ [Ethnic Inequalities 
in Employment Access in New Caledonia], Economie et Statistique , vol. 464, no. 1: 59–72. https://doi.
org/10.3406/estat.2013.10229
Robert, K. W., Parris, T. M. & Leiserowitz, A. A. 2005, ‘What Is Sustainable Development? Goals, 
Indicators, Values, and Practice,’ Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development , vol. 47, no. 
3: 8–21. https://doi.org/10.1080/00139157.2005.10524444
Salomon, C. 2000a, ‘Hommes et emmes: Harmonie d’ensemble ou antagonism sourd?,’ [Men and 
Women: Harmony Together or Deaf Antagonism?] in En pays kanak; Ethnology, linguistique, archéology, 
histoire de la Nouvelle Calédonie [In Kanak Country; Ethnology, Linguistics, Archaeology, History of New 
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
24
Caledonia], (eds) A. Bensa & I. Leblic. Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris: 311–338. https://doi.
org/10.4000/books.editionsmsh.2799
Salomon, C. 2000b, Savoirs et pouvoirs thérapeutiques Kanaks  [Kanak Therapeutic Knowledges and 
Powers].  PUF, Paris.
Salomon, C. 2002, ‘Obligatory Maternity and Diminished Reproductive Autonomy in A‘Jië and Paicî 
Kanak Societies: A Female Perspective,’ in Birthing in the Pacific: Beyond Tradition and Modernity?,  (eds) 
V. Lukere & M. Jolly. Honolulu, University of Hawai’i Press: 79–99.
Salomon, C. 2003, ‘Quand les filles ne se taisent plus. Un aspect du changement postcolonial en 
Nouvelle-Calédonie’ [When Girls No Longer Remain Quiet. A Dimension of Post-colonial Change in 
New Caledonia], Terrain , no. 40: 133–150. https://doi.org/10.4000/terrain.1573
Sandbach, F. 1978, ‘The Rise and Fall of the Limits to Growth Debate,’ Social Studies of Science , vol. 8, no. 
4: 495–520. https://doi.org/10.1177/030631277800800404
Schrader, A. 2015, ‘Abyssal Intimacies and Temporalities of Care: How (Not) to Care About Deformed 
Leaf Bugs in the Aftermath of Chernobyl,’ Social Studies of Science , vol. 45, no. 5: 665–690. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715603249
Shineberg, D. 1986, French Colonization in the Pacific: With Special Reference to New Caledonia In Australia 
and the Pacific Sydney. H. V. Evatt Memorial Foundation, Sydney.
Shineberg, D. 1999, The People Trade: Pacific Island Laborers and New Caledonia, 1865 –1930 . University of 
Hawai’i Press, Honolulu.
Smail, J. K. 2002, ‘Confronting a Surfeit of People: Reducing Global Human Numbers to Sustainable 
Levels an Essay on Population Two Centuries after Malthus,’ Environment, Development and 
Sustainability , vol. 4, no. 1: 21–50. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016327316754
Spar, D. L. 2006, The Baby Business: How Money, Science, and Politics Drive the Commerce of Conception . 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Springett, D. 2005, ‘Critical Perspectives on Sustainable Development,’ Sustainable Development , vol. 13, 
no. 4: 209–211. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.279
Strathern, M. 1992, Reproducing the Future: Essays on Anthropology, Kinship and the New Reproductive 
Technologies . Manchester University Press, Manchester.
Tjibaou, J.-M. 1996, La presence Kanak [The Kanak Presence].  Odile Jacob, Paris.
Tronto, J. C. 1995, ‘Care as a Basis for Radical Political Judgments,’ Hypatia , vol. 10, no. 2: 141–149. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1527-2001.1995.tb01376.x
Turner, G. M. 2008, ‘A Comparison of the Limits to Growth with 30 Years of Reality,’ Global 
Environmental Change , vol. 18, no. 3: 397–411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.05.001
UNESCO n.d., Sustainable Development Goals for Culture on the 2030 Agenda. Online, available: 
http://en.unesco.org/sdgs/clt  [Accessed 5 February 2017].
United Nations 1987, Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our 
Common Future (or Brundtland Report). Online, available: http://www.un-documents.net/wced-ocf.
htm [Accessed 5 February 2015].
United Nations 1994, Report of the International Conference on Population and Development. A/
CONF.171/13. Online, available: https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/event-pdf/icpd_eng_2.pdf   
[Accessed 15 May 2017].
Population, Reproduction and IVF in New Caledonia: Exploring Sociocultural and Caring 
Dimensions of Sustainable Development
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017 
25
United Nations 2015a, Sustainable Development Goals. Online, available: http://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/  [Accessed 5 February 2017].
United Nations 2015b, Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
Online, available: http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E  [Accessed 
5 February 2017].
United Nations 2016, Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2016 on the 
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) (A/71/502). Online, 
available: http://www.undocs.org/A/RES/71/119  [Accessed 28 June 2017].
Vallance, S., Perkins, H. C. & Dixon, J. E. 2011, ‘What Is Social Sustainability? A Clarification of 
Concepts,’ Geoforum , vol. 42, no. 3: 342–348. Online, available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0016718511000042?via%3Dihub  [Accessed 28 June 2017].
Marks
PORTAL Journal of Multidisciplinary International Studies ,  Vol. 14, No. 2, September 2017  
26
