Vol.:(0123456789)Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
https://doi.org/10.1007/s42438-024-00481-5
1 3
ORIGINAL ARTICLES
Postdigital Citizen Science and Humanities:  
A Theoretical Kaleidoscope
Michael Jopling1  · Georgina Tuari Stewart2  · Shane Orchard3  · 
Juha Suoranta4  · Sara Tolbert3  · Laurène Cheilan5  · Fei Yan6 · 
Catherine Price7  · Sarah Hayes8  · Howard Scott9  · Annabel Latham10  · 
Ibrar Bhatt11  · Vyacheslav Dodonov12  · Adam Matthews13  · 
Rami Muhtaseb9  · Alison MacKenzie11  · Mohamed Owaineh14 · 
Sarah Earle8  · Ben Simmons8  · Zoë Clarke15  · Linda la Velle8 · 
Benjamin J. Green16 · Cheryl Brown3 · Richard Watermeyer17  · 
Petar Jandrić18 
Accepted: 20 May 2024 / Published online: 14 June 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This collective article presents a theoretical kaleidoscope, the multiple lenses of 
which are used to examine and critique citizen science and humanities in postdigital 
contexts and from postdigital perspectives. It brings together 19 short theoretical and 
experiential contributions, organised into six loose groups which explore areas and 
perspectives including Indigenous and local knowledge, technology, and children 
and young people as citizen researchers. It suggests that this collective approach is 
appropriate because both postdigital and citizen research are founded on and com-
mitted to collaboration, dialogue, and co-creation, as well as challenging the tenets 
and approaches of traditional academic research. In particular, it suggests that post-
digital transformations in contemporary societies are both changing citizen science 
and humanities and making it more important.
Keywords Postdigital · Research · Theoretical kaleidoscope · Citizen science · 
Citizen humanities · Citizen social science Collaborative writing · Collective 
writing · Technology · Artificial Intelligence · Activism · Data
Introduction (Michael Jopling)
Citizen science involves non-professional researchers in scientific research pro-
cesses (Senabre Hidalgo et al. 2021), for example in submitting data to bird cen-
suses or monitoring water quality. Although it has a long history which precedes  
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
32 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
academic research, the term citizen science has only been used extensively since the 
1990s. Since then, it has been acknowledged as a ‘key pillar’ of open science (Eitzel  
et al. 2017) and an important influence on widening participation and democratisa-
tion in science (Shirk et al. 2012; Sauermann et al. 2020). How participatory citi-
zen science is in practice may be questioned, as participating citizens are still much  
more likely to collect data for use by professional scientists than collaborate with 
them in a more meaningful sense (Mueller and Tippins 2012). More recently, inter -
est has been growing in how to increase collaboration and use citizen science to pro-
mote scientific literacy and combat scepticism about areas such as climate change  
(Eleta et al. 2019).
This has led to calls for citizen science to be redefined, for example, as ‘commu-
nity citizen science’ or ‘civic science’ (Weinstein 2011). While some of the contribu-
tions to this article offer further redefinitions, our focus is different. Our starting point, 
presented in more depth in ‘Postdigital Citizen Science: Mapping the Field’ (Jandrić 
et al. 2023a), is the contention that transformations in contemporary societies described 
under the broad heading ‘postdigital’, in which our human and digital lives and social 
contexts are increasingly entangled and inseparable, which makes citizen science both 
different and more important.
As such, this article is a logical extension of the interest of postdigital research 
and praxis in collaboration (see Jandrić et al. 2023b) and dialogue (see Jandrić 
et al. 2019). This has been reflected in an interest in facilitating collaborative and 
cross-sector approaches to research that are necessary to investigate and under -
stand the postdigital contexts we inhabit and the postdigital challenges we face. It 
is undeniable that the new technologies that have emerged since the late twentieth 
century have greatly increased the accessibility of science, which has increased 
the recognition and participation of non-specialist researchers (Vohland et  al. 
2021), although concerns remain about lack of diversity among citizen scientists 
(Waugh et  al. 2023). Adopting a postdigital perspective draws attention to the 
concomitantly huge increases in the quantity of data that is collected about and 
from each of us, which also raises questions about how those data are used (see 
Hayes et al. 2023).
This requires citizen science to address issues relating to how data are used 
and who collects them. The hybrid, inclusive nature of the postdigital (Jandrić 
et al. 2018) also requires us to extend the focus from citizen science to encom-
pass social science and humanities, both conceptually and methodologically. This 
is one of the starting points of this collective article: social-technical challenges 
require social-technical explorations and solutions (Jandrić et al. 2023b), which 
in turn require interdisciplinary approaches. These also have important politi-
cal implications. This is why our focus is explicitly broadened to include citizen 
humanities and science, including social science. This indivisibility is reflected 
in the form and structure of the article and its central metaphor of the kaleido-
scope, made up of multiple intersecting theoretical perspectives, which is used 
to understand and critique the complexity and potential of postdigital citizen sci-
ence and humanities.
33
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Constructing the Kaleidoscope
This article takes inspiration from ‘Understanding Digital Inequality: A Theo-
retical Kaleidoscope’, in which Kuhn et al. (2023: 896) use the kaleidoscope as 
a metaphor ‘to describe the need for different theories, or sometimes, the inter -
section of multiple theories, to unpack and understand the complexity’ of digital 
inequality in the postdigital context.
It has long been common, indeed almost a cliché, for researchers to write of 
applying a specific theoretical lens to a phenomenon. The metaphor revivifies 
this notion by bringing multiple perspectives into play (an important word—
kaleidoscopes are also toys), just as the kaleidoscope uses ‘two or more mir -
rors/lenses, angled at particular points, which, when rotated, allow the viewer to 
see an increasing array of complex patterns that would be hard to see with our 
naked eye’ (Kuhn et al. 2023: 896). Just as each turn or shake of the kaleidoscope 
changes the pattern the viewer sees, each theoretical perspective in this collective 
article should function as a new lens or mirror, shifting our perspective, offering 
a new angle, and prompting our own reflections on citizen science and humani-
ties. Of course, it is important to acknowledge that this metaphor can only be 
pushed so far.
The postdigital context is also reflected in the collective nature of the article, 
which joins a growing body of collective work informed by postdigital perspec-
tives (e.g. Jandrić et al. 2020, 2023b; Kuhn et al. 2023). This is part of a deliber -
ate resistance to, and redefinition of, academic writing, which attempts to rep-
resent a diversity of viewpoints with minimal interpretative organisation (Peters 
et al. 2021; Jandrić et al. 2023b) and emphasises the value of collaboration and 
shared ownership in research. It also highlights a deliberate postdigital com-
mitment to dialogue, which has been described as ‘an exchange of information 
between people, a linguistic format which supports such exchange, a form of art, 
a type of inquiry, an approach to pedagogy, a precondition for social change and 
much more’ (Jandrić et al. 2019: 163).
The approach to dialogue taken in this article was an open call for 500-word 
contributions from a range of theoretical and research perspectives. The call sug-
gested some of the lenses contributors have used in the article, such as Artifi-
cial Intelligence (AI), feminism, and philosophy of technology, but writers were 
also free to suggest other perspectives. In order to avoid duplication or substantial 
overlap, it was agreed with each writer which of the kaleidoscope’s lenses they 
would use before they wrote their contribution, but there were no other restric-
tions. Some editorial support was offered, mainly to reduce word count and to 
highlight common themes and issues.
This has allowed the 19 theoretical and experiential perspectives collected in 
this article to be presented in combination and tension without hierarchy and with 
minimal editorial intervention. The ordering of the contributions was not deter -
mined collectively, primarily for pragmatic reasons, but also because it should 
only be regarded as provisional, necessary as part of the process of producing a 
publishable article, but by no means final or important. Ideally, they would be 
34 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
free-floating, like B. S. Johnson’s (1969) book in a box, The Unfortunates, whose 
25 central sections (excluding a first and last chapter) can be read in any order.
It should not be overlooked that this collective approach is also a remarkably 
efficient and rewarding way of writing, sharing the means, as well as the outcome, 
of academic production. The collective approach embodies the collaborative ethos 
of citizen science, social science, and humanities, which at its best is founded 
on participatory, co-creational, and collective approaches to research (Senabre 
Hidalgo et al. 2021; Thomas et al. 2021) and as such necessarily involves a plural-
ity of voices, ontologies, and theoretical perspectives. Finally, the article can be 
read in tandem with the other emerging articles about postdigital citizen science 
and humanities, combining to form a larger kaleidoscopic collective approach and 
ongoing postdigital dialogue.
Indigenous and Local Knowledge as Citizen Science
Māori/Indigenous Knowledge and Postdigital Citizen Science  
(Georgina Tuari Stewart)
The dominant meaning of ‘citizen science’ is when members of the public collect 
data for use by institutional science. Astronomical observations and environmental 
monitoring are two common forms of scientific data collected in such ‘contributory 
citizen science’ (Jandrić et al. 2023a). Citizen science varies according to the degree 
of citizen participation/agency, and key foci for citizen science include conservation, 
education, and digital technology.
But what if a modifier like ‘citizen’ affects and changes what is understood by 
‘science’? Both words—‘citizen’ and ‘science’—are associated with histories of 
exclusion, including the exclusion of Indigenous peoples and their knowledge 
(Jandrić et al. 2023a). Yet the two concepts and their webs of meaning and linked 
concepts are in entirely different domains. Such two-word terms modify a strong 
knowledge noun (science is paradigmatic) with a ‘social’ adjectival modifier—in 
this case, citizen—to create a conundrum, a philosophical puzzle, a concept of 
unclear and unsettled meaning. The same dilemma is raised by terms such as ‘Māori 
science’ or ‘feminist science’.
According to Jandrić and colleagues (2023a), postdigital citizen science encom-
passes the social sciences and humanities, going beyond the strict meaning of ‘sci-
ence’ as used within Anglophone knowledge systems including the university. 
By this reasoning, Māori philosophy (Stewart 2021a, b) and other philosophical 
approaches to Indigenous knowledge (e.g. Yunkaporta 2020) can be seen as Indig-
enous forms of postdigital citizen science.
The meaning of ‘Indigenous’ is itself unsettled (Stewart 2018), but here is used 
to mean peoples whose lands have been settled by Western powers. Indigeneity is 
a form of ethnicity, which is in itself a contested concept, dependent as it is on 
the recognition of power relationships between particular cultural groups, many 
35
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
of which arose during the era of the Voyages of Discovery—of European expan-
sion and colonisation of claimed territories in Asia, Africa, America, Australia, and 
Aotearoa. Since this process is now (almost totally) complete, it is reasonable to 
argue that few if any new ‘ethnicities’ will arise in the future (Stewart 2023). Indig-
enous perspectives comprise one category of critique of science and mainstream 
Western knowledge systems and processes. Each Indigenous scholar writes from 
their own cultural perspective, and this commentary is written from a Māori view -
point on the question of how Māori/Indigenous knowledge partakes in citizen sci-
ence in the postdigital era.
To explore Māori knowledge is a form of citizen science because Māori knowl-
edge bases reside within particular communities and iwi-hapū (kin groups). Explor -
ing Māori concepts in the postdigital era exploits the affordances of the Internet 
and digital technologies, far more powerful research tools than were available for 
all previous generations of researchers. But how, exactly, are we to understand the 
term ‘postdigital Māori/Indigenous citizen science?’ The terminology threatens to 
overwhelm thinking: how many modifiers can be used in front of ‘science’ before it 
loses all meaning?
An example of ‘postdigital Māori/Pasifika citizen science’ is the current topic of 
being Māori/Pasifika in the academy or in science (Airini and Mila-Schaaf  2010; 
Cram et al. 2014; Matapo 2018; Naepi 2019). This work is ‘adjacent’ to science; it 
is written by scientists and addresses science as a social institution, but does not fit 
within the tight bounds of scientific research. It is instructive to look at the range 
of methodologies in these papers. Some use statistics (McAllister et  al. 2022) or 
surveys (Naepi et al. 2019), and others use autoethnography and narrative methods 
(Stewart et  al. 2023). Narrative methods are post-qualitative approaches that con-
front the reader with compelling insider accounts of the research topic or question. 
Post-qualitative approaches do not conform with ‘scientific method’ in research (St. 
Pierre 2021; Stewart 2024).
Not to align with science methods has been seen predominantly as a deficit in 
research. Following the general rule that informed critique depends on mastery of 
the subject, it stands to reason that Māori philosophers with science backgrounds 
will be needed to complete a Māori critique of science. Postdigital Māori citizen 
science deliberately and wholeheartedly steps away from the scientific method and 
the role it plays in contemporary mainstream educational theory. This is not to reject 
science and all its benefits and tools, but rather to stop pretending that ‘scientific 
method’ can tell us what to do when investigating philosophical and ethical ques-
tions in education and related disciplines. Instead, to proceed with this work it is 
important to ‘listen’ to the material we are collecting and working with in order to 
decide what to do next (Stewart and Devine 2024).
This work is part of a larger shift towards overcoming the historical bifurcation of 
the Western world of writing into literature and science (Richardson 1990). Māori/
indigenous perspectives have the advantage of access to other philosophies and 
knowledge in which this bifurcation never occurred. This is one way in which sci-
ence can benefit from cultural difference.
36 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Recognising Local Knowledge in Community and Citizen Science (Shane Orchard)
Local knowledge is developed through traditional practices, cultural norms, and 
personal experiences (Raymond et al. 2010). It accrues at personal to community-
wide levels and contributes to traditional knowledge, which has been defined as the 
knowledge, innovations, and practices of indigenous and local communities (United 
Nations Environment Programme 2021). The resulting knowledge base embodies 
arguably the world’s most significant contributions to collective intelligence and 
has a history as long as civilization itself, far exceeding that of modern data collec-
tion methods (Silvertown 2009). While citizen science proponents often point to the 
need for new approaches to address the scale and scope of contemporary challenges, 
there is equally a need to recognise and appreciate the wisdom of these earlier forms 
of knowledge (Tengö et al. 2014).
The development of local and traditional knowledge presents an interesting theo-
retical lens through which to view the scope of public participation in the generation 
of knowledge. It offers insights into the depth of participation that may contribute to 
contemporary collective intelligence. Despite its local connotations, the accumula-
tion of many observations and experiences may provide a detailed understanding 
of wider regions and include the evolution of traditional knowledge passed down 
through generations (Antweiler 2019; Campbell and Orchard 2023). In subtle and 
sometimes unseen ways, local knowledge also contributes to the availability and 
interpretation of public knowledge, thereby informing the discussion of epistemolo-
gies (ways of knowing) and investments in the pursuit of knowledge.
These aspects of local knowledge align with the ‘democratization of science’ 
perspectives of Irwin (1995) and others, while extending them further to embrace 
the origins of existing knowledge. Increasingly, this is becoming better recognised 
and enabled in the context of Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) and related 
approaches to sustainable development that may offer apparently new solutions to 
modern challenges (Huntington et al. 2011; Long et al. 2020). However, with citizen 
science having now attained a relatively mainstream status in the science-policy dis-
course, there is also a need to ensure that institutional support and other investments 
do not merely reflect an extension of data collection priorities that derive from top-
down processes (Kukutai and Cormack 2020; Kullenberg 2015). Instead, citizen sci-
ence offers a way to redress information disparities and imbalances. This suggests 
a need to recognise diversity in the many forms of community and citizen science 
(Orchard 2019; Sauermann et al. 2020).
Further complexities include intersections with social science methodologies 
that engage with knowledge holders using elicitation techniques such as surveys, 
interviews, Volunteered Geographical Information (VGI) platforms, and participa-
tory mapping or appraisal exercises (Brown 2012; Haklay 2013). However, it is 
essential to recognise that these more formal research methods are designed to 
harvest and synthesise the knowledge that already resides in the observations and 
perceptions of individuals. At the same time, this local knowledge exists indepen-
dently of whether it is actively communicated by knowledge holders, or otherwise 
shared with more formal research efforts. Indeed, there are many examples of local 
and traditional knowledge that is primarily collected for a specific purpose, and 
37
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
which may not necessarily be intended for a wider audience. Importantly, such pur -
poses may be accompanied by sensitivities around the sharing and potential misap-
propriation of knowledge by others, as is recognised in the principles of Free and 
Prior Informed Consent and the Nagoya Protocol (Morgera et al. 2014; Williams 
and Hardison 2013).
More recently, attention to these principles and technological solutions for 
addressing them have been at the forefront of developments in digital and online 
technologies. These include systems for addressing privacy issues and attach-
ing licences to community-contributed data to facilitate their reuse while ensuring 
adherence with the conditions under which they were originally provided. It can 
also be noted that all of these examples fall within the ambit of community and citi-
zen science, despite representing very different modes of public participation and 
agency in the process of knowledge generation. For example, the elicitation of local 
knowledge using social science techniques could occupy many different positions 
on Arnstein’s (1969) ‘ladder of citizen participation’ depending on the relationships 
between the actors and the level of co-creation. These aspects illustrate some of the 
complexities that may be encountered when addressing local knowledge, yet do not 
undermine its validity.
Activist Citizen (Social) Science and Humanities
People’s Critical Social Science (Juha Suoranta)
Critical social sciences, which aim to promote social justice and equality, have a 
long history of fostering collaboration between non-experts and social scientists. 
This field encompasses a range of research methodologies, such as participatory 
action research, public sociology, activist research, critical pedagogy, and citizen 
social science (Martínez 2023). Social sciences working for the liberation and eman-
cipation of the people practice their critical function in addressing human misery 
and improving people’s lives by acting with the people and refusing abstractions 
and high theory (Denzin 2001). They sometimes work as militants, struggling with 
the people for their fundamental human rights (Suoranta 2021). The union between 
critical pedagogy and citizen social science is an attempt in this direction.
Critical pedagogy is a progressive alternative to standardised pedagogical mod-
els (Freire 2005). Following Marx’s dictum, it aims to make the world a better 
place, not only interpret it. Citizen social science involves the active participation 
of people in social scientific research at various stages of the research process, fos-
tering collaboration between professional researchers and the broader community 
(Tauginienė 2020).
Citizen social scientists share most of these aims and take collaboration 
between research scholars and others seriously. They emphasise mutual interac-
tion between scholars and ordinary people doing social research. After Antonio 
Gramsci (1971: 3), they maintain that all human beings are intellectuals ‘in the 
sense of having an intellect and using it, but not all are intellectuals by social 
function’. Critical pedagogues and citizen social scientists are convinced that 
38 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
during the current environmental, political, and warfare crises and biological haz-
ards, it is essential that as many people as possible can be intellectuals also ‘by 
social function’, use their intellect, and participate in world-making together.
Several common characteristics unite the projects of critical pedagogy and cit-
izen social science. The following syntheses can be used to explore the intersec-
tion of critical pedagogy and the principles of citizen social science by the Euro-
pean Citizen Science Association (2021). The syntheses emphasise the active 
involvement in learning and social research in different roles.
Citizen social science and critical pedagogy prioritise ordinary individu-
als’ perspectives, particularly those of the marginalised or whom Frantz Fanon 
(2004) called the wretched of the earth. They are committed to public engage-
ment and the democratization of research (Chan et  al. 2020). Democratisation 
ensures that marginalised people can influence the research process and iden-
tify what is important to research and how the community may benefit from it 
(Edwards and Brannelly 2017: 275). Moreover, citizen social science and critical 
pedagogy emphasise empowerment and agree that professional researchers and 
participants can learn from each other. Engagement in the research process can 
enhance learning opportunities, personal enjoyment, social benefits, and the com-
mon good. The synthesis of citizen social science and critical pedagogy values 
openness and advocates for the public availability of education and research to 
guarantee the democratisation of knowledge.
The time has come to combine critical pedagogy and citizen social science. 
Together, practitioners can create dialogical and participatory educational practices 
globally to empower people as active agents and world makers, increase mutual 
understanding of people through research, dialogues, and negotiations, and decide 
what is worth studying and researching, who owns the projects, whose voices are 
heard, and who benefits from the results. It is vital to democratise our knowledge 
practices to overcome the world’s ills (Tandon and Hall 2021).
However, the term ‘citizen social science’ may not include all individuals as not 
everyone holds citizenship status and exists within a Western hegemony of nation 
state-based hierarchy. Therefore, it may be beneficial to reconsider the use of ‘citizen’ 
and find terms that better capture the idea—perhaps people’s critical social science—
in the global world, which often moves in random and uncoordinated ways. In this 
regard, postdigital approaches to citizenship (Rapanta 2023a) and citizen education 
(Rapanta 2023b) are a useful point of departure. Furthermore, in a world shackled 
by capitalism’s chains and stifled by authoritarian regimes’ grip, a new vision 
emerges—a vision that beckons humanity towards liberation and empowerment. It 
requires establishing critical people’s universities for all.
The call is for a collective critical consciousness to transform citizens into active 
change agents. The traditional paradigms of citizen social science need to be revised 
in the postdigital era; we need a relentless pursuit of knowledge that challenges 
existing power structures and fosters a deep understanding of the political dynamics 
of authoritarian dominance. People’s critical social science empowers individuals to 
question, analyse, and deconstruct the narratives woven by oppressive ideologies. It 
is a call to arms, urging citizens to become scholars of their own experiences, illumi-
nate society’s obscured corners, and challenge the status quo (Denzin 2019).
39
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
The idea is to establish critical people’s universities that go beyond arbitrary 
academic walls. They would provide a space for dialogue, dissent, and intellectual 
exploration where diverse voices converge to dismantle structures perpetuating ine-
quality. The goal is to create a global network of such universities, forging alliances 
that transcend borders and cultural boundaries. These universities would become 
crucibles of resistance, transforming society through critical thought and collective 
action. The vision is for citizens to rise as scholars, not restricted to ivory towers but 
immersed in the struggle for justice. Let’s embrace the power of critical emancipa-
tory citizen science and create a more just and equitable world.
Feminisms and Postdigital Citizen Science (Sara Tolbert)
What is a feminist postdigital citizen science? While feminism defies singularities, 
a unifying matter of concern for feminism is the inequitable distribution of power 
and participation, particularly at the intersection of gender with other marginal-
ised social categories, such as race, class, immigration status, and disability (Truth 
1851/  2020). Feminist scholarship has historically been concerned with critiquing 
patriarchal norms of knowledge production and, like postdigital scholarship, tran-
scending normative disciplinary boundaries and Cartesian dualisms. Feminist sci-
ence and technology studies could be viewed as a precursor to postdigital feminisms 
(Hurley 2023). Donna Haraway’s (1985) iconic Cyborg Manifesto, for example, 
proclaimed that we are all cyborgs, problematizing definitive distinctions between 
human and machine, natural and artificial, physical and non-physical, human and 
non-human animal, etc.
Postdigital feminism is an emerging transdisciplinary field in its own right that 
builds on and transcends prior conceptions of feminism, maintains anti-capitalist 
commitments, and interrogates (subverts) postdigital hegemonies (Deepwell 2020; 
Hurley 2023; Jandrić and Ford 2022). Postdigital feminism brings attention to tech-
nological biases (D’Ignazio and Klein 2023), platform patriarchy (Hurley 2023), 
and the ‘flawed’ and ‘partial coverage’ of women and other marginalised positional-
ities (Deepwell 2020: 250), including nonhuman animals (Whitlock 2021) in digital 
spaces (see also Russell 2020). Katy Deepwell (2020) called on the field of post-
digital education to consider how feminist knowledge production, when placed at 
the centre of postdigital inquiries, might reveal alternative framings and solutions to 
persistent inequities in postdigital contexts.
Feminist postdigital citizen science is not a term used within feminism or else-
where; I use it here as a tool for theorising what a feminist postdigital citizen sci-
ence might offer as part of a theoretical kaleidoscope. Feminist postdigital citizen 
science, like feminisms and postdigital scholarship more broadly, could be charac-
terised as a highly diverse constellation of projects. The concept of ‘feminist post-
digital citizen science’ intersects with cyberfeminism, data feminism, glitch femi-
nism, and feminist digital humanities in that all of these cyber/post/digital/glitch 
feminist projects are creating ruptures in cis/male-dominated digital and technosci-
entific worlds through artistic/activist/anti-disciplinary/theoretical/ grassroots inter -
ventions. Postdigital feminist knowledge collectives such as subRosa (2008), The 
40 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Women’s Writers Project, and FemTechNet, operate at the intersections of knowl-
edge production and activism (da Costa and Philip 2008). These collectives often 
challenge traditional modes of authorship and attribution, producing and publishing 
trans/anti-disciplinary postdigital art, science, and scholarship not under individuals’ 
names but rather as collectives (see Azarmandi and Tolbert 2024).
A more recent example of feminist postdigital citizen science emerged during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Many women and others who menstruate were report-
ing abnormalities in their menstrual cycles as a result of the vaccine, side effects 
discounted on public health websites and not documented in other major vaccine 
trials, underscoring persistent gender biases in clinical research. Biological anthro-
pologist Dr. Kate Clancy used social media to crowdsource these experiences (see 
Fig.  1), which in turn became part of a postdigital feminist citizen science move-
ment that led to women’s post-vaccine related experiences—previously written off 
as ‘stress-related’—becoming the subject of a series of publicly funded clinical 
studies (Cousin-Frankel 2022).
This movement echoes other citizen science (or ciencia popular, Weinstein 
2011)-oriented movements in which women have, through the collective sharing of 
stories and anecdotes, mobilised resources towards the more systematic investiga-
tion of their marginalised concerns (e.g. the grandmothers in the TCE contamina-
tion in South Tucson, Arizona; the mothers seeking out scientists’ help to investigate 
drinking water contamination in Flint, Michigan; mothers analysing post-Fukushima 
radiation in foods) (see Kimura 2016; Krauss 1993).
Citizen science has been critiqued for the ways in which it can be corrupted by 
scientism, as well as for falling short of its democratising and participatory aims 
(Kimura and Kinchy 2016). Feminist science and postdigital feminism seek to make 
science and postdigital scholarship more liberatory and accountable. I propose 
that, when (postdigital) feminism is placed at the centre of its inquiries (Deepwell 
2020), postdigital citizen science is better positioned to harness the radical poten-
tial of citizen science movements. In short, feminist postdigital citizen science is 
Fig. 1  Social media post by Kate Clancy
41
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
an amorphous, tentacular constellation of movements and collectives, which disrupt 
patriarchal norms, work creatively towards intersectional justice, and contribute to 
the production of (social/techno/scientific) art and knowledge from the margins.
New Materialism and Theories of Care for Postdigital Citizen Science  
(Laurène Cheilan)
Citizen science in a postdigital world is an ambiguous domain, rife with tensions 
and possibilities (Jandrić et al. 2023a). It simultaneously holds the potential to pro-
mote more community engagement with knowledge production and runs the risk 
of deepening inequalities, through only acknowledging certain forms of knowing as 
valid. Its central ambivalence can disrupt or reinforce the neoliberalisation of knowl-
edge production. An appropriate theoretical approach to critical postdigital citizen 
science should allow these fundamental ambiguities to be surfaced and acknowl-
edged, while also allowing unequal dynamics at play to be critiqued.
Based on these premises, I argue that approaching citizen science as a set of 
purely discursive and intellectual practices not only helps invisibilise many dimen-
sions of how citizens can contribute to the production of knowledge, but also limits 
how knowledge is defined, produced, and engaged with. The argument for acknowl-
edging embodied and affective dynamics in science communication and public 
engagement with research has been made before (Davies 2014, 2019), based on 
feminist theories of new materialism which have redefined knowledge as situated 
(Haraway 1988), material (Hird 2009), and affective (Pedwell and Whitehead 2012). 
As postdigital citizen science happens in a more-than-human field of relationalities, 
paying attention to these dimensions of knowledge production allows us to widen 
our understanding of postdigital participation in science (Jandrić et al. 2018).
Additionally, feminist theories of care have been offering frames for conceptualising  
how care work and hidden caring dynamics are entangled in all parts of societies for 
decades. Tronto and Fisher (1990) defined care as the work we do to maintain and 
repair our world so we can keep living in it as well as possible. This has led to calls to 
redefine citizenship through care (Tronto 2013) and develop a care politics that centres 
on interdependencies and ambivalences (Hakim et al. 2020). Care as a mode of being in 
the world has also been constitutive of citizen science approaches that pay attention to 
localised and indigenous forms of knowledge (Karrow and Fazio 2010).
In the field of Science and Technology Studies (STS), the redefinition of knowl-
edge politics through ‘matters of care’ articulates how care can be a part of socio-
technical assemblages of humans and non-humans with distributed agency (de la 
Bellacasa 2017). In the ‘ongoing material remaking of the world’ (de la Bellacasa 
2011: 87), these assemblages entangle affective dynamics, moral economies, and 
maintenance work (de la Bellacasa 2015). The dynamic interactions of these three 
elements define and form the intricate relationships of mutual care through which 
knowledge is produced.
In a postdigital world, conceptualising knowing as caring means paying attention 
to the heterogeneous assemblages (human and non-human, material and immate-
rial, organic and technological) that participate in citizen science. It requires being 
42 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
particularly attentive to sensory and affective modes of knowing in order to acknowl-
edge all forms of expertise as valid. In terms of critical care, it means asking not only 
‘who cares?’ in postdigital citizen science, but also ‘how to care?’ which offers a 
‘transformative ethos’ (de la Bellacasa 2015: 67) that goes beyond normative ethics.
However, care is not a reassuring notion, an innocent refuge to revert to when 
social worlds seem too unsettling, or a guarantee to do things well (Murphy 2015). 
Because of its potential for ‘staying with the trouble’ (Haraway 2016), care is a 
powerful epistemological tool for critical postdigital citizen science. It can disrupt 
extractive and exploitative practices, acknowledge the diversity of existing forms of 
knowledge, and embed capacity for non-reductive approaches, while holding onto 
the messiness and ambivalence of doing citizen science in a postdigital world.
Postdigital Citizen Science and Humanities in Authoritarian Contexts (Fei Yan)
The postdigital provides a new condition for the development of citizen science 
(Jandrić et  al. 2023a). However, what has been often overlooked or marginalised 
in discussions is the extent to which the future of postdigital citizen science and 
humanities is contingent on the support of a healthy civic society. Anchored in 
democracy, civic societies provide an arena in which social issues can be publicly 
debated, facilitating the possibility of achieving social justice through the participa-
tion of all citizens. Healthy civic societies are thus the soil in which postdigital citi-
zen science and humanities can grow and flourish.
But the soil is markedly different in authoritarian contexts, where the develop-
ment of civil society is severely constrained by a powerful state or dictator. In these 
societies, social issues are easily manipulated as the state typically monopolises not 
only the content of education but also a wide range of the media through which most 
people access information. Through this control, the state instils officially approved 
ideologies, such as nationalism, which fundamentally shape people’s perspectives 
on issues related to social justice. Examples of such issues include whether to allow 
ethnic minorities to use their mother tongue in education (Bulag 2023), or whether 
to support Ukraine in defending itself from Russia’s invasion. It is not uncommon to 
observe the state in authoritarian contexts devoting significant manoeuvring power 
to predisposing its citizens to certain points of view (for example, see Yan 2020).
Yet, despite the seemingly omnipresent power of the state in authoritarian con-
texts, the complexity and hybridity of the postdigital era have created ‘a rupture’ in 
the real world (Jandrić et al. 2018: 895), which offers opportunities for people living 
in these societies to engage in social issues in ways that were previously impossi-
ble. This was evident in the rare and courageous protests across China during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, sparked by widespread footage on social media of a deadly 
apartment fire in the far west of the country (Davidson and Yu 2022). The wave of 
civil disobedience initiated in the digital space eventually led to the abolition of offi-
cial lockdown policies in the following weeks, demonstrating the power of grassroot 
or bottom-up approaches in the postdigital era. Another impressive example of rare 
online civic activism in an authoritarian context is the widespread public outrage 
and criticism of officials over the case of the ‘chained woman’ (Xiaohuamei), whose 
43
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
plight evoked great public sympathy. This raised awareness of China’s poor record 
in preventing human trafficking, supporting women’s rights, and treating people 
with mental illness (Kuo & Li 2022).
The development of postdigital citizen science and humanities in authoritarian 
contexts depends heavily on the power of the state and how authoritarian the regime 
is. Any examination of the political dimension of postdigital citizen science and 
humanities in these societies must therefore consider the extent to which the role of 
the state, and the power structures within it, differs from its function in more demo-
cratic societies. As Strasser and colleagues (2019: 53) point out, we need to interro-
gate not only ‘what kind of science, but also what kind of society’ this is producing.
This inquiry raises various intriguing questions regarding the development of 
postdigital citizen science and humanities in authoritarian contexts. For instance, 
how does the state regulate the development and utilisation of technology and data, 
such as through censorship and surveillance? What role does it play in generating 
and controlling knowledge, including issues of academic freedom and sources of 
research funding? How does the state organise and oversee postdigital participation, 
particularly in relation to decision-making and power distribution?1
Given the recent global surge in authoritarianism, exemplified by countries like 
Russia, India, and Turkey, alongside the growing influence of authoritarian regimes 
like China, it is imperative to approach these questions carefully. This is essential to 
gain deeper insights into the challenges facing the development of both postdigital 
citizen science and civic societies and democracies more broadly.
Citizen More Than Human(ities) and Science
Postdigital Citizen Science and the More‑Than‑Human World (Catherine Price)
Postdigital citizen science has the potential to increase and diversify participation in 
knowledge production, but this can be limited by who or what we consider as par -
ticipants. Researchers have already shown that it is possible to learn with the more-
than-human world (Szymanski and Calvert 2018; Tsing 2010). One example is the 
SCRaMble project where yeast was a participant and given the same agency as the sci-
entists involved in the research process (Szymanski and Calvert 2018). Additionally, in 
her study on the citizen science river monitoring project, ‘Citizen Crane’, Ria Dunkley 
(2023) shows that it is possible for humans and the more-than-human world to gather 
scientific data together. As these examples show, the more-than-human world can be 
considered an equal in scientific research and citizen science projects.
Where does this leave postdigital citizen science? As Jandrić et al. (2023a) argue, 
the ‘postdigital age is about openness and inclusivity; professional scientists and 
citizen scientists need to be accepted as equals’. The postdigital citizen science con-
cept needs to be extended to include the more-than-human world, given that it has 
already been recognised as a knowledge producer. What is worth remembering for 
1 These questions are inspired by the three challenges raised in Jandrić et al. (2023a).
44 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
all of these knowledge producers, whether they are professional scientists or post-
digital citizen scientists (human or non-human), is that the relationship between 
thinking and knowing is made possible due to the concept of ‘care’. Maria Puig de la 
Bellacasa defines care as:
intrinsically involving an ethical and political intervention that affects also 
those who are researching care. Because speaking of ‘good care’ – or of as-
well-as-possible care – is never neutral. Because the work of care can be done 
within and for worlds that we might find objectionable. (Puig de la Bellacasa 
2017: 6)
Postdigital citizen science provides an opportunity for humans who care about 
the more-than-human world to collect data on subjects including bird and butterfly 
numbers (Rautio et  al. 2022), the weather (Gharesifard et  al. 2017), water catch-
ments (Mackay et al. 2015), soil (Kovács et al. 2019), and many others. There is the 
potential to foster a deeper connection with other living and non-living entities and 
to help address challenges facing the planet such as climate change and biodiversity 
loss. Including the more-than-human world in this monitoring as an active partici-
pant, rather than as a mere object of study, offers the opportunity for transforma-
tional change (Dunkley 2023; Rautio et al. 2022).
However, the concept of care is multifaceted and disruptive (Puig de la Bellacasa 
2015; Szymanski et  al. 2021). Caring for and with the more-than-human world 
means considering how the postdigital technologies required by postdigital citizen 
scientists for data collection are produced. The manufacturing of computing 
hardware and software can actually add to postdigital environmental crises through 
the extraction of minerals, metals, oil, and gas (Price 2023a). There is also a 
requirement to ensure more-than-human participants, e.g. birds carrying satellite 
tags (Price 2023b), are not exploited by humans in data collection in the quest to 
further knowledge production.
While the inclusion of the more-than-human world as a participant potentially 
problematizes postdigital citizen science, this does not mean it should be over -
looked. Caring for and with the complexities of the more-than-human world might 
contribute to the survival of life and flourishing futures.
Postdigital Citizen Data: Participation, Partnerships, Precautions, 
and Possibilities (Sarah Hayes)
While ‘most citizen science projects take place within the problem-focused natural 
sciences’, social sciences and humanities help to further our understanding of the 
human dimensions (Tauginienė et al. 2020: 1). This makes a case for the power of 
an interdisciplinary lens to examine public participation in scientific research, but in 
postdigital society, the prolific extent of data interactions in human lives calls also 
for collaborative cross-sector dialogue. This is an inclusive approach that is captured 
in Human Data Interaction, Disadvantage and Skills in the Community: Enabling 
Cross-Sector Environments for Postdigital Inclusion (Hayes et al. 2023), discussed 
45
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
too in a showcase of Human Data Interaction Network Plus (2023), recent interview 
(Hayes et al. 2024), and book review (Turvey 2024).
Since the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a stronger awareness of the need 
to improve ‘digital inclusion’ among disadvantaged groups and individuals in com-
munities across the globe (Hayes et  al. 2023: xiv). Yet the major focus has been 
placed on human computer interactions, such as improving digital skills and access. 
How individuals are positioned in their human data interactions, as these intersect 
in complex ways with various forms of disadvantage in postdigital contexts, has 
been less researched.
Preece (2016: 585) suggests that citizen science and Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI) researchers ‘can leverage each other’s skills to speed up science, accelerate 
learning, and amplify society’s well-being globally as well as locally’. However, 
emerging also from an HCI theoretical background, the Human Data Interaction (HDI) 
framework (Mortier et  al. 2014) calls for legibility, agency, negotiability, and even 
resistance, to give citizens greater capacity to act, as they encounter data-driven systems. 
Data are no longer simple forms of information entered into a spreadsheet. Data are now 
deeply interspersed with online and offline forms of media and algorithmic activity, 
the Internet of Things, and the digitalisation of many social services (Hayes et al. 2023: 
xvi). The HDI framework suggests that analytics and algorithms ought to be transparent 
and comprehensible, enabling opting in or out, and personal data to be corrected. This 
extends to our physical lives too, given that ‘biology as digital information, and digital 
information as biology, are now dialectically interconnected’ (Peters et al. 2021: 370) 
enabling the trackability of humans, with or without, our explicit consent.
It is important though that precautionary discussions take place alongside a fur -
thering of participatory possibilities for citizens to interact with their own and other 
people’s data to contribute to societal research. For example, the Consumer Data 
Research Centre (CDRC) (2024) points to the valuable insights into human behav -
iour that might be gained across scientific, social, and economic challenges, via 
collaboration with consumer data providers. Using consumer data, diverse patterns 
of urban mobility and travel, flooding, terrorist attacks, areas of food insecurity, or 
detailed crime narratives can be shared across researchers, businesses, and agencies. 
Such coordinated HDI activities open routes for valuable local and international, 
interdisciplinary, and cross-sector knowledge exchange.
Therefore, an interdisciplinary lens on citizen science enables perspectives from 
the social sciences and humanities to strengthen the dialogue on citizen participation 
in scientific research. This could, for example, both encourage valuable exchanges 
of data and knowledge and heed Ritzer’s arguments about shifts in capitalism from 
an exploitation of producers to an exploitation of consumers (Ritzer et  al. 2018, 
2024). Citizen con(pro)sumers are now daily generators of digital data in postdigital 
society, amid rapid developments in algorithmic culture and artificial intelligence 
systems. This means that there are complex implications for postdigital inclusion 
as citizen science is enacted in local communities. Ongoing interdisciplinary and 
cross-sector dialogues on Human Data Interaction (HDI) are recommended to bal-
ance considerations of equity and social justice alongside the possibilities for soci-
etal research from citizen data.
46 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
AI‑Powered Citizen Science (Howard Scott)
Could citizen science benefit from integrating AI into co-creation projects through a 
postdigital theoretical approach which draws on the Human Data Interaction (HDI) 
tenets (Mortier et  al. 2014)? Despite its pervasiveness in the postdigital world, 
access to data remains a challenge for citizen scientists and this kind of integrated 
approach might help address ethical concerns around AI, including transparency, 
and improve general AI literacy in harnessing its potential to support co-creation.
Criticisms of data exploitation have been levelled against citizen science because 
often the data that participants gather are gifted to formal projects without acknowl-
edgement (Weinstein 2011). Far too often, citizen scientists simply assume the role 
of data collectors, without having input into research methodologies, questions, 
analysis, or outcomes. As the following examples indicate, using AI such as natural 
language processing tools may improve citizen scientists’ access to projects.
Access to ‘open data’ can help facilitate the use of real-world AI applications 
(European Union 2023) in citizen science co-creation projects, where communi-
ties may, for example, wish to collaborate. Mortier et al. (2014) propose legibility,  
agency, and negotiability as tenets which focus on human interaction with data and 
could help guide citizen science to work with AI. Hypothetically, a citizen science 
group wishing to monitor and analyse water pollution in their local environment 
could compare data they collect locally with wider examples from open data and har -
ness AI to analyse it for trends or patterns, as long they are supported to develop the 
necessary rigour and skill sets to analyse the data they have collected. Access to data-
sets in a postdigital landscape is no challenge in itself. As Green et al. (2020) have 
identified, using public camera traps in projects produces such massive amounts of 
data that it is their categorisation and analysis which become challenging.
Citizen scientists might, however, develop AI skillsets, e.g. an understanding of 
prompt engineering (Bozkurt and Sharma 2023) or topic modelling, which Church-
ill and Singh (2022) describe as textual analysis by large language models to identify  
themes and discover patterns ‘that allow humans or machines to swiftly grasp salient 
information or quickly navigate massive databases’ (Wong and Li 2023: 4). Alongside 
this could be the need for monitoring and critical reading of results by a Human-In-The-
Loop (HITL) to ensure AI interfaces do not provide false information (‘hallucinations’).
Co-created citizen science may raise questions about integrity in potential pro-
jects, highlighting the need for theoretical guidance. Monitoring pollution in a local 
water supply, for instance, could produce different results if the stakeholders involve 
community scientists collaborating alongside employees of a local polluting com-
pany. They could undertake this as citizens, but a theoretical perspective drawing on 
Mortier et al.’s (2014) HDI tenets could require projects to comply with ‘legibility’, 
whereby data analytics must be transparent. AI tools such as scite.ai even enable 
a means of project management for auditing research processes and disseminating 
results. Trustworthy AI tools that ensure metadata are transparent and of high qual-
ity may not be available, so a postdigital human element to research, like HITL, may 
need to be retained to ensure integrity. In summary, AI can be beneficial to help citi-
zen scientists access metadata and conduct data analysis, but cognisance of ethical 
approaches, including transparency, need to be maintained.
47
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Angling and Entangling the Kaleidoscope’s Theoretical Lenses
Philosophy of Technology (Annabel Latham)
There is debate around whether technology is distinct from science or is the appli-
cation of science (Encylopedia Britannica 2024). Herbert Simon (1969) stated that 
while scientists are concerned with how things are , engineers focus on how things 
ought to be. Technology has revolutionised citizen science, improving efficiency in 
data collection and analysis, reducing cost, expanding the geographic and demo-
graphic reach (Newman et al. 2012), and changing the ways that citizen scientists 
can contribute (Mazumdar et al. 2018).
The Philosophy of Technology can be seen as a study of the meaning of technol-
ogy in the context of its relationship with and impact on, people, culture, and soci-
ety. Mitcham (1994) refers to this as the ‘humanities philosophy of technology’. This 
popular standpoint sees technology as a black box (as it originates from the goals and 
values of humans) and considers its effect as a sociocultural phenomenon in rela-
tion to human culture, morality, politics, the structure of society, and metaphysics. As 
such it tends to view technology as having a negative impact on human society.
An alternative branch, ‘analytic philosophy of technology’, focuses on the tech-
nology itself, aiming to understand the nature, design, and creation of technological 
artefacts (Franssen 2009). Technology is considered to be grounded in practice, i.e. 
engineering, with a focus on considering the concepts, goals, and methods from a 
philosophical viewpoint. Here, design is fundamental to technology, with engineers 
seeking to solve problems for the good of society. For instance, the Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers (2024), the world’s largest technical professional 
organisation, aims to ‘advance technology for humanity’. However, the design pro-
cess includes many considerations: not only functional requirements, but also the 
values of users, efficiency, safety, sustainability, market success, and financial or 
resource constraints. This means trade-offs are inevitable. Attempting to integrate 
values into designs leads to conflicts that are difficult to resolve.
In our postdigital age of big data, algorithmic decision-making, and artificial 
intelligence, the ethical and social aspects of technology are fundamental. If tech-
nology is value-neutral, how do we approach responsibility? Is it possible to assign 
responsibility for complex systems designed by multiple teams of engineers? Fur -
ther, outputs from self-learning and intelligent systems are difficult for humans to 
understand, predict, and control, leading to responsibility gaps (Matthias 2004). Risk 
is another key concern, but there is rarely sufficient knowledge to reliably assess the 
consequences of a new technology. This means the focus tends to be on safety rather 
than social or psychological risks.
Can postdigital citizen science exist now without technology, data, and algo-
rithms? Society and technology are interdependent, each influencing the other. 
Citizen scientists may rarely consider the personal consequences of sharing and 
uploading information to apps and, like most people, may not read the terms and 
conditions. Researchers depending on citizen scientists should consider their use of 
technology from both humanist and analytic perspectives, asking questions such as 
48 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
the following: Who is responsible for unforeseen social or psychological impacts 
on citizens? How inclusive are we being? Are we reinforcing digital inequalities? Is 
there a balance of power? Will the data gathered be inherently biassed? Can we offer 
alternative methods of participating?
Citizen Linguistics (Ibrar Bhatt)
We can leverage the principles of citizen science to deepen our understanding of 
language use, variation, and evolution within communities. This approach has the 
potential to span several areas of linguistic inquiry, including sociolinguistics, liter -
acy studies, and linguistic ethnography. Work in these sub-areas can benefit from the  
participatory nature of citizen science, where ‘non-professionals’ can contribute to 
academic research in meaningful ways. By situating ‘citizen linguistics’ within the 
broader context of the humanities, we open avenues for interdisciplinary collabora-
tion that not only enrich our linguistic knowledge but also strengthen the fabric of 
humanities research, fostering a holistic understanding of human culture and society.
At its core, citizen linguistics involves the collection and analysis of linguistic 
data by ‘lay’ people. Our everyday environments and personal lives are rich with 
linguistic information—ranging from public signs and graffiti (linguistic landscap-
ing) and individual experiences with language (linguistic auto-ethnography) to the 
observation of how language is used and evolves within our communities. These 
endeavours are not just about accumulating data but also require us to engage deeply 
with the language as it is lived and experienced, marking an ongoing effort to docu-
ment oral and written language development through community participation and 
metadata collection.
Participants in citizen linguistics can engage in a variety of research tasks. These 
can include classifying regional accents by listening to audio clips, recording spon-
taneous language use, and noting the evolving meanings of words and phrases, espe-
cially in contexts where multiple languages intersect (translingual practice). Under -
standably, this process will extend to analysing the semiotic features of the linguistic 
practices of individuals and groups and will be further interpreted by academic 
researchers. Thus, citizen linguistics is inherently participatory and fosters a form of 
epistemic interdependence between researchers and the researched.
Such grassroot engagement is particularly vital in contexts where languages are at 
risk of disappearing or when heritage literacy practices encompass transmodal and 
translingual elements that exceed the boundaries of traditionally named languages. 
Such practices can be multimodal, multiple orthographies and include gestures and 
non-verbal communication, which require a nuanced approach to documentation and 
analysis. For example, languages like the Ainu language in Japan and the Navajo lan-
guage in the United States exemplify communities where linguistic practices are under 
threat, necessitating innovative approaches for preservation and documentation.
Moreover, citizen linguistics has practical implications beyond academic 
research. It supports linguistic policy planning, the development of educational 
resources, and the documentation of endangered languages and dialects. By involv -
ing community members in the research process, it ensures that the outcomes are 
49
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
relevant and beneficial to those same communities, thus promoting a more inclusive 
and participatory approach to language study.
Language practices which span various modes and media are most coherently 
understood within a postdigital context (see Bhatt 2023a, b). Such an approach not 
only considers people’s attachments to analogue technologies but also situates these 
preferences within a broader ‘postdigital literacy ecology’ as described by Bhatt 
(2023a). By framing our understanding in this way, and aided by citizen linguistics, 
we can appreciate the intricate web of language practices that are shaped by a multi-
tude of influences, offering a holistic view of how digital and analogue experiences 
coalesce in the modern world.
Citizen linguistics empowers individuals and communities to contribute to the 
understanding and preservation of linguistic diversity. It acknowledges the complex-
ity of language in its ‘natural’ settings and seeks to harness this complexity through 
collective effort. As such, it not only enriches linguistic research but also plays a 
crucial role in cultural preservation and the promotion of linguistic diversity on a 
global scale.
Postdigital Citizen Science: An Approach from Economics (Vyacheslav Dodonov)
As an economist, I see great potential for the development of traditional economics 
through the use of citizen science tools, both in a practical sense by increasing the 
accuracy of estimates and the measurement of economic processes through expand-
ing data sets with the help of citizen scientists and in terms of enriching theory 
through cross-sectoral citizen research in economics, sociology, and political science.
Improving the accuracy of the analysis and assessment of economic processes is 
possible in those areas where the role of citizen scientists is potentially extensive, 
not so much for obtaining primary data, as for interpreting them at the level of per -
ception within households. This applies to issues such as the impact of inflation on 
living standards, income inequality, and the quality of municipal government. These 
issues are especially relevant for developing economies, where problems remain 
with the accuracy of statistics relating to these parameters and the methodology for 
calculating the corresponding indicators. Therefore, the involvement of citizen sci-
ence tools can provide additional impetus for the practical application of the data 
obtained with its help.
I see the improvement and enrichment of theoretical approaches using the capa-
bilities of citizen science as possible, based on the fusion of approaches of econom-
ics and sociology to increase the accuracy of measuring macroeconomic dynamics 
and its refraction through the perception of citizens. Citizen science and scientists 
can make improvements in the measurement of macroeconomic indicators and their 
impact on households by continuing research at the intersection of GDP, human 
capital, and social indicators (such as the UNDP Human Development Index or 
World Bank Human Capital Index) or through more ambitious efforts to find alter -
natives to macroeconomic progress in the form of measuring areas such as gross 
national happiness (United Nations General Assembly 2011), human wellbeing, and 
50 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
environmental impact (Happy Planet Index). More accurate measurement in turn 
can become the basis for policy-focused research and recommendations to improve 
decision-making processes.
The digital dimension of citizen science in developing and emerging economies 
is also worth mentioning, in particular, the problem of digital inequality which ‘can 
be understood as the unequal or differentiated use of the available technology, infra-
structure, services, facilities, and information’ (Kuhn et al. 2023: 908). This problem 
not only ‘threatens to leave those States in the technological wake’ (United Nations 
General Assembly 2023), but also increases inequality of income and opportunity 
within these countries. In the postdigital era, digital inequality in less developed 
countries threatens to increase divides and push large parts of society to the margins 
of progress. In preventing this scenario, citizen science and, in particular, economics 
can play a significant role by more accurately and critically assessing the economic 
basis and scale of digital inequality, determining the focus of its most critical efforts.
Citizen scientists can collect more accurate and representative data on the use of 
digital technologies in different strata of society by income level, which will make 
it possible to link income inequality and digital inequality. It is especially impor -
tant to study digital inequality in business organisation and management in devel-
oping countries, where civilian scientists can make a considerable contribution to 
the study of the interdependent factors that cause it. This can help to develop eco-
nomic mechanisms for reducing gaps in key areas of digital inequality, mitigating 
its consequences, and targeting assistance towards the most vulnerable members of 
the population. This suggests that postdigital citizen science has great potential to 
enrich the theory and practice of economic science in general and its implementa-
tion to address developing countries’ problems, especially those related to income 
and digital inequality.
Integrating the Lippman‑dewey Debate: Pragmatic Idealism and the Mode 3 
Universal Network University (Adam Matthews)
Walter Lippmann’s (1922/  2007) book, Public Opinion, introduced the concepts of 
stereotype and pseudo-environment to conceptualise citizens’ lack of omnicompe-
tence in domains of the modern world beyond their own personal expertise, experi-
ence, and context. This for Lippmann raised practical limitations to a fully partici-
patory democratic ideal. John Dewey responded with The Public and its Problems 
(Dewey and Rogers 1927/  2016), presenting his own democratic ideal of full par -
ticipation, which saw democracy in terms of a constantly evolving entanglement of 
communication and problem-solving across all of society.
Both authors advocated democratic ends—a key difference was that Lippmann 
thought that it was the role of experts (such as academics, professionals, and jour -
nalists) to communicate and synthesise information to publics and elected officials, 
while Dewey called for active participation from all (Whipple 2005). The Dewey-
Lippmann debate provides us with two lenses with which to consider postdigital 
citizen science and humanities where information is abundant (Jandrić 2023) and 
the epistemological, political, and postdigital are intertwined (Jandrić et al. 2023b).
51
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
For Dahl and Shapiro (2015), large-scale democracy requires alternative sources 
of information, associational autonomy, and inclusive citizenship. The deluge 
of alternative sources of information in the twenty-first century has democratised 
access in many cases but such abundance has also resulted in scepticism (and more 
dangerously, cynicism) and antagonism towards expertise and objective ‘truth’, 
manifested through contested terms such as postmodernism, post-truth, fake news, 
and mis/disinformation in the contemporary public sphere (Farkas and Schou 2019). 
Contemporary issues such as climate change and artificial intelligence are highly 
technical, and how we respond has wide-ranging implications for all. This poses a 
technocracy-democracy dilemma (Coeckelbergh and Sætra 2023), similar to that 
which divided Lippmann and Dewey.
Harjuniemi (2022) juxtaposes Lippmann’s argument for professional standards 
and autonomy with Hayek’s view of free market neoliberalism as a marketplace 
of ideas free to emerge from all, not just ‘elites’. Curtis (2020) has described the 
conflict between democracy and neoliberalism as the ‘second Dewey-Lippmann 
debate’. ‘Experts’ such as those in universities have come under attack in recent 
times (Galpin and Vernon 2024) with populist movements polarising ‘elites’  
against ‘the people’.
The institution of the university as a key knowledge producer and interpreter in 
society has seen huge growth since the time of Dewey and Lippman. This has placed 
greater responsibility upon the university, moving it beyond exclusively academic 
knowledge (Mode 1) and mass production to solve problems and produce future 
workforces (Mode 2) towards the Mode 3 Universal Network University (Matthews 
2023). This requires the university not only to focus on the research journal article 
and full-time degree, but also on widening participation, collaboration, and integra-
tion with society in (co-)creating and communicating information and knowledge. 
These modes are not purely historical developments; they also co-exist in tension in 
different contexts.
Concepts such as integrating and transcending disciplinary knowledge (Repko 
and Szostak 2021) and the co-production, exchange, and communication of knowl-
edge (Bandola-Gill 2023) are wide-ranging, collaborative tasks, involving many 
stakeholders (Schütz et al. 2019). Through these tasks, the Mode 3 Universal Net-
work University can draw together both sides of the Dewey-Lippmann debate to 
contribute a theoretical lens with which to theorise and practice citizen science and 
humanities. Skills and knowledge drawn from Dewey as a philosopher and Lipp-
mann as a journalist provide integrative promise as well as critical perspectives for 
collaborative knowledge production, exchange and communication in the public 
sphere (Duffy 2015; Remler et  al. 2014). Dewey’s complexity and ideals are key 
for equitable and democratic ends and Lippmann’s pragmatism is a reminder of 
the challenges faced and diverse expertise available in many areas both inside and 
outside of the university for knowledge production, integration, equity, and access. 
Integrating and oscillating between the two positions offers opportunities for a prag-
matic idealism (Vermeulen and Van Den Akker 2010) as a guiding principle for the 
Mode 3 Universal Network University, active and participatory in the postdigital 
public sphere.
52 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Cultural Considerations and Postdigital Participation in Citizen Science  
(Rami Muhtaseb)
Citizen science transcends the conventional boundaries of research, allowing individuals 
from diverse backgrounds to participate in scientific projects. This can introduce diverse 
perspectives into scientific research, particularly when addressing global issues. Research 
in citizen science demonstrates the influence of culture on citizen scientists’ motivations 
(Rotman et al. 2014; Jeong et al. 2023). Moreover, participation in science is influenced 
by a range of factors, including gender (Hurley 2023), race, ethnicity (Benjamin 2019), 
religion (Savin-Baden and Reader 2022) and location, as well as other aspects of identity, 
intersectionality, and belief (Jandrić et al. 2023a). Consequently, developing inclusive and 
engaging citizen science initiatives hinges on developing a nuanced understanding of how 
culture shapes communication and collaboration.
In the postdigital era, it becomes imperative to consider how cultural dimensions 
intersect with (post)digital platforms and practices in ICT-mediated citizen science 
initiatives. Hofstede’s (2011) framework is one of the most common models for describing 
how culture affects members’ values and behaviour. It situates national cultures along six 
dimensions: Individualism vs. Collectivism, Power Distance, Masculinity vs. Femininity, 
Uncertainty Avoidance, Long-Term vs. Short-Term Orientation, and Indulgence vs. 
Restraint. This contribution begins to exemplify and investigate the dynamics influencing 
online participation in citizen science across diverse cultural contexts by integrating the 
postdigital perspective with three of Hofstede’s cultural dimensions. Further investigation 
of all these cultural dimensions can contribute to developing practical guidelines for 
fostering cross-cultural communication and collaboration in postdigital citizen science.
Individualism vs. Collectivism
This dimension reflects how much a society prioritises individual interests over 
collective goals. In societies with individualistic cultures, participants may engage 
in projects that align with their passions and preferences and cherish their sense of 
freedom and autonomy. Meanwhile, participants from more collectivist cultures may 
be motivated by a sense of duty to their social group or a desire to contribute to a 
collective cause (Cardoso-Andrade et al. 2022).
For example, in a citizen science project to monitor bird populations in specific 
areas, participants from individualistic cultures might be more inclined to work 
autonomously, focus on personal observations, and contribute based on their exper -
tise. In contrast, participants from collectivist cultures might prioritise collaboration 
and community involvement, organising local bird-watching events, and sharing 
their findings collectively on social media.
Power Distance
Power Distance reflects the extent to which a society accepts and expects unequal 
distributions of power. Given the participatory nature of citizen science, this may 
influence communication and decision-making. Participants from cultures with high 
53
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
levels of Power Distance may prefer expert-led citizen science projects. Participants 
from cultures with low levels of Power Distance may be more inclined to engage in 
community-led initiatives.
In a citizen science conservation project involving environmental monitoring 
through social media, communication in high power distance cultures may be more 
formal and top-down, relying on project leaders for guidance. Participants from low 
Power Distance cultures might prefer more decentralised decision-making processes 
and collaborative leadership, using social media for open discussions and decentral-
ised decision-making.
Long‑Term vs. Short‑Term Orientation
Both forms of orientation relate to the focus of people’s efforts and reflect a soci-
ety’s attitude towards future planning. In long-term–oriented cultures, participants 
may exhibit commitment and perseverance in citizen science initiatives, prioritising 
the sustainability of citizen science projects. Short-term–oriented cultures may pre-
fer initiatives with quick, observable outcomes.
For instance, projects focused on pro-environmental behaviour, such as tracking 
changes in air quality, are likely to attract participants from long-term–oriented 
cultures (Dangelico et al. 2020), to monitor trends and patterns over extended periods.  
Projects focused on documenting transient events, like migratory bird sightings  
or responding to emergencies, are more likely to appeal to participants from short-
term–oriented cultures.
Children and Y oung People as Citizen Researchers
According Epistemic Credibility to Young People as Citizen Social Scientists 
(Alison MacKenzie and Mohamed Owaineh)
Social science research has rarely regarded Children and Young People (C&YP) 
as credible knowers and perceivers of their own experiences, and neither, conse-
quently, as citizen social scientists. Researchers have researched on C&YP using 
the perspective and experiences of adults—parents, teachers, social workers, or 
the police, for example. The reasons for overlooking C&YP as epistemic agents—
and citizen social scientists—lie in belief systems that C&YP lack rationality, 
lack the capacity to have valid or reliable views and opinions, and that, below the 
age of 11, they are not capable of thinking about thinking.
C&YP were seen as immature forms of the human organism who would even-
tually become the final form—the human adult (the Aristotelian conception of 
childhood). The Piagetian (1933) stage theory, which conceived of children as 
developing in age-related stages, viewed them as a configuration of deficits and 
as lacking the capacities of adults, a paradigmatic view that persisted long into 
the twentieth century. These influential conceptions have had implications for 
how we understand C&YP in philosophy, psychology, sociology, education, law, 
54 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
and other fields, as well as in social science research: as subjects or objects of  
research rather than as contributors to  research.
These widely held conceptions, however, are being challenged. The most sig-
nificant challenge has come from the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
(UNICEF 1989), particularly Article 12, the lynchpin of the convention, which 
provides for the child’s right to participate in processes affecting their lives. 
This right recognises the child as a full human being who is able to participate 
in society. Their views, moreover, are to count (given ‘due weight’). As they are 
to count, then children ought to be regarded as epistemic agents who can design, 
take part in, and offer critical insights into and commentary on social science 
research, including education, the environment, or social media legislation.
Due weight arguments are supported by Article 13, the right of ‘freedom of 
expression’ and ‘the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of 
all kinds’. Researchers in the field of children’s rights (Lundy 2018), participa-
tory action research informed by children’s rights (Lundy and Templeton 2018; 
Owaineh 2023), and philosophical communities of inquiry (Petropoulos 2023) 
have shown how critically informed and engaged C&YP are, if they are given 
the opportunity and the means by which to express themselves. Research which 
involves C&YP as epistemic agents who are credible citizen social scientists is 
growing in influence and impact (for example, Templeton et al. 2022).
C&YP are, moreover, growing up in a digital world in which 1 in 3 Internet 
users worldwide are under 18 (Livingstone et al. 2015). C&YP are skilled users 
of the digital and are adept postdigital citizens for whom the postdigital merges 
seamlessly with the off-digital. The knowledge and experience of C&YP mean 
they are, or should be, regarded as indispensable social citizen scientists.
Owaineh (2023) created a disabled young women’s advisory group to explore 
the myriad challenges which hinder their access to education in Palestine, 
a context in which the political, cultural, social, and infrastructural barriers to 
inclusion are systemic and structural as a consequence of, primarily, aggres-
sive settler colonialism and the thwarting of Palestinian statehood. The advisory 
group sought to use the digital environment to participate in, and contribute to, 
the research. Among their observations on the advantages of this approach to 
research was that, for example, video calling both transformed and sustained their 
ability to communicate, while protecting them from the hazards of travelling in 
the occupied West Bank.
The advisory group’s contributions were thought-provoking: they were surprised 
at being consulted as no one had ever sought their views, believing they lacked 
capacity or understanding. Their insights on being disabled, young, female, and Pal-
estinian were acute and harrowing because they were so eloquently expressed from 
their perspective in their own words. Owaineh (2023) concluded that while lack -
ing professional skills in conventional research, they were valuable epistemic con-
tributors to the field of educational inclusion within a very particular context that 
is too often described by non-disabled adults and non-Palestinians who lack their 
fine-grained knowledge. Though overlooked, unseen, and silenced, no one, we con-
tend, could read the accounts of these perforce self-effacing young women and not 
conclude that they are bona fide citizen social scientists.
55
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Postdigital Primary School Citizen Science (Sarah Earle)
Citizen science is increasingly used as a strategy to engage children in science, for 
example, in gathering data for bird sightings in gardens (e.g. RSPB’s (2024) Big 
Garden Bird Watch in the UK) or testing water samples (e.g. BBC’s Terrific Scien-
tific (n.d.)). Children, as citizens, are asked to collect data and submit it digitally, to 
help scientists. While in theory this sounds as though it actively involves children in 
science, potentially making them feel part of the scientific community, it may also 
be embedding the view that science is led by others.
Attitudes to science are built in primary school (Archer et  al. 2020; Nag 
Chowdhuri et  al. 2021), with implications not only for engagement in science 
at secondary school and future careers, but also in terms of the critical thinking 
required of scientifically literate citizens. The concept of ‘science capital’ is often 
represented as a rucksack containing the person’s experiences and engagement with 
science (University College London 2020). For those with high science capital, 
their ‘rucksack’ is full of visits to museums and discussions with family and friends 
who use science in their work, perhaps leading to an understanding of the range 
of jobs requiring science and the importance of science for society. These children 
feel that science is ‘for them’ (Nag Chowdhuri et al. 2022). In contrast, those with 
lower levels of science capital may only see science as a subject studied at school 
or something that is done by stereotypical chemists in lab coats; science is not ‘for 
them’. Such beliefs about science may lead to issues with the uptake of science 
qualifications and roles (Institution of Engineering and Technology 2021) and 
under-representation and inequity in STEM education and the workforce (All-Party 
Parliamentary Group 2021).
Efforts to raise science capital and engagement in science could involve visiting 
scientists or linking more diverse scientists to topics in school (e.g. Primary Science 
Teaching Trust’s (2024) ‘A scientist like me’). This may broaden children’s ideas 
about who can be a scientist, but it may not address the issue of science being done 
by ‘others’. Involving children in citizen science activities could help children to 
see that anyone can do science, with digital datasets cumulatively building in real 
time. However, from a postdigital citizen science perspective, it is also important to 
acknowledge other embedded messages within citizen science programmes that seek 
to engage children. Just as adult citizen scientists could be described as unpaid data 
collectors in scientist-led studies (Jandrić et  al. 2023a), a similar argument could 
be made for children, as citizen scientists who are contributors only, being data-
providers who are ‘done to’.
The Primary Science Capital Teaching Approach (Nag Chowdhuri et al. 2021) 
recognises the importance of children’s starting points and interests, suggesting 
that inclusive practice involves ‘personalising and localising’, to help connect sci-
ence to the child’s unique context, together with supporting their voice and agency. 
When children, in collaboration with their teachers, make additions to an online 
citizen science database, counting birds or litter for example, this could further add 
to the science capital of those who already have a sense of the importance of sci-
ence. However, for those with low science capital, it may only be seen as another 
in-school activity, something that does not sufficiently link science to their own 
56 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
context. Involving children in citizen science is one of many activities designed to 
raise the profile of science, but a postdigital perspective is useful to help us consider 
whether and where it can extend to genuine collaboration, rather than just participa-
tion (Jandrić et al. 2023a). Agency may be achieved by providing more opportuni-
ties for children to be involved in the whole process of citizen science, rather than 
just at the point of data collection, for example, by seeking children’s perspectives 
on the questions they have and the problems they would like to solve.
Children With Profound and Multiple Learning Disabilities as Citizen Scientists 
(Ben Simmons and Zoë Clarke)
Children with Profound and Multiple Learning Disabilities (PMLD) experience 
global developmental delay stemming from neurological impairments. They are 
commonly described as functioning at the earliest, pre-verbal stages of development 
and are perceived to lack formal (symbolic, intentional) language skills, cause-effect 
awareness, object permanence, and a range of other capabilities associated with 
later infancy (Simmons and Watson 2014). Children with PMLD present some of 
the greatest challenges to emerging research paradigms such as ‘inclusive research’, 
‘co-produced research’, and ‘postdigital citizen science’, which presuppose a par -
ticular kind of ‘researcher’ or ‘scientist’, i.e. a rational, objective, agentic, and 
symbolically-competentindividual.
Some might call into question the extent to which children with PMLD can 
become postdigital citizen scientists given the severity of their impairments—
especially when they are described as lacking a ‘point of view’ (Ware 2004). 
However, it is our contention that such attitudes are informed by a medical model 
of disability (Barnes and Mercer 2010), whereby exclusion from science is blamed 
on children’s impairments. A more fruitful approach, reflecting a social model of 
disability (Shakespeare 2017), is to start from the phenomenological position that 
views children with PMLD as situated and embodied beings-in-the-world and as 
‘always-already’ postdigital citizen scientists (Merleau-Ponty 2002).
Children with PMLD live in a postdigital age, participate in, and explore social 
and physical worlds, and are attuned to sensory experiences. As such, they are nat-
ural scientists and have much to teach us about the ‘being’ of a scientist. Rather 
than asking how we can train children with PMLD to become citizen scientists, we 
should instead be asking what children with PMLD—as experts in their own lives—
can teach us about the meaning of citizen science and humanities.
For example, instead of privileging an objective epistemology which sees knowl-
edge as existing in the world waiting to be discovered (Crotty 1998), detached 
from the knower, children with PMLD teach us that knowledge can be ambigu-
ous, emergent, and temporary. The child with PMLD communicates not through 
formal language, but through embodied responses to the world. Their individual-
ised behaviours can require people working with children with PMLD carefully to 
monitor and revise their interpretations of all children’s behaviours because these 
behaviours need to be interpreted in contexts which change over time. This eschews 
57
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
the Cartesian desire for certainty underpinning objectivity and supports a view of 
knowledge as relative and local.
Children with PMLD teach us that human beings are inherently a relational group 
who depend on others. They do not stand outside of social and cultural worlds, but 
are very much part of their fabric (Loidolt 2018). Those who spend time with chil-
dren with PMLD discover not an objective or even intersubjective science, but an 
intercorporeal citizen science, whereby we engage with one another and the world 
through our bodies, with particular attunement to sensation and affect (Varela et al. 
2016; Szanto and Moran 2016). If postdigital citizen science is for everyone, then 
we must approach it in a way that includes the lived experiences of children with 
PMLD. Our claim here is that such inclusion will lead us to science that is affective, 
relationally embodied, with local and emergent knowledge claims.
Citizen science is unlikely to be inclusive for children with PMLD if it explores 
research questions and uses methodologies designed without input from children 
and families. Inclusivity requires researchers to work closely with children with 
PMLD and their social networks to develop tailor-made projects that value chil-
dren’s uniqueness while recognising their dependency on others. Therefore, the 
focus and practice of such research must be co-designed to allow it to be meaningful 
and accessible to children and those who support them.
PhenoloGIT: A Transnational Educational Citizen Science Project (Linda la Velle)
Phenology is the study of periodic plant and animal life cycle events, and how these 
are influenced by seasonal and inter-annual variations in climate. Collection of phe-
nological information is a long-established citizen science activity across Europe, 
with national and international associations gathering individual data sets provided 
by thousands of people annually. However, until 2019, it was a science that for the 
most part used traditional, non-digital methods to record data.
Harnessing everyday digital tools, the PhenoloGIT2 project, which brought 
together six partners and was funded by the EU’s Erasmus + programme, 
designed, built, and tested a collaboratively created educational platform. Teach-
ers and pupils in schools across Europe used it to collect and share phenological 
information and access the extensive digital capabilities of geographical informa-
tion technologies (GIT) to gather, manage, and analyse data.
That the children were able to act as citizen scientists, whose data collection was 
as valid as that of participating adults, was genuinely inclusive in the postdigital 
sense (Tauginiene et al. 2020). It also enabled the use of cultural tools as material 
and symbolic, ‘person-plus’ mediators of learning (Baggott la Velle et al. 2004) as a  
key feature of the postdigital education landscape (Newman et al. 2012).
PhenoloGIT used state-of-the-art mobile technology and GIT to make availa-
ble to schools the educational potential of these technological developments, ena-
bling issues-based and enquiry-based teaching and learning for pupils aged 9–13 
2 See https:// erasm us- plus. ec. europa. eu/ proje cts/ search/ detai ls/ 2015-1- UK01- KA201- 013537. Accessed 
25 April 2024.
58 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
in a range of curricular disciplines (e.g. STEM, geography, languages, art). Many 
educators consider GIT to be one of the most promising means for implementing 
curriculum reform, with learners working collaboratively to construct their own 
analyses and artistic and scientific representations of real-world data sets. How -
ever, GIT is often seen as too complex for teachers to be able to access its wide-
ranging potential in lessons.
The PhenoloGIT project created an educational and technological solution that 
allowed teachers and pupils innovatively to use open-source GIT + mobile learn-
ing + phenological data recording as citizen scientists. This contributed to the 
large volume of high-quality geographical databases that many national and inter -
national organisations are building to facilitate a better understanding of their 
territories and environments. Most of these data are still unusable or unknown 
by most classroom teachers. PhenoloGIT enabled the use of these resources in 
schools, so that they could be made available for educational ends, including the 
preparation of future citizen scientists in a postdigital world. The intersection 
of young people with technology has a direct impact on their relationships with 
other people and the natural environment.
There were clear benefits for each of the partners from the project outcomes. 
The two universities involved, in England and Denmark, gained opportunities for 
research-informed teaching and technology-enhanced learning. Inherently post-
digital, the project empowered pre- and in-service teachers to engage and encour -
age their pupils to engage in citizen science activities, thus expanding the fron-
tiers of participatory research, knowledge production, and public engagement 
(Peters et al. 2020). The two publicly-funded EdTech innovation centres involved, 
in Spain and Lithuania, were able to provide multilingual open-access resources 
and in-service training.
This has implications for the postdigital political economy. Provision of tools 
to generate and share knowledge can be argued to be an example of what Peters 
et al. (2020) term ‘knowledge socialism’. The Spanish school involved generated 
and made available citizen science resources for use in collecting phenological 
data using the PhenoloGIT app. This kind of collaboration enacts the intersec-
tion between phenology (and ecology more widely) and the human/digital nexus, 
reflecting their indivisibility in the postdigital world (Jandrić et al. 2023a).
Shaking the Kaleidoscope
Flipping the Kaleidoscope Metaphor on its Head (Benjamin Green)
Mesjasz (2015) has cautioned against the ‘abuse’ of complexity science and its 
related terminology by those who reduce complexity within their work to little more 
than metaphor or analogy. Notwithstanding, the call for contributions which pre-
ceded this article enlisted the metaphor of the kaleidoscope ‘to describe a need for 
different theories, or an intersection of multiple theories, to unpack and understand 
the complexity of postdigital citizen science’.
59
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
However, according to Sir David Brewster (the inventor of the kaleidoscope) in his 
A treatise on the Kaleidoscope (1819: 17), ‘[t]he fundamental principle, therefore, 
of the Kaleidoscope is, that it produces symmetrical and beautiful pictures, by con-
verting simple into compound or beautiful forms, and arranging them, by successive 
reflections, into one perfect whole’. Rather than clarifying complex forms through 
component images, the kaleidoscope casts a simple image into a beautifully com-
plex and multifractal unified form. Thus, utilising this metaphor as an analytical tool 
to develop a multifaceted understanding of ‘the supercomplex nature’ of social phe-
nomena (Kuhn et al. 2023: 895) highlights a flawed understanding of the intended 
purpose or function of a kaleidoscope. As argued by Knox (in Kuhn et  al. 2023), 
given that the task of the kaleidoscope is to convert the simple into the compound, 
a kaleidoscopic metaphor for scientific inquiry might suffer from an assumption of 
‘supercomplexity’ as ‘intrinsic’ to the object of inquiry (in this case, citizen science). 
In other words, the issue here is that this metaphor might lead to a focus on complex-
ity of form rather than ‘the object of study itself’ (Knox in Kuhn et al. 2023: 924).
In Fractal Leadership, Karatzogianni and Matthews (2023: 4–5) incorporate an 
understanding of kaleidoscopic whirl, as a ‘frothy’3 property of a whole that pre-
vents systemic understanding through the identification of discrete component prop-
erties. It foregrounds fractal whirl as critical to understanding the ‘nebulous and 
often competing discourses’, decentralised leadership structures, and individual con-
versations which make up the ‘amorphous and shifty nature’ of contemporary youth 
protest movements (Karatzogianni and Matthews 2023: 5). This difficulty reflects 
a core facet of complexity theory, wherein the nonlinear nature of complex social 
systems is understood through emergence—an unplanned feature of a system that 
cannot be reduced to a linear aggregation of the underlying components (Baggio and 
Parravicini 2019; Törnberg 2011; Walloth 2018; Green 2023).
There are those who argue that citizen science resists a simplified definition 
(Hakley et  al. 2021). However, it is undeniably reducible in form—laypersons 
engaging in individual or collective scientific inquiry. Nevertheless, a related paper 
aims to develop a ‘deep reimagination and reconfiguration of citizen science in and 
for the postdigital condition’ (Jandrić et al. 2023a). Attaching a postdigital qualifier 
to the concept of citizen science also entails a concern for understanding scholarly 
research through ‘multi-, inter-, and transdisciplinary approaches’ (Jandrić, et  al. 
2023a). In consonance with this postdigital impetus, Wells outlines that transdisci-
plinary thinking ‘draws on multiple disciplines and transcends disciplines in pursuit 
of real world, complex, multidimensional inquiries’ (2012: 123).
However, garnering a transdisciplinary understanding of citizen science through 
an inverted process of kaleidoscopic inquiry can only lead to a ‘frothy’ or ‘fractal’ 
postdigital conceptualization that lacks a unified form. Specifically, a more appro-
priate approach would be to begin from a simplified and taken-for-granted under -
standing of citizen science, progressively adding subsequent layers of refraction 
until ‘the object seen by direct vision is in a state of perfect junction with the images 
3 See https:// www. worke rslib erty. org/ story/ 2017- 07- 26/ has- polit ics- become- fract  al. Accessed 25 April 2024.
60 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
of it formed by reflection’ (Brewster 1819: 35). This is to say that the task of build-
ing a complex, transdisciplinary vision of citizen science necessitates collective 
inquiry into a simplified rather than complex form.
As it stands, there does not currently exist a methodology of transdisciplinar -
ity that is capable of uniting the disciplines through epistemological, structural, 
and conceptual shifts (Green 2022). Nevertheless, if utilised appropriately, i.e. if 
flipped on its head, the metaphor of the kaleidoscope may allow for the recon-
struction of ostensibly simple, taken-for-granted concepts such as citizen science 
into more appropriately multifaceted, critical, emancipatory, and inclusive trans-
disciplinary wholes.
Towards this aim, the grounded theory, as a methodological inquiry into a com-
plex social phenomenon that foregrounds an iterative approach to data collection, 
coding, analysis, and eventual theory development (Charmaz 2014; Corbin and 
Strauss 2015), seems the most prescient approach for postdigital scholars seeking 
to collectively develop a complex, transdisciplinary conceptualization of citizen sci-
ence. Thus, a flipped kaleidoscopic approach to grounded theoretical inquiry may 
allow postdigital scholars and citizen scientists to work collectively towards an itera-
tive reimagining of a beautifully complex, transdisciplinary vision of citizen science 
(as well as other concepts such as wisdom, the good life, being), developed and uti-
lised towards the common good.
Conclusion: A Postdigital Citizen Research Collideascope  
(Michael Jopling)
The preceding critical exploration of the potential of the flipped kaleidoscope for 
postdigital citizen and humanities, earthed methodologically by grounded theory, 
captures something of its potential for the future interdisciplinary practice of citizen 
science and humanities. The two key elements would seem to offer mutual benefits. 
The citizen research element (used here as an alternative to the slightly cumbersome 
formulation of ‘citizen science and humanities’) provides a pragmatic, empirical 
foundation for postdigital explorations of the social-technical challenges identified 
previously. The conceptual plurality of the postdigital multiplies the ways in which 
citizen research and its data can be interpreted and used.
However, this conclusion does not seek to make sense of the multiple lenses and 
mirrors that have been revealed and applied to citizen research. Instead, it is here to 
suggest that the kaleidoscope is used in a manner closer to Barthes’ (2007) notion of 
‘the neutral’, where meanings, rather than interpretations, are developed and trans-
formed. As Canetti (1989: 40) asserted: ‘Interpret nothing, explain nothing. Give 
those who want to rack their brains something to do’. This also has the benefit of 
approaching the openness and call for wider participation of citizen research. We 
should remember perhaps that a kaleidoscope is both a tool for learning and an 
instrument of play.
61
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
In the spirit of play, the kaleidoscope might also be regarded as a ‘collideascope’,4 
in which the perspectives provided come together both to support and undermine 
each other, offering new ways of approaching (or even interpreting) citizen research. 
I would like to end by suggesting three ways in which this notion of collision can 
be useful. The first returns us to the colliding, inclusive hybridity of the postdigital, 
which this article has attempted to embody, and which might expand the possibili-
ties of citizen research in terms of methodologies, conceptual foundations, and par -
ticipatory potential.
The second emphasises the ‘always already’ of postdigital citizen research, which 
draws on the collision between the old and the new, exemplified also in the contri-
butions to this article which pinpoint how Indigenous and local knowledge precede 
and might enhance citizen research. Combined with postdigital perspectives’ entan-
glement of the digital and the predigital, the final collision is of simultaneity. The 
perspectives, lenses, and mirrors presented in this article exist at the same time and 
alongside each other, intersecting to offer a critique of citizen research and a means 
of widening, democratising, and problematising it through the meaningful engage-
ment of non-specialists.
Open Review 1: Rethinking Relationships (Cheryl Brown)
This collective paper takes the reader through criss-crossing pathways which explore 
and grapple with postdigital citizen science and humanities. Beginning with the 
intention to provide multiple views and ending with an acknowledgement that these 
perspectives can collide in complementary and divergent ways, the paper opens up 
conversations on this topic.
In grappling with who is a citizen, Juha Suoranta critiques the notion of citizen-
ship status and how it is conceptualised in relation to nationhood. Others not viewed 
as citizens in a political and legal sense are children and young people (C&YP). 
Viewed as lacking rationality and competence their insights and experiences are 
often disregarded. The term citizen is also human-centred, and as Catherine Price 
notes, there is a need to include the more-than-human world too. This dilemma has 
been recognised in the Aotearoa New Zealand where a river’s relationship to local 
iwi (kin-group) and long-term protection and restoration was recognised by making 
it a person in the eyes of the law (New Zealand Parliament 2017).
These issues raise questions about how, in the postdigital age, values of openness 
and inclusivity are operationalised. Participation is also typically conceptualised 
from the individual standpoint. Many of the contributions in this paper foreground 
community participation and engagement with Muhtaseb noting this depends 
on how a society prioritises individualistic over collectivist goals. Co-design and 
4 The image of the collideascope is borrowed from a song by The Dukes of Stratosphear (1987). Their 
combination of tribute, pastiche, and devotion in recreating the music of the late 1960s 20 years later (in 
a world that did not seem even slightly interested) should remind us that the postdigital has precedents 
which only emphasise its historical evasiveness.
62 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
collaboration as approaches were foregrounded by contributors in relation to chil-
dren and teachers, non-experts and experts, between experts, and between human 
and more-than-human.
These discussions imply that a reframing of the concept of citizens might further 
open up opportunities for wider inclusion. The paper does offer some suggestions 
for this, for example, changing the terminology to people’s science or community 
science. However, as Matthews notes, this will require introspection of academia 
and our role as experts. A principle which could be helpful here is the te ao Māori 
concept of ako.5 This describes a teaching and learning relationship, where the edu-
cator is also learning from the student. Citizen science could benefit from rethinking 
the relationships in a way where reciprocity is a core value and intention.
I found the problematisation of participation in the recent book on postdigital 
participation in education (Weich and Macgilchrist 2023), a useful thinking tool in 
these deliberations. Participation has, in the recent past, been unquestioned and seen 
as a ‘good’. Enabling participation is seen as empowering inclusion. Research on 
marginalised and indigenous communities’ lack of participation in citizen science 
barriers is complex (Benyei et al. 2023), and some choose not to engage due to dif-
ficult political contexts. As Fei Yan notes, in authoritarian societies, participation 
may put citizens at risk.
Other issues include lack of trust and lack of motivation where communities’ 
purposes are in contradiction to researchers’ purposes (Benyei et al. 2023). It is also 
critical to consider the nuances between taking part in an activity (in this case people 
contributing their time and knowledge to science and humanities) and having a say 
in the processes of what you are taking part in and how. This raises questions like 
whose knowledge systems or theories of knowledge are we privileging? Georgina 
Tuari Stewart and Shane Orchard note that Indigenous and local knowledge precedes 
mainstream Western knowledge systems and processes. As Stewart (2021a, b) notes 
elsewhere in a debate about Mātauranga Māori (Māori knowledge), the relationship 
between science and Indigenous knowledge is not a binary.
These are just a few of the aspects that stood out for me in this paper although 
there are many more that deserve interrogation. Whether viewed through the lens 
of a kaleidoscope or collideascope, the contributors’ ideas provide opportunities for 
reimaging and reimagining postdigital citizen science and humanities through criti-
cal cross-disciplinary interrogation.
Open Review 2: A Problem of Prestige (Richard Watermeyer)
The metaphor of the kaleidoscope offers a representation of citizen science as a 
commitment to disruptive visualisation that vandalises the certainties of knowledge 
orthodoxies and disambiguates the messiness of knowledge production. It articu-
lates the intervention of ‘inexpert’ publics, mobilised by digital ‘technologies of 
5 See https:// tereo maori. tki. org. nz/ Curri culum- guide lines/ Teach ing- and- learn ing- te- reo- Maori/ Aspec ts- 
of- plann ing/ The- conce pt- of- ako. Accessed 25 April 2024.
63
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
elicitation’ (Lezaun and Soneryd 2007) that prosecute their participation as inter -
locuters of scientific discourse, as a means of reseeing the world. In the various 
preceding accounts, we find a valorisation of ‘lived experience’ and localised and 
Indigenous wisdom as legitimate parts of a visual soup that feeds the collective 
imagination and aspiration for the repair of the social-scientific settlement.
The postdigital organisation of citizen science, which in cognisance of the 
boundary transgressions necessary for the resolution of hyper-complex problems 
incorporates the humanities into its toolkit, is advocated not only for its contribu-
tion to making science but also for its contribution to unmaking social conventions. 
Throughout, the kaleidoscopic capacity of postdigital citizen science is celebrated 
for its democratising potential and its potential for elevating and licensing the voice 
of the marginalised and discounted, the oppressed, and subaltern. It is commended 
as a crucible from which critical pedagogues and critical social scientists might pro-
liferate and collectivise in reconstituting knowledge as an egalitarian endeavour that 
collapses hierarchies and the exclusions they impose.
Postdigital citizen science is celebrated for its potential in exposing and elevating 
otherwise neglected and marginal concerns while also reinvesting scholarship with 
a public consciousness and an activist agenda. It is also championed for its early 
cultivation of scientific citizens and its value in enriching the curriculum and seed-
ing a lifelong enthusiasm for science. Less conspicuous throughout these accounts, 
however—the contribution from Dodonov aside—is the value of citizen science in 
the amelioration of policy and through dialogical interchange, perhaps because this 
nexus remains stubbornly analogue and less amenable to digital mediation.
Yet for all the cogency of the claims made herein and the myriad virtues and 
justifications attributed to the kaleidoscopic intervention of citizen science, its 
transformative capacity may ultimately yield to the tyranny of a prestige economy 
which dominates science and renders it the jurisdiction of tribal elites who remain 
highly protectionist of their sovereign territory. In fact, despite the obvious moral 
motivation and productive advantages of public collaboration, scientists may be rou-
tinely disincentivized from joining forces. Their reticence has multiple explanations 
among which feature an elevated sense of precarity in an era where public agnosti-
cism of experts and the politicisation of science (particularly post-pandemic and on 
the wave of populist politics, disinformation, and post-truth) are compounded by a 
fetishisation of accountability, metrics, and demands for impact.
Where scientists’ value is calculated by the proficiency of their acquiring posi-
tional goods—measurable impact being one such—and their careers thus ensured, 
any dilution of their claims of capture might only be avoided. Citizen scientists 
might then find themselves exploited where their relationship with scientists is 
rationalised (by scientists) on the basis of their facilitating productive gains. Who 
then serves whom and in whose best interest? This question extends, as Yan sug-
gests, to the potential of citizen science in authoritarian states (patent and tacit) and 
the control of knowledge flows.
Yet the ethical complexity of postdigital citizen science, which manifests not 
only in the power imbalance of novice and expert—and how the former may find 
themselves misappropriated—but also in the terms of inclusive and authentic rep-
resentation as considerations of care, is hesitantly treated. The credibility of an 
64 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
undergirding moral imperative to citizen science is thereby impaired. Methodologi-
cally, Simmons and Clarke also point out that there is no one-size-fits-all method for 
knowledge co-production/engagement. Even the most holistic problematisation will 
require investment and competency in the application of not one but many kaleido-
scopes and technologies of elicitation to ensure equality of perspective.
The disruptive value of digital citizen science as a route to epistemic justice and 
other knowledge benefits requires ethical reflexivity and political pragmatism in 
tempering the seductions of ideological triumphalism and technological determin-
ism. It is such a dialectical approach that will allow knowledge actors to widen their 
aperture without losing focus.
Open Review 3: The Genre is the Message (Petar Jandrić)
Traditions are hard to break. Humans are beings of habit and ritual, and as the folk 
wisdom says, most people become more conservative as they grow older. Global 
academia is built on ritual and ruled by old people, up to recently, almost exclu-
sively white men. Small research advances that dutifully cite the elders get nods of 
approval; anything that disrupts their peace is rejected or at least frowned upon. I 
do not want to be mean towards the elders, especially because I am only a few years 
shy from becoming one of them. Conservative approaches make a lot of sense, as 
traditions are also dangerous to break. For instance, as noted by Green, traditional 
scholarly disciplines are here for a good reason, and we still haven’t reached useful 
and sustainable transdisciplinarity.
Somewhat paradoxically, however, tradition-breaking is the key to knowledge 
development. Very little knowledge has been developed by scratching each other’s 
backs. Knowledge is created from disagreement, and tactful management of that 
disagreement, in global (and as of recently postdigital) scholarly dialogues (Jandrić 
et al. 2019). Contrary to our proverbially dry appearance, we researchers reside at 
the fringes of convention; we are travellers building the road towards the unknown.
Building on several recent innovations in academic writing (notably, the col-
lective social sciences and/or humanities article (Jandrić et  al. 2023b) and the 
theoretical kaleidoscope (Kuhn et al. 2023)), this article tinkers with the tradition 
of scholarly publication. ‘Postdigital Citizen Science and Humanities: A Theo-
retical Kaleidoscope’ creates its own genre, so much so that it simply does not fit 
any article category offered by the publisher and scholarly databases. As an edi-
tor, I take pride in publishing such an article. I am fully aware that this article will 
be frowned upon at least by some parts of the academic community. Understand-
ing that knowledge is borne from disagreement, however, I relish the possibility 
of learning from those critiques.
My concerns are predominantly epistemic. Will our disruption of traditional 
academic writing bring about true knowledge development, or will it remain a 
theoretical and practical dead end? Will this, and many other similar articles, 
stand the only test that matters—the test of the history of ideas? Does this article 
produce new and really useful knowledge about postdigital citizen science (see 
65
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Jandrić 2023), or is it merely an exercise for those privileged enough to indulge in 
writing experimentation?
Without the possession of a crystal ball, I’ll try and stick to what we’ve got 
here and now. ‘Postdigital Citizen Science and Humanities: A Theoretical 
Kaleidoscope’ presents thoughts and ideas written by more than 20 academics, 
each of whom knows their field quite well. The reference section is a few lines 
short of 200 sources, which makes it a useful resource for anyone who wants to 
learn about postdigital citizen science. For me, this contribution alone justifies 
the article’s publication.
I find the theoretical kaleidoscope approach useful in one more way. Reading 
the contributions, I feel unexplainable but very tangible synergy, and that syn-
ergy helps me form my own ideas. Of course, synergy always contains a bit of 
magic, probably best expressed in the math teacher’s nightmare Eq. 1 + 1 > 2. In a 
postdigital perspective, however, magic is not a bad word. As I wrote a few years 
back, ‘humans are not only beings of logic and emotion—we are also beings of 
myth and faith’ (McLaren and Jandrić 2020: 255). For me, and this is admittedly 
a very personal statement, the magic of human interaction is much more real than 
the magic of the free market or Jesus Christ. If these examples of magic have 
their own dedicated publications, then why should this version not as well?
Finally, and very practically, this article is a part of a larger research effort. It 
is conceived as a part of a forthcoming Special Issue, ‘Postdigital Citizen Sci-
ence and Humanities: Survive, Resist, Flourish’, edited by Michael Jopling and 
Sarah Hayes. Alongside standard academic articles, it will be published shoulder 
to shoulder with at least one or two similarly designed collective articles written 
by citizen scientists. As a part of a larger whole, this article may contribute to an 
even larger dialogue and perhaps an even larger synergy.
There is no way that I can predict what this article may bring to our stud-
ies of postdigital citizen science and humanities and/or postdigital research in 
more general. I am very cautious in my interpretation, because I understand that 
expecting too much would be vain and counterproductive. However, I also under -
stand that expecting too little would be paralysing. To avoid the conundrum of 
expectation, I will end this review with four wishes. I would like this article to 
help those who want to learn more about postdigital citizen science. I hope at 
least someone else feels the synergy and its effects. I would like this article to 
initiate good scholarly discussion. Finally, in the spirit of postdigital citizen sci-
ence, I hope this discussion expands towards those who are traditionally excluded 
from the ivory tower of the academia. If only one of these wishes is even partially 
realised, the publication of this article is more than justified.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
66 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
References
Airini, A. M., & Mila-Schaaf, K. (2010). Teu le va-relationships across research and policy in Pasi-
fika education: a collective approach to knowledge generation & policy development for action 
towards Pasifika education success. Auckland, New Zealand: Ministry of Education.
All-Party Parliamentary Group. (2021). Inquiry into Equity in the STEM Workforce. London: British 
Science Association. https:// www. briti shsci encea ssoci ation. org/ appg. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Antweiler, C. (2019). Local knowledge theory and methods: An urban model from Indonesia. In P. 
Sillitoe (Ed.), Investigating local knowledge. New directions, new approaches (pp. 1–34). Lon-
don: Routledge.
Archer, L., Moote, J., Macleod, E., Francis, B. & DeWitt, J. (2020). ASPIRES 2: Young people’s sci-
ence and career aspirations, age 10–19. London: UCL Institute of Education.
Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of Plan-
ners, 35(4), 216-224. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01944 36690 89772 25.
Azarmandi, M., & Tolbert, S. (2024). A manifesto for transdisciplinary (transgressive) feminist praxis 
in the academy. In J. Ulmer, C. Hughes, M. Salazar Perez, & C. Taylor (Eds.), The Routledge 
International Handbook of Transdisciplinary Feminist Research and Methodological Praxis. 
London: Routledge.
Baggio, G., & Parravicini, A. (2019). Introduction to Pragmatism and Theories of Emergence. Euro-
pean Journal of Pragmatism and American Philosophy, XI(2), 1–10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4000/  
ejpap. 1611.
Baggott la Velle, L., McFarlane, A., John, P. D., & Brawn, R. (2004). According to the promises: the sub-
culture of school science, teachers’ pedagogic identity and the challenge of ICT.  Education, Com-
munication & Information, 4(1), 109-129. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14636 31042 00021 0962.
Bandola-Gill, J. (2023). Knowledge Brokering Repertoires: Academic Practices at Science-Policy Interfaces 
as an Epistemological Bricolage. Minerva, 61(1), 71–92. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11024- 022- 09478-5.
Barnes, C., & Mercer, G. (2010). Exploring disability.  2nd Ed. Cambridge: Polity.
Barthes R. (2007). The Neutral: Lecture Course at the College de France (1977–1978). Columbia: New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Benjamin, R. (Ed.). (2019). Captivating technology: Race, carceral technoscience, and liberatory imagi-
nation in everyday life. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Benyei, P., Skarlatidou, A., Argyriou, D., Hall, R., Theilade, I., Turreira-García, N., Latreche, D., Albert, 
A., Berger, D., Cartró-Sabaté, M., Chang, J., Chiaravalloti, R., Cortesi, A., Danielsen, F., Haklay, 
M., Jacobi, E., Nigussie, A., Reyes-García, V., Rodrigues, E., Sauini, T., Shadrin, V., Siquiera, 
A., Supriadi, M., Tillah, M., Tofighi-Niaki, A., Vronski, N., & Woods, T. (2023). Challenges, 
Strategies, and Impacts of Doing Citizen Science with Marginalised and Indigenous Communities: 
Reflections from Project Coordinators. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 8(1), 21. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 5334/ cstp. 514.
Bhatt, I. (2023a). Postdigital Possibilities in Applied Linguistics. Postdigital Science and Education. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 023- 00427-3
Bhatt, I. (2023b). ‘Postdigital Literacies’. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), The Encyclopaedia of Postdigital Science 
and Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 15-1.
Bozkurt, A., & Sharma, R. C. (2023). Generative AI and prompt engineering: The art of whispering to let 
the genie out of the algorithmic world.  Asian Journal of Distance Education,  18(2), i-vii. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 5281/ zenodo. 81749 41.
Brewster, D. (1819). A Treatise on the Kaleidoscope. Edinburgh: J. Ruthven and Sons.
Brown, G. (2012). Public Participation GIS for regional and environmental planning: reflections on a 
decade of empirical research. URISA Journal, 24(2), 7-18.
Bulag, U. E. (2023). The wheel of history and minorities’ ‘self-sacrifice’ for the Chinese nation. Com-
parative Education, 60(1), 96-117. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 03050 068. 2023. 22717 81.
Campbell, O., & Orchard, S. (2023). Development and application of local coastal knowledge: Insights 
from New Zealand surfers. Coasts, 3(3), 175-189. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ coast s3030 011.
Canetti, E. (1989). The Secret Heart of the Clock: Notes, Aphorisms, Fragments, 1973-1985. New York: 
Farrar Strauss Giroux.
Cardoso-Andrade, M., Cruz-Jesus, F., Troncoso, J. S., Queiroga, H., & Gonçalves, J. M. (2022). 
Understanding technological, cultural, and environmental motivators explaining the adoption 
67
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
of citizen science apps for coastal environment monitoring.  Global Environmental Change,  77. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. gloen  vcha. 2022. 102606.
Chan, L., Hall, B., Piron, F., Tandon, R. & Williams, L. (2020). Open Science Beyond Open Access: For 
and with communities. A step towards the decolonization of knowledge. Ottawa, CA: The Cana-
dian Commission for UNESCO’s IdeaLab. https:// zenodo. org/ recor  ds/ 39467 73#. X6Q7u VNKiCR. 
Accessed 25 April 2024.
Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing Grounded Theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. 
London: SAGE.
Churchill, R., & Singh, L. (2022). The Evolution of Topic Modelling. ACM Computing Surveys 
54(10s), 1-35. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 35079 00.
Coeckelbergh, M., & Sætra, H. S. (2023). Climate change and the political pathways of AI: The tech-
nocracy-democracy dilemma in light of artificial intelligence and human agency. Technology in 
Society, 75. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. techs oc. 2023. 102406.
Consumer Data Research Centre (2024). About the CDRC. https:// www. cdrc. ac. uk/ about/.
Corbin, J. M., & Strauss, A. L. (2015). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory. London: SAGE.
Cousin-Frankel, J. (2022). Thousands report unusual menstruation patterns after COVID19 vaccina-
tion. Science. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1126/ scien ce. add96 78.
Cram, F., Phillips, H., Sauni, P., & Tuagalu, C. (Eds.), (2014). Māori and Pasifika Higher Education 
Horizons. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: meaning and perspectives in the research pro-
cess. London: Sage.
Curtis, W. M. (2020). Democracy versus Neoliberalism: The Second Dewey-Lippmann Debate. Amer -
ican Political Thought, 9(2), 285-316. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1086/ 708391.
da Costa, B., & Philip, K. (Eds.). (2008). Tactical biopolitics: art, activism, and technoscience. Cam-
bridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Dahl, R. A., & Shapiro, I. (2015). On Democracy. 2nd Ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Dangelico, R. M., Fraccascia, L., & Nastasi, A. (2020). National culture’s influence on environ-
mental performance of countries: A study of direct and indirect effects.  Sustainable develop-
ment, 28(6), 1773-1786. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ sd. 2123.
Davidson, H., & Yu, V. (2022). Clashes in Shanghai as protests over zero-Covid policy grip China. 
Guardian, 28 November. https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2022/ nov/ 28/ clash es- in- shang hai-  
as- prote sts- over- zero- covid- policy- grip- china. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Davies, S. R. (2014). Knowing and loving: Public engagement beyond discourse. Science and Tech-
nology Studies, 27(3), 90–110. https:// doi. org/ 10. 23987/ sts. 55316.
Davies, S. R. (2019). Science Communication as Emotion Work: Negotiating Curiosity and Wonder at 
a Science Festival. Science as Culture, 28(4), 538-561. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 09505 431. 2019.  
15970 35.
de La Bellacasa, M. P. (2011). Matters of care in technoscience: Assembling neglected things. Social 
Studies of Science, 41(1), 85–106. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12710 380301.
de la Bellacasa, M.P. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. 
Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 691–716. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12715 599851.
de La Bellacasa, M.P. (2017). Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds. Min-
neapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Deepwell, K. (2020). Postdigital education, feminism, women. Postdigital Science and Education, 
2(2), 248-253. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 019- 00096-1.
Denzin, N. (2001). The reflexive interview and a performative social science. Qualitative Research, 
1(1), 23-46. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14687 94101 00100 102.
Denzin, N. (2019). Qualitative Manifesto. A call to arms. New York: Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
4324/ 97804 29449 987.
Dewey, J., & Rogers, M. L. (1927/2016). The public and its problems: An essay in political inquiry. 
Athens, OH: Swallow Press.
D’Ignazio, C., & Klein, L. F. (2023). Data feminism. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Duffy, A. (2015). Journalism and Academic Writing: Sibling Rivalry or Kissing Cousins? Asia Pacific 
Media Educator, 25(1), 5-12. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13263 65X15 575562.
Dukes of Stratosphear. (1987). Collideascope. In Psonic Psunspot [Musical Record]. London: Virgin.
68 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Dunkley, R. (2023). Ecological kin-making in the multispecies muddle: An analytical framework for 
understanding embodied environmental citizen science experiences. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers, 48(4), 781–796. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ tran. 12613.
Edwards, R., & Brannelly, T. (2017). Approaches to democratizing qualitative research methods. Qualita-
tive Research, 17(3), 271–277. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14687 94117 706869.
Eitzel, M. V., Cappadonna, J. L., Santos-Lang, C., Duerr, R. E., Virapongse, A., West, S. E., Kyba, C. 
C. M., Bowser, A., Cooper, C. B., Sforzi, A., Metcalfe, A. N., Harris, E. S., Thiel, M., Haklay, M., 
Ponciano, L., Roche, J., Ceccaroni, L., Shilling, F. M., Dörler, D., Heigl, F., Kiessling, T., Davis, B. 
Y., & Jiang, Q. (2017). Citizen Science Terminology Matters: Exploring Key Terms. Citizen Sci-
ence: Theory and Practice, 2(1), 1. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5334/ cstp. 96.
Eleta, I., Clavell, G. G., Righi, V., & Balesrini, M. (2019). The Promise of Participation and Decision-
Making Power. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 4(1), 8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5334/ cstp. 171.
Encyclopaedia Britannica. (2024). Technology. Encyclopaedia Britannica. https:// www. brita nnica. com/ 
techn ology/ techn ology . Accessed 25 April 2024.
European Citizen Science Association. (2021). ECSA 10 Principles of Citizen Science. https:// eu- citiz en. 
scien ce/ resou rce/ 88. Accessed 25 April 2024.
European Union (2023). Open data and AI: A symbiotic relationship for progress. https:// data. europa. eu/ en/  
publi catio ns/ datas  tories/ open- data- and- ai- symbi otic- relat ionsh ip- progr  ess. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Fanon, F. (2004). The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove Press.
Farkas, J., & Schou, J. (2019). Post-truth, fake news and democracy: Mapping the politics of falsehood. 
New York: Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97810 03434 870.
Franssen, M. (2009). Analytic philosophy of technology. In J. K. Berg Olsen, S. A. Pedersen, & V. 
F. Hendricks (Eds.), A Companion to the Philosophy of Technology (pp. 184–188). London: 
Blackwell.
Freire, P. (2005). Pedagogy of the Oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Galpin, C., & Vernon, P. (2024). Post-truth politics as discursive violence: Online abuse, the pub-
lic sphere and the figure of ‘the expert’.  The British Journal of Politics and International Rela-
tions, 26(2), 423-443. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13691 48123 12026 41.
Gharesifard, M., Wehn, U., & van der Zaag, P. (2017). Towards benchmarking citizen observatories: Fea-
tures and functioning of online amateur weather networks. Journal of Environmental Management, 
193, 381–393. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jenvm an. 2017. 02. 003.
Gramsci, A. (1971). The Intellectuals. In Q. Hoare & G. N. Smith (Eds.), Selections from the Prison 
Notebooks (pp. 3-23). New York: International Publishers.
Green, B. (2022). Why the world doesn’t need a metaphysics of transdisciplinarity. Postdigital Science 
and Education, 4(3), 683–691. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 022- 00296-2.
Green, B. (2023).  How China’s System of Higher Education Works: Pragmatic Instrumentalism, Central-
ized-Decentralization, and Rational Chaos. Abingdon and New York: Routledge.  https:// doi. org/ 
10. 4324/ 97810 03282 372.
Green, S. E., Rees, J. P., Stephens, P. A., Hill, R. A., & Giordano, A. J. (2020). Innovations in cam-
era trapping technology and approaches: The integration of citizen science and artificial intelli-
gence. Animals, 10(1), 132. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ani10 010132.
Hakim, J., Littler, J., Rottenberg, C., & Segal, L. (2020). The Care Manifesto. New York: Verso.
Haklay, M. (2013). Citizen science and volunteered geographic information (VGI): Overview and typol-
ogy of participation. In D. Sui, S. Elwood, & M. Goodchild (Eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic 
Knowledge (pp. 105–122). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 94- 007- 4587-2_7.
Hakley, M., Dörler, D., Heigl, F., Manzoni, M., Hecker, S., & Vohland, K. (2021). What Is Citizen Sci-
ence? The Challenges of Definition. In K. Vohland, A. Land-Zandstra, L. Ceccaroni, R. Lemmens, 
J. Perelló, M. Ponti, R. Samson, & K. Wagenknecht (Eds.), The Science of Citizen Science (pp. 
13–33). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 58278-4_2.
Haraway, D. (1988). Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Par -
tial Perspective. Feminist Studies, 14(3), 575. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2307/ 31780 66.
Haraway, D. (2016). Staying with the Trouble. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Haraway, D. J. (1985). Cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and social-feminist in the late 20th cen-
tury. Social Review, 80, 65-108.
Harjuniemi, T. (2022). Post-truth, fake news and the liberal ‘regime of truth’ – The double movement 
between Lippmann and Hayek. European Journal of Communication, 37(3), 269–283. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1177/ 02673 23121 10467 84.
69
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Hayes, S., Connor, S., Johnson, M., & Jopling, M. (Eds.). (2023).  Human Data Interaction, Disadvan-
tage and Skills in the Community: Enabling Cross-Sector Environments for Postdigital Inclu-
sion. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 31875-7.
Hayes, S., Jopling, M., Connor, S., Johnson, M., & Riordan, S. (2024). ‘Making you Aware of your Own 
Breathing’: Human Data Interaction, Disadvantage and Skills in the Community. Postdigital Sci-
ence and Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 023- 00446-0.
Hird, M. J. (2009). Feminist Engagements with Matter. Feminist Studies, 35(2), 329–346.
Hofstede, G. (2011). Dimensionalizing cultures: The Hofstede model in context.  Online Readings in Psy -
chology and Culture, 2(1). https:// doi. org/ 10. 9707/ 2307- 0919. 1014.
Human Data Interaction Network Plus. (2023). Data and Disadvantage: Taking a Regional Approach 
Towards Human Data Interaction (HDI) to Inform Local and National Digital Skills Policies. 
https:// hdi- netwo rk. org/ showc ase- proje cts/# disad vanta ge. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Huntington, H. P., Gearheard, S., Mahoney, A. R., & Salomon, A. K. (2011). Integrating traditional and 
scientific knowledge through collaborative natural science field research: Identifying elements for 
success. ARCTIC, 64(4), 437–445. https:// doi. org/ 10. 14430/ arcti c4143.
Hurley, Z. (2023). Postdigital Feminisms. In P. Jandrić, (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Postdigital Science and 
Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 42-1.
Institution of Engineering and Technology. (2021). Addressing the STEM skills shortage challenge. Lon-
don: Institution of Engineering and Technology. https:// www. theiet. org/ media/ 8186/ addre ssing- 
the- stem- skill-s- short  age- chall enge- report. pdf. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. (2024). Advancing Technology for Humanity. https:// 
www. ieee. org. Accessed 30 May 2024.
Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen science: A study of people, expertise, and sustainable development. London: 
Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97802 03202 395.
Jandrić, P. (2023). Really useful knowledge in a postdigital age. In M. A. Carrigan, H. Moscovitz, M. 
Martini, & S. L. Robertson (Eds.),  Building the Post-Pandemic University: Imagining, Contest-
ing and Materializing Higher Education Futures (pp. 38–59). Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, 
MA: Edward Elgar. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4337/ 97818 02204 575.
Jandrić, P., & Ford, D. (2022). Postdigital Ecopedagogies: Genealogies, Contradictions, and Pos-
sible Futures.  Postdigital Science and Education, 4(3), 672-710.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s42438- 020- 00207-3.
Jandrić, P., Hayes, D., Truelove, I., Levinson, P., Mayo, P., Ryberg, T., Monzó, L.D., Allen, Q., Stewart, 
P.A., Carr, P.R., Jackson, L., Bridges, S., Escaño, C., Grauslund, D., Mañero, J., Lukoko, H.O., 
Bryant, P., Fuentes Martinez, A., Gibbons, A., Sturm, S., Rose, J., Chuma, M.M., Biličić, E., Pfohl, 
S., Gustafsson, U., Arantes, J.A., Ford, D.R., Kihwele, J.E., Mozelius, P., Suoranta, J., Jurjević, L., 
Jurčević, M., Steketee, A., Irwin, J., White, E.J., Davidsen, J., Jaldemark, J., Abegglen, S., Burns, 
T., Sinfield, S., Kirylo, J.D., Batarelo Kokić, I., Stewart, G.T., Rikowski, G., Lisberg Christensen, 
L., Arndt, S., Pyyhtinen, O., Reitz, C., Lodahl, M., Humble, N., Buchanan, R., Forster, D.J., 
Kishore, P., Ozoliņš, J., Sharma, N., Urvashi, S., Nejad, H.G., Hood, N., Tesar, M., Wang, Y., 
Wright, J., Brown, J.B., Prinsloo, P., Kaur, K., Mukherjee, M., Novak, R., Shukla, R., Hollings, 
S., Konnerup, U., Mallya, M., Olorundare, A., Achieng-Evensen, C., Philip, A.P., Hazzan, M.K., 
Stockbridge, K., Komolafe, B.F., Bolanle, O.F., Hogan, M., Redder, B., Sattarzadeh, S.D., Jopling, 
M., SooHoo, S., Devine, N., & Hayes, S. (2020). Teaching in The Age of Covid-19.  Postdigital 
Science and Education, 2(3), 1069-1230. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 020- 00169-6.
Jandrić, P., Knox, J., Besley, T., Ryberg, T., Suoranta, J., & Hayes, S. (2018). Postdigital Science and 
Education.  Educational Philosophy and Theory,  50(10), 893-899.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00131 
857. 2018. 14540 00.
Jandrić, P., Luke, T. W., Sturm, S., McLaren, P., Jackson, L., MacKenzie, A., Tesar, M., Stewart, G. T., 
Roberts, P., Abegglen, S., Burns, T., Sinfield, S., Hayes, S., Jaldemark, J., Peters, M. A., Sinclair, C., 
& Gibbons, A. (2023a). Collective Writing: The Continuous Struggle for Meaning-Making.  Post-
digital Science and Education, 5(3), 851-893. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 022- 00320-5.
Jandrić, P., Ryberg, T., Knox, J., Lacković, N., Hayes, S., Suoranta, J., Smith, M., Steketee, A., Peters, M. 
A., McLaren, P., Ford, D. R., Asher, G., McGregor, C., Stewart, G., Williamson, B., & Gibbons, A. 
(2019). Postdigital Dialogue.  Postdigital Science and Education, 1(1), 163-189.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s42438- 018- 0011-x.
Jandrić, P., Tolbert, S., Hayes, S., & Jopling, M. (2023b). Postdigital Citizen Science: Mapping the Field. 
Postdigital Science and Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 023- 00443-3.
70 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Jeong, E. E., Jackson, C., Dowthwaite, L., Johnson, C., & Trouille, L. (2023). How Personal Value Orienta-
tions Influence Behaviors in Digital Citizen Science. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer 
Interaction, 8(CSCW1), 64. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 36373 41.
Johnson, B. S. (1969). The Unfortunates. London: Panther.
Karatzogianni, A., & Matthews, J. (2023). Fractal Leadership: Ideologisation from the 1960s to contem-
porary social movements. Leeds: Emerald.
Karrow, D., & Fazio, X. (2010). Educating-Within-Place: Care, Citizen Science, and EcoJustice. In D. J. 
Tippins, M. P. Mueller, M. Van Eijck, & J. D. Adams (Eds.), Cultural Studies and Environmental-
ism (pp. 193–214). Dordrecht: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 90- 481- 3929-3_ 16.
Kimura, A. (2016). Radiation Brain Moms and Citizen Scientists: The Gender Politics of Food Contami-
nation after Fukushima. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Kimura, A. H., & Kinchy, A. (2016). Citizen science: Probing the virtues and contexts of participatory 
research. Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, 2 , 331–361. https:// doi. org/ 10. 17351/ ests2 016. 99.
Kovács, K. Z., Hemment, D., Woods, M., van der Velden, N. K., Xaver, A., Giesen, R. H., Burton, V. J., 
Garrett, N. L., Zappa, L., Long, D., Dobos, E., & Skalsky, R. (2019). Citizen observatory based 
soil moisture monitoring – the GROW example. Hungarian Geographical Bulletin, 68(2), 119–
139. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15201/ hunge obull. 68.2.2.
Krauss, C. (1993). Women and toxic waste protests: Race, class and gender as resources of resistance. 
Qualitative sociology, 16, 247-262. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF009 90101.
Kuhn, C., Khoo, S.-M., Czerniewicz, L., Lilley, W., Bute, S., Crean, A., Abegglen, S., Burns, T., Sinfield, S., 
Jandrić, P., Knox, J., & MacKenzie, A. (2023). Understanding digital inequality: A theoretical kaleido-
scope. Postdigital Science and Education, 5(3), 894-932. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 023- 00395-8.
Kukutai, T., & Cormack, D. (2020). "Pushing the space”: Data sovereignty and self-determination. In 
Aotearoa NZ. In T. K. M. Walter, S. Russo Carroll, & D. Rodriguez-Lonebear (Eds.), Indigenous 
Data Sovereignty and Policy (pp. 21–35). London: Routledge.
Kullenberg, C. (2015). Citizen science as resistance: Crossing the boundary between reference and repre-
sentation. Journal of Resistance Studies, 1(1), 50-76.
Kuo, L., & Li, L. (2022). Saga of the chained mother of eight continues to roil China, inspiring rare 
social activism. Washington Post, 25 February. https:// www. washi ngton  post. com/ world/ 2022/ 02/ 
25/ xuzhou- chain ed- woman- china/. Accessed 7 May 2024.
Lezaun, J., & Soneryd, L. (2007). Consulting citizens: technologies of elicitation and the mobility of pub-
lics. Public Understanding of Science, 16(3), 279-297. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 09636 62507 079371.
Lippmann, W. (1922/2007). Public Opinion. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Livingstone, S., Carr, J., & Byrne, J. (2015). One in Three: Internet Governance and Children’s Rights. 
Waterloo, ON: Centre for International Governance Innovation and The Royal Institute of Inter -
national Affairs. https:// www. cigio nline. org/ publi catio ns/ one- three- inter  net- gover  nance- and- child 
rens- rights/. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Loidolt, S. (2018). Phenomenology of Plurality: Hannah Arendt on Political Intersubjectivity. Abingdon: 
Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97813 15208 565.
Long, J. W., Lake, F. K., Goode, R. W., & Burnette, B. M. (2020). How traditional tribal perspectives influ-
ence ecosystem restoration. Ecopsychology, 12(2), 71-82. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1089/ eco. 2019. 00.
Lundy, L. (2018). In Defence of Tokenism? Children’s Right to Participate in Collective Decision Mak -
ing. Childhood, 25(3), 340-354. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 09075 68218 777.
Lundy, L., & Templeton, M. (2018). Children as Human Rights Defenders: The Views and Perspectives 
of Children. Geneva: Childs Rights Connect. https:// www. child right sconn ect. org/ wp- conte nt/ uploa 
ds/ 2018/ 09/ DGD- REPORT_ WEB_ en_ def_ web. pdf. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Mackay, E., Wilkinson, M., Macleod, C., Beven, K., Percy, B., Macklin, M.,Quinn, P. F., Stutter, M., & 
Haygarth, P. (2015). Digital catchment observatories: A platform for engagement and knowledge 
exchange between catchment scientists, policy makers, and local communities. Water Resources 
Research, 51, 4815-4822. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ 2014W R0168 24.
Martínez, M. A. (2023). Activist Research as a Methodological Toolbox to Advance Public Sociology. 
Sociology. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00380 38523 12192 07.
Matapo, J. (2018). Traversing Pasifika education research in a post-truth era. Waikato Journal of Educa-
tion, 23(1), 139–146. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15663/ wje. v23i1. 627.
Matthews, A. (2023). The Idea and Becoming of a University Across Time and Space: Ivory Tower, 
Factory and Network. Postdigital Science and Education, 5(3), 665–693. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s42438- 022- 00341-0.
71
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Matthias, A. (2004). The Responsibility Gap: Ascribing Responsibility for the Actions of Learning Autom-
ata. Ethics and Information Technology, 6(3), 175–183. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10676- 004- 3422-1.
Mazumdar, S., Ceccaroni, L., Piera, J., Hölker, F., Berre, A., Arlinghaus, R., & Bowser, A. (2018). Citi-
zen science technologies and new opportunities for participation. In S. Hecker, M. Haklay, A. 
Bowser, Z. Makuch, J. Vogel, & A. Bonn (Eds.), Citizen Science: Innovation in Open Science, 
Society and Policy. London: UCL Press.
McAllister, T. G., Naepi, S., Wilson, E., Hikuroa, D., & Walker, L. A. (2022). Under-represented and 
overlooked: Māori and Pasifika scientists in Aotearoa New Zealand’s universities and crown-
research institutes. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand, 52(1), 38-53. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1080/ 03036 758. 2020. 17961 03.
McLaren, P., & Jandrić, P. (2020).  Postdigital Dialogues on Critical Pedagogy, Liberation Theology and 
Information Technology. London: Bloomsbury.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2002). Phenomenology of perception. Abingdon: Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 
97802 03994 610.
Mesjasz, C. (2015). Complex Systems Studies and Terrorism. In P. Vos Fellman, Y. Bar-Yam, & A. A. 
Minai (Eds.), Conflict and Complexity: Countering terrorism, insurgency, ethnic and regional vio-
lence (pp. 35–72). New York: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 4939- 1705-1_2.
Mitcham, C. (1994). Thinking Through Technology: The Path Between Engineering and Philosophy. Chi-
cago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Morgera, E., Tsioumani, E., & Buck, M. (2014). Unraveling the Nagoya Protocol: A commentary on the 
Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-sharing to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Leiden: 
Brill.
Mortier, R., Haddadi, H., Henderson, T., McAuley, D., & Crowcroft, J. (2014). Human Data Interaction: 
The Human Face of the Data-Driven Society. SSRN Electronic Journal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2139/ 
ssrn. 25080 51.
Mueller, M., & Tippins, D. (2012). Citizen science, ecojustice, and science education: rethinking an 
education from nowhere. In B. Fraser, K. Tobin, & C. McRobbie (Eds.), Second International 
Handbook of Science Education (pp. 865–882). Dordrecht: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-
1- 4020- 9041-7_ 58.
Murphy, M. (2015). Unsettling care: Troubling transnational itineraries of care in feminist health prac-
tices. Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 717–737. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 03063 12715 589136.
Naepi, S. (2019). Why Isn’t My Professor Pasifika? A Snapshot of the Academic Workforce in New Zea-
land Universities. MAI Journal, 8(2), 219–234. https:// doi. org/ 10. 20507/ MAIJo urnal. 2019.8. 2.9.
Naepi, S., McAllister, T., Thomsen, P., Leenen-Young, M., Walker, L. A., McAllister, A. L., Theodore, 
R., Kidman, J., & Suaaliia, T. (2019). The Pakaru ‘Pipeline’: Māori and Pasifika Pathways within 
the Academy. The New Zealand Annual Review of Education, 24, 142–159. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
26686/ nzaroe. v24i0. 6338.
Nag Chowdhuri, M., King, H., & Archer, L. (2021). The Primary Science Capital Teaching Approach: 
Teacher handbook. London: UCL Institute of Education. https:// disco  very. ucl. ac. uk/ id/ eprint/ 
10136 335/.
Nag Chowdhuri, M., King, H., & Archer, L. (2022). The Primary Science Capital Teaching Approach: 
Building science engagement for social justice. Journal of Emergent Science, 23, 34–38. https:// 
www. ase. org. uk/ resou rces/ journ al- of- emerg  ent- scien ce/ issue- 23/ resea rch- review- prima ry- scien ce-  
capit  al- teach ing. Accessed 7 May 2024.
New Zealand Parliament. (2017). Innovative bill protects Whanganui River with legal personhood. 
https:// www. parli ament. nz/ en/ get- invol  ved/ featu res/ innov  ative- bill- prote cts- whang  anui- river- with-  
legal- perso nhood/. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Newman, G., Wiggins, A., Crall, A., Graham, E., Newman, S., & Crowston, K. (2012). The future of citi-
zen science: emerging technologies and shifting paradigms. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environ-
ment, 10(6), 298-304. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1890/ 110294.
Orchard, S. (2019). Growing citizen science for conservation to support diverse project objectives and the 
motivations of volunteers. Pacific Conservation Biology, 25(4), 342-344. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1071/ 
PC180 11.
Owaineh, M. (2023). Epistemic Injustice, Marginalisation and Resistance: Palestinian Young Women with 
Disabilities Experiences of Education. PhD Dissertation. Belfast: Queen’s University Belfast. https://  
pure. qub. ac. uk/ en/ stude ntThe ses/ epist emic- injus  tice- margi nalis ation- and- resis  tance. Accessed 25 April 
2024.
72 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Pedwell, C., & Whitehead, A. (2012). Affecting feminism: Questions of feeling in feminist theory. Femi-
nist Theory, 13(2), 115–129. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14647 00112 442635.
Peters, M. A., Besley, T., Jandrić, P., & Zhu, X. (Eds.). (2020).  Knowledge Socialism. The Rise of Peer 
Production: Collegiality, Collaboration, and Collective Intelligence. Singapore: Springer.  https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978- 981- 13- 8126-3.
Peters, M. A., Tesar, M., Jackson, L., Besley, T., Jandrić, P., Arndt, S., & Sturm, S. (2021).  The Method-
ology and Philosophy of Collective Writing. Abingdon and New York: Routledge.  https:// doi. org/ 
10. 4324/ 97810 03171 959.
Petropoulos, G. (2023). The Present and Future of Doing Philosophy with Children: Practical Philosophy 
and Addressing Children and Young People’s Status in a Complex World. Childhood and Philoso-
phy, 19, 1–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 12957/ child philo. 2023. 78673.
Piaget, J. (1933). Children’s Philosophies. In Carl Murchison (Ed.), A Handbook of Child Psychology. 
Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Preece, J. (2016). Citizen science: New research challenges for human–computer interaction.  Interna-
tional Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 32(8), 585-612. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10447 318. 
2016. 11941 53.
Price, C. (2023a). Postdigital Environmental Crises. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Postdigital Sci-
ence and Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 6-2.
Price, C. (2023b). Postdigital Nature 2.0. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Postdigital Science and 
Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 16-1.
Primary Science Teaching Trust. (2024). A scientist just like me. https:// pstt. org. uk/ unique- resou rces/a- 
scien tist- just- like- me/. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Rapanta, C. (2023a). Postdigital Citizenship. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), Encyclopaedia of Postdigital Science 
and Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 3-2.
Rapanta, C. (2023b). Postdigital Citizenship Education. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), Encyclopaedia of Postdigital 
Science and Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 40-1.
Rautio, P., Tammi, T., Aivelo, T., Hohti, R., Kervinen, A., & Saari, M. (2022). “For whom? By whom?”: 
Critical perspectives of participation in ecological citizen science. Cultural Studies of Science Edu-
cation, 17, 765–793. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11422- 021- 10099-9.
Raymond, C. M., Fazey, I., Reed, M. S., Stringer, L. C., Robinson, G. M., & Evely, A. C. (2010). Inte-
grating local and scientific knowledge for environmental management. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 91(8), 1766-1777. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jenvm an. 2010. 03. 023.
Remler, D. K., Waisanen, D. J., & Gabor, A. (2014). Academic Journalism: A modest proposal. Journal-
ism Studies, 15(4), 357–373. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 14616 70X. 2013. 821321.
Repko, A. F., & Szostak, R. (2021). Interdisciplinary research: Process and theory. 4th Ed. London: 
SAGE.
Richardson, L. (1990). Writing Strategies: Reaching Diverse Audiences. London: Sage. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
4135/ 97814 12986 526.
Ritzer, G., Jandrić, P., & Hayes, S. (2018). The velvet cage of educational con(pro)sumption.  Open 
Review of Educational Research, 5(1), 113-129. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 23265 507. 2018. 15461 24.
Ritzer, G., Ryan, J. M., Hayes, S., Elliot, M., & Jandrić, P. (2024). McDonaldization and Artificial Intel-
ligence. Postdigital Science and Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s42438- 024- 00475-3.
Rotman, D., Hammock, J., Preece, J. J., Boston, C. L., Hansen, D. L., Bowser, A., & He, Y. (2014). 
Does motivation in citizen science change with time and culture? In  Proceedings of the companion 
publication of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social com-
puting (pp. 229–232). New York: Association for Computing Machinery. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 
25564 20. 25564 92.
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB). (2024). Together, we’re making it count. https:// www. 
rspb. org. uk/ whats- happe ning/ big- garden- birdw  atch. Accessed 30 May 2024.
Russell, L. (2020). Glitch feminism: a manifesto. New York: Verso.
Sauermann, H., Vohland, K., Antoniou, V., Balázs, B., Göbel, C., Karatzas, K., Mooney, P., Perelló, J., 
Ponti, M., Samson, R., & Winter, S. (2020). Citizen science and sustainability transitions. Research 
Policy, 49(5), 1-16. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. respol. 2020. 103978.
Savin-Baden, M., & Reader, J. (Eds.). (2022). Postdigital Theologies: Technology, Belief, and Practice. 
Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 09405-7.
Schütz, F., Heidingsfelder, M. L., & Schraudner, M. (2019). Co-shaping the Future in Quadruple Helix 
Innovation Systems: Uncovering Public Preferences toward Participatory Research and Innovation. 
73
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation, 5(2), 128–146. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. sheji. 2019. 04. 002.
Senabre Hidalgo, E., Perelló, J., Becker, F., Bonhoure, I., Legris, M., & Cigarini, A. (2021). Participation 
and Co-creation in Citizen Science. In K. Vohland, A. Land-Zandstra, L. Ceccaroni, R. Lemmens, 
J. Perelló, M. Ponti, R. Samson, & K. Wagenknecht (Eds.), The Science of Citizen Science (pp. 
199–218). Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 030- 58278-4_ 11.
Shakespeare, T. (2017). The social model of disability. In L. Davis (Ed.), The disability studies reader.  5th 
Ed. Abingdon: Routledge.
Shirk, J. L., Ballard, H. L., Wilderman, C. C., Phillips, T., Wiggins, A., Jordan, R., . . . Bonney, R. (2012). 
Public Participation in Scientific Research: A framework for deliberate design. Ecology and Soci-
ety, 17(2), 29. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5751/ ES- 04705- 170229.
Silvertown, J. (2009). A new dawn for citizen science.  Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24(9), 467–
471. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. tree. 2009. 03. 017.
Simmons, B., & Watson, D. (2014). The PMLD ambiguity: articulating the life-worlds of children with 
profound and multiple learning disabilities. Abingdon: Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97804 
29482 755.
Simon, H. A. (1969). The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
St. Pierre, E. A. (2021). Post Qualitative Inquiry, the Refusal of Method, and the Risk of the New. Quali-
tative Inquiry, 27(1), 3-9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 10778 00419 863005.
Stewart, G. T. (2018). What does ‘indigenous’ mean, for me? Educational Philosophy and Theory, 50(8), 
740-743. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00131 857. 2017. 13020 50.
Stewart, G. T. (2021a). Defending science from what? Educational Philosophy and Theory. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1080/ 00131 857. 2021. 19664 15.
Stewart, G. T. (2021b). Māori Philosophy: Indigenous thinking from Aotearoa. London: Bloomsbury.
Stewart, G. T. (2023). Postdigital Ethnicity. In P. Jandrić (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Postdigital Science and 
Education. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 35469-4_ 10-1.
Stewart, G. T. (2024). Indigenous Post Qualitative Inquiry. London: SAGE.
Stewart, G. T., & Devine, N. (2024). Nothing outside of the text in Aotearoa New Zealand. International 
Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 09518 398. 2024. 23426 95.
Stewart, G. T., Barbarich-Unasa, T. W., Enari, D., Faumuina, C., Heke, D., Henare, D., Lolohea, T., Phillips, 
M., Port, H., Staniland, N., Tapuni, M., Teaurere, R., Ualesi, Y., Walker, L., Devine, N. A., & Matapo, 
J. (2023). Experiences of Indigenous (Māori/Pasifika) early career academics. Educational Philosophy 
and Theory. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00131 857. 2023. 22716 49.
Strasser, B., Baudry, J., Mahr, D., Sanchez, G., & Tancoigne, E. (2019). "Citizen science"? Rethinking 
science and public participation. Science & Technology Studies, 32(2), 52–76. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
23987/ sts. 60425.
subRosa. (2008). Common knowledge and political love. In B. da Costa & K. Philip (Eds.), Tactical 
biopolitics: Art, activism, and technoscience (pp. 221–242). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Suoranta, J. (2021). Militant Freire. New York: DIO Press.
Szanto, T., & Moran, D. (Eds.). (2016). Phenomenology of sociality: discovering the ‘we’. Abingdon: 
Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97813 15688 268.
Szymanski, E. A., Smith, R. D. J., & Calvert, J. (2021). Responsible research and innovation meets multi-
species studies: why RRI needs to be a more- than-human exercise. Journal of Responsible Innova-
tion, 8(2), 261–266. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 23299 460. 2021. 19060 40.
Szymanski, E., & Calvert, J. (2018). Designing with living systems in the synthetic yeast project. Nature 
Communications, 9. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41467- 018- 05332-z.
Tandon, R., & Hall, B. (2021). Towards a Framework for Knowledge Democracy. In B. Hall & R. Tandon 
(Eds.), Socially Responsible Higher Education (pp. 288–301). Leiden and Boston: Brill.
Tauginienė, L., Butkevičienė, E., Vohland, K., Heinisch, B., Daskolia, M., Suškevičs, M., Portela, M., 
Balázs, B., & Prūse, B. (2020). Citizen science in the social sciences and humanities: the power of 
interdisciplinarity. Palgrave Communications, 6, 89. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1057/ s41599- 020- 0471-y .
Templeton, M., Cuevas-Parra, P., & Lundy, L. (2022). Children’s Participation in International Fora: 
The Experiences and Perspectives of Children and Adults. Children and Society, 37(3), 786-805. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ chso. 12629.
Tengö, M., Brondizio, E. S., Elmqvist, T., Malmer, P., & Spierenburg, M. (2014). Connecting diverse 
knowledge systems for enhanced ecosystem governance: The multiple evidence base approach. 
AMBIO, 43(5), 579-591. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13280- 014- 0501-3.
74 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
Thomas, S., Scheller, D., & Schröder, S. (2021). Co-creation in citizen social science: the research forum 
as a methodological foundation for communication and participation. Humanities and Social Sci-
ences Communications, 8(1), 244. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1057/ s41599- 021- 00902-x.
Törnberg, A. (2011). Using Complexity Theory Methods for Sociological Theory Development. PhD 
Dissertation. Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg. http:// hdl. handle. net/ 2077/ 26536. Accessed 
25 April 2024.
Tronto, J. C. (2013). Caring Democracy: Markets, Equality, Justice. New York: New York University 
Press.
Tronto, J. C., & Fisher, B. (1990). Toward a Feminist Theory of Caring. In E. Abel & M. Nelson (Eds.), 
Circles of Care (pp. 36–54). Albany, New York: SUNY Press.
Truth, S. (1851/2020). Ain’t I a woman? Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Tsing, A. (2010). Arts of Inclusion, or How to Love a Mushroom. Manoa, 22(2), 191–203. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1353/ man. 2010. a4074 37.
Turvey, K. (2024). Review of Sarah Hayes, Michael Jopling, Stuart Connor, and Matthew Johnson (Eds.). 
(2023).  Human Data Interaction, Disadvantage and Skills in the Community: Enabling Cross-Sec-
tor Environments for Postdigital Inclusion. Postdigital Science and Education. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s42438- 024- 00452-w .
UNICEF. (1989). The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. https:// www. ohchr. org/ en/ 
instr uments- mecha nisms/ instr  uments/ conve ntion- rights- child. Accessed 25 April 2024.
United Nations Environment Programme. (2021). Article 8(j) - Traditional knowledge, innovations and 
practices. Montreal, CA: Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. https:// www. cbd. 
int/ tradi tional/ intro. shtml. Accessed 25 April 2024.
United Nations General Assembly (2011). Happiness: towards a holistic approach to development. UN 
General Assembly. https:// web. archi ve. org/ web/ 20181 02301 4942/ http:// repos itory. un. org/ handle/ 
11176/ 291712/. Accessed 25 April 2024.
United Nations General Assembly (2023). Widening Digital Gap between Developed, Developing States 
Threatening to Exclude World’s Poorest from Next Industrial Revolution. UN General Assembly 
https:// press. un. org/ en/ 2023/ gaef3 587. doc. htm. Accessed 25 April 2024.
University College London. (2020). The Science Capital Teaching Approach Animation. [YouTube 
Video]. https:// youtu. be/ hWWPU IK3xZ0? featu re= shared. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Varela, F. J., Rosch, E., & Thompson, E. (2016). The embodied mind: cognitive science and human expe-
rience. Revised Ed. London: The MIT Press.
Vermeulen, T., & Van Den Akker, R. (2010). Notes on metamodernism. Journal of Aesthetics & Culture, 
2(1), 1-14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3402/ jac. v2i0. 5677.
Vohland, K., Land-Zandstra, A., Ceccaroni, L., Lemmens, R., Perelló, J., Ponti, M., Samson, R., & 
Wagenknecht, K. (2021). Editorial: The Science of Citizen Science Evolves. In K. Vohland, A. 
Land-Zandstra, L. Ceccaroni, R. Lemmens, J. Perelló, M. Ponti, R. Samson, & K. Wagenkne-
cht (Eds.),  The Science of Citizen Science  (pp. 1–12). Cham: Springer.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
978-3- 030- 58278-4_1.
Walloth, C. (2018). Emergent Nested Systems: a theory of understanding and influencing complex systems as 
well as case. studies in urban systems. Cham: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 27550-5.
Ware, J. (2004). Ascertaining the views of people with profound and multiple learning disabilities. British 
Journal of Learning Disabilities, 32(4), 175-179. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1468- 3156. 2004. 00316.x.
Waugh, J. K., Lindsey, J. K., Stewart, M. Z., Winter, J. C., & Parrish, J. K. (2023). Demographics of 
Public Participation in Science: A Meta-Analytic Approach. Citizen Science: Theory and Practice, 
8(1), 61. https:// doi. org/ 10. 5334/ cstp. 610.
Weich, A., & Macgilchrist, F. (Eds.). (2023). Postdigital Participation in Education: How Contemporary 
Media Constellations Shape Participation. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
978-3- 031- 38052-5.
Weinstein, M. (2011). Schools/Citizen Science. A Response to "The Future of Citizen Science". Democ-
racy and Education, 20(1), 1–3.
Wells, J. (2012). Complexity and Sustainability. London: Routledge. https:// doi. org/ 10. 4324/ 97802 03095 
676.
Williams, T., & Hardison, P. (2013). Culture, law, risk and governance: contexts of traditional knowl-
edge in climate change adaptation. Climatic Change, 120(3), 531-544. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10584- 013- 0850-0.
75
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Wong, G. K., & Li, S. Y. (2023). An Exploratory Study of Helping Undergraduate Students Solve Litera-
ture Review Problems Using Litstudy and NLP.  Education Sciences,  13(10), 987. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 3390/ educs ci131 00987.
Whipple, M. (2005). The Dewey-Lippmann Debate Today: Communication Distortions, Reflective 
Agency, and Participatory Democracy. Sociological Theory, 23(2), 156–178. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1111/j. 0735- 2751. 2005. 00248.x.
Whitlock, K. (2021). Handle with Care: Digital Citizen Science and Data Feminism in the Anthro-Cap-
italocene. Masters Thesis. Dallas, TX: The University of Texas at Dallas. https:// hdl. handle. net/ 
10735.1/ 9336. Accessed 25 April 2024.
Yan, F. (2020). Managing ‘Digital China’ During the Covid-19 Pandemic: Nationalist Stimulation 
and its Backlash. Postdigital Science and Education, 2(3), 639-644. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s42438- 020- 00181-w .
Yunkaporta, T. (2020). Sand Talk: How Indigenous Thinking Can Save The World. San Fransciso, CA: 
HarperOne.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Michael Jopling1  · Georgina Tuari Stewart2  · Shane Orchard3  · 
Juha Suoranta4  · Sara Tolbert3  · Laurène Cheilan5  · Fei Yan6 · 
Catherine Price7  · Sarah Hayes8  · Howard Scott9  · Annabel Latham10  · 
Ibrar Bhatt11  · Vyacheslav Dodonov12  · Adam Matthews13  · 
Rami Muhtaseb9  · Alison MacKenzie11  · Mohamed Owaineh14 · 
Sarah Earle8  · Ben Simmons8  · Zoë Clarke15  · Linda la Velle8 · 
Benjamin J. Green16 · Cheryl Brown3 · Richard Watermeyer17  · 
Petar Jandrić18 
 * Richard Watermeyer 
 richard.watermeyer@bristol.ac.uk
 Michael Jopling 
 m.jopling@brighton.ac.uk
 Georgina Tuari Stewart 
 georgina.stewart@aut.ac.nz
 Shane Orchard 
 shane.orchard@canterbury.ac.nz
 Juha Suoranta 
 juha.suoranta@tuni.fi
 Sara Tolbert 
 sara.tolbert@canterbury.ac.nz
 Laurène Cheilan 
 laurene.cheilan@bristol.ac.uk
 Fei Yan 
 educhina2020@outlook.com
 Catherine Price 
 Catherine.Price@nottingham.ac.uk
76 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77
1 3
 Sarah Hayes 
 s.hayes@bathspa.ac.uk
 Howard Scott 
 Howard.scott@wlv.ac.uk
 Annabel Latham 
 A.Latham@mmu.ac.uk
 Ibrar Bhatt 
 i.bhatt@qub.ac.uk
 Vyacheslav Dodonov 
 dodonovv@mail.ru
 Adam Matthews 
 a.matthews.3@bham.ac.uk
 Rami Muhtaseb 
 R.w.muhtaseb@wlv.ac.uk
 Alison MacKenzie 
 A.Mackenzie@qub.ac.uk
 Mohamed Owaineh 
 mohammed.owaineh@ucc.ie
 Sarah Earle 
 s.earle@bathspa.ac.uk
 Ben Simmons 
 b.simmons@bathspa.ac.uk
 Zoë Clarke 
 z.clarke@nhs.net
 Linda la Velle 
 l.lavelle@bathspa.ac.uk
 Benjamin J. Green 
 bgreen@blcu.edu.cn
 Cheryl Brown 
 cheryl.brown@canterbury.ac.nz
 Petar Jandrić 
 pjandric@tvz.hr0
1 University of Brighton, Brighton, UK
2 Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
3 University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
4 Tampere University, Tampere, Finland
5 ESRC Centre for Sociodigital Futures, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
6 Independent Scholar, Beijing, China
7 University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
8 Bath Spa University, Bath, UK
9 University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, UK
10 Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK
11 School of Social Sciences, Education and Social Work, Queen’s University Belfast, 
77
1 3 Postdigital Science and Education (2025) 7:31–77 
Belfast BT7 1HL, UK
12 Institute of Philosophy, Political Science, and Religious Studies By the Committee of Science 
of the Ministry of Science and Higher Educationof the Republic of Kazakhstan, Almaty, 
Kazakhstan
13 University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
14 University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
15 Barnsley Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Barnsley, UK
16 Beijing Language and Culture University, Beijing, China
17 University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
18 Zagreb University of Applied Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia
