Capitalism Nature Socialism
ISSN: 1045-5752 (Print) 1548-3290 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rcns20
Public Action for Public Science: Re-imagining the
Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture
Angie Carter, Carrie Chennault & Ahna Kruzic
To cite this article: Angie Carter, Carrie Chennault & Ahna Kruzic (2018) Public Action for
Public Science: Re-imagining the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture, Capitalism Nature
Socialism, 29:1, 69-88, DOI: 10.1080/10455752.2017.1423364
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2017.1423364
Published online: 16 Jan 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 547
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcns20
Public Action for Public Science: Re-imagining the
Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture
Angie Cartera, Carrie Chennaultband Ahna Kruzicc
aDepartment of Social Sciences, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI, USA;
bDepartment of Agricultural Education and Studies, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA;
cFood First/Institute for Food and Development Policy, Oakland, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
In Iowa, the heart of the United States Corn Belt, a small, publicly funded
research center has championed alternative agricultural practices and fosteredthe creation of a sustainable agricultural community over the past 30 years,
but its future is now uncertain due to funding cuts and increased
corporatization of the university. We share our engagement in a grassrootscampaign to restore and, ultimately, to re-imagine the future for the Leopold
Center for Sustainable Agriculture as an act of ecofeminist praxis. This process
documents the beginnings of a transformative moment. We find
opportunities to begin a new dialogue about the place of a sustainable
agricultural center, the role of science created by and for the public, and anew relationality among scientists, farmers, animals, and the Earth.
KEYWORDS Public science; agriculture; land-grant university; ecofeminism; grassroots
In spring of 2017, the Iowa state legislature passed a bill to defund the Leopold
Center for Sustainable Agriculture (Leopold Center). The cuts were a part of a
broader round of austerity measures advanced by the 2017 Republican-con-trolled legislature, measures characteristic of the party ’s socially and fiscally
conservative policy positions. Established with public funding from thestate legislature in 1987, the Leopold Center has served for 30 years as a com-munity-oriented agricultural science center housed at Iowa State University
(ISU) —a land-grant university
1in Ames, Iowa, United States. News of the
cuts sent waves through the sustainable agricultural community and inspired
a groundswell of support in Iowa and nationwide. We share our efforts asactive participants in an ongoing grassroots campaign in partnership with
© 2018 The Center for Political EcologyCONTACT Angie Carter ancarter@mtu.edu
1The 1862 Morrill Act established Iowa State University, originally founded in 1858, as the first land-grant
university in the United States (Iowa State University, “History of Iowa State, ”n.d.). As a land-grant uni-
versity, Iowa State ’s mission is to “create, share, and apply knowledge to, make Iowa and the world a
better place ”by“sharing knowledge beyond the campus borders ”(Iowa State University, “Mission
and Vision, ”n.d.).CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM, 2018
VOL. 29, NO. 1, 69 –88
https://doi.org/10.1080/10455752.2017.1423364
community organizations to restore the Leopold Center and, ultimately, to re-
imagine the center ’s future as part of a decolonized food system.
The extractive industrial agriculture predominant in the U.S. Corn Belt
relies upon increased industrialization of hog and poultry production in con-
finements, intensification of corn and soybean production, and concentration
of land among descendants of white settlers, with extreme consequences upon
the biophysical and social landscapes. The Leopold Center represents a coun-terweight to that model. Still, its situatedness within relations of colonial,
patriarchal, and capitalist economies has challenged its ability to carry out
its mission, and ultimately has threatened its very survival. Over its history,the Leopold Center has been unable to feasibly work outside of these relations
on a broad scale, leading some of its supporters to question whether it has
been the right vehicle to move Midwestern Corn Belt agriculture beyondextraction and toward regeneration.
We have wrestled with these concerns. We are each current or former gradu-
ate students of ISU ’s interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Sustainable Agri-
culture, where we shared a close partnership with the Leopold Center that hasbenefitted us in our scholarship. Each of us has either worked at the Leopold
Center through graduate assistantships and/or received graduate research
funding from it, including critical research on the construction of race andother forms of marginalization in local food systems and a women-led partici-
patory research project in Iowa ’s most agriculturally polluted watershed.
For us and for many current and former students, researchers, community
leaders, and farmers, the Leopold Center has been the heart of alternative agri-cultural visions in Iowa, offering an oasis that welcomed debate, dialogue, and
creativity about agrifood systems transformation on a campus and within astate that readily advocate and embrace the mythology that corporate,monoculture agriculture feeds the world. Though the Leopold Center exists
within a larger university with a history of perpetuating science as a colonizing
practice, the center has nonetheless been a space welcoming of creativity andcriticality about transformation toward an agriculture grounded in mutually
beneficial relationships, care, and justice. Our current campaign for the
Leopold Center ’s future places these tensions at the center of our work, and
we recognize the challenge of rebuilding a new Leopold Center that leads in
decolonizing science and agriculture.
Our Vision for a Decolonized Sustainable Agriculture
Our campaign is inspired by our participation in the Women, Food and Agri-
culture Network (WFAN).2WFAN is a national nonprofit organization based
2As of 12 November 2017, the Women, Food and Agriculture Network states on their website that their
mission is “to engage women in building an ecological and just food and agricultural system through70 A. CARTER ET AL.
in Iowa with ecofeminist roots, established in the early 1990s by organic
farmers, food activists, and scholar-activists and currently the only U.S. non-
profit organization with the explicit mission of serving women in sustainableagriculture. An ecofeminist care for othered others, built upon a foundation ofnon-dominance and interdependence, informs our work.
Our ecofeminist vision of a relational agriculture originates in indigenous
epistemologies, feminisms, and agricultural practices, drawing from LaDuke ’s
(2017 , xii) wisdom that: “Indigenous agriculture —based on biodiversity and
the use of multiple locally adapted crops —is the real future for agriculture. ”
We envision a biologically diverse agriculture, with care for plants, animals,biota, and climate. We envision a socially diverse agriculture in which
people of color, poor people, indigenous people, queer people, women, and
other marginalized people participate as equals, co-producing agriculturalknowledge and practices. We envision a more economically diverse agricul-
ture, experimenting in alternative and non-capitalist forms of communally
nourishing one another. Finally, we envision an epistemologically diverseagriculture that respects a pluriverse of ideas, methods, research, and prac-tices, and is founded upon principles of decolonization and care. It was and
continues to be our belief that the Leopold Center could support agricultural
research and community that —in its focus, its methods, and its public engage-
ment —will bring us closer to creating this future together.
Our praxis is guided by an array of diverse yet interrelated feminist theor-
etical and methodological insights including ecofeminism (Shiva 2010 ), trans-
national and postcolonial feminisms (Alexander and Mohanty 2010 ; Smith
1999 ), political ecology (Harcourt, Nelson, and 2015 ; Rocheleau, Thomas-
Slayter, and Wangari 1996 ), economic geography (Gibson-Graham 2008 ,
2011 ), and scholar-activism (Gilmore 2008 ; Nagar 2014 ). In our feminist
engagement, we are committed to a public science based upon transparency,
critical reflection, accountability to marginalized humans and other species,
and diverse ontologies and epistemologies. However, we acknowledge theconstraints of our feminist scholar-activism; as white women inheriting the
culture of European settlers, we question issues of voice and locating ourselves
within institutions of power through which we re-enact coloniality as we try todismantle it.
Historically, the Leopold Center has not committed to an ecofeminist and
decolonial agriculture, nor has it explicitly rejected these commitments. Itstrack record includes a long history of co-production of knowledge in the
public ’s interest (albeit a public of predominately white, male farmers and
individual and community power. ”The organization was born in 1994 when Denise O ’Brien, an organic
farmer from Iowa, and Kathy Lawrence, a food justice advocate from New York, organized a working
group of women in agriculture to attend the United Nations 4th World Conference on Women inBeijing and today continues to organize women through programs offering on-farm mentorship experi-ences, political campaign training, and land management education.CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 71
landowners): the startup and funding of farmer-directed research projects,
farmer-led research networks, and projects centering the experiences of immi-
grant, refugee, and women farmers that reach beyond the status quo. TheLeopold Center was an early supporter of WFAN, providing funding forWFAN conference sponsorships and research projects. Even as the Leopold
Center was constrained politically from being an explicit voice in support
of systems change, it provided seed money and space for groups likeWFAN and scholar-activists like ourselves to find, share, and create commu-
nity to further the work of systemic change in the agrifood system.
When we learned of the funding cuts and began to organize a campaign, we
assumed that our ecofeminist and decolonial visions would be dismissed as alower priority than the agrarian visions of green growth promoted throughout
the Leopold Center ’s history and by many of its supporters. However, we have
found that the reactive energy created through the Leopold Center ’s defund-
ing has created space to cultivate an alternative vision for the center as a leaderfor a new, transformative direction, one that prioritizes the health of commu-nities over the profits of corporations, values social equity and biodiversity onthe landscape, and prepares the next generation to address the pressing chal-
lenges posed by extractive agriculture. In the reactive moment of Leopold
Center ’s defunding, we embraced the opportunity to challenge the status
quo and to share ideas with other supporters who were ready to mobilize
for change toward an ecofeminist future.
We have practiced an activism of alliance against the loss of public science,
or publicly funded science which includes and benefits the public good, elevat-ing a new vision for the Leopold Center and thereby a new vision for agricul-
ture in Iowa. Our allied activism has included publicly speaking out againstthe government and private industry interests that orchestrated the LeopoldCenter ’s defunding and mobilizing other Leopold Center supporters to do
the same. We have defended the center ’s past accomplishments as a signifi-
cant step forward for Iowa agriculture. Even more importantly, now, in thistime of increased attacks upon the public good, we advocate for a future-
forward vision prioritizing the interconnected health of our communities.
In the remainder of this article, we first chart the colonial history of Iowa
and Iowa ’s land-grant university as setting the stage for today ’s practices of
industrial agriculture and colonized agricultural science. We consider this his-
torical context in tandem with the creation and dismantling of the LeopoldCenter, placing the center simultaneously in connection and in tension
with its embeddedness in the land-grant university system. We trace the
Leopold Center ’s defunding as one of many instances of colonized science
dominating spaces that should belong to a decolonized public science. Para-doxically, in that act of colonization, we simultaneously found an opportunity
for a praxis of decolonization— for joint efforts with allied activists to advocate
for a newly imagined and re-oriented Leopold Center. In the final section, we72 A. CARTER ET AL.
examine the extent to which our allied activism and public engagement show
promise of an ecofeminist future —where we have seen hopeful signs of trans-
formation and where our collective efforts have fallen short.
Monoculture and Extractive Economies of Production
Iowa ’s landscape reflects a history of colonization, maintenance of white
supremacy, and heteropatriarchy.3Today in Iowa 99.8 percent of principal
farm operators are white and 92 percent of principal farm operators are
men (USDA NASS 2016 ). The first official European settlement in Iowa
was founded in 1833, following the Black Hawk Purchase. Not a purchase
at all, the federal government forced the Sauk and Meskwaki people to relin-
quish a portion of land in eastern Iowa as punishment for resisting an 1829federal government requirement to vacate the land in western Illinois
(Harlan 1931 ). The Sauk and Meskwaki eventually complied, but only after
the significant loss of life via the Black Hawk War. Soon after the war, with
the invention of John Deere ’s steel moldboard plow, European-American set-
tlers began to till the prairies and establish farms.
The land where ISU sits today was colonized and tilled, and federal legis-
lation established a college specializing in the proliferation of colonization andtillage in a span of three decades. ISU was first founded as the State Agricul-
tural College and Model Farm in 1858. It became a land-grant college in 1864,
when Iowa became the first state to accept the Morrill Act, federal legislationwhich granted federally owned land to states for colleges focusing on the
teaching of practical agriculture, science, and engineering in partnership
with farmers and rural communities (Food and Water Watch 2012 ; Iowa
State University, n.d.). As thousands of settler-colonizers poured into thestate and white men established claims to the land as private property, rail-
roads were constructed and farms began to industrialize to meet demands
for growing regional agricultural economies. To facilitate the cultivation ofrow crops, they altered Iowa ’s original prairies and wetlands through subsur-
face tile drainage.
Today farming remains central to Iowa ’s economy and cultural identity,
and farming practices continue to prioritize profit over the well-being of
the biotic community. Iowa is second in the United States only to California
for the value of agricultural goods exported, and first in total exports of grains(corn and soybeans) (USDA NASS 2016 ). The high rate of grain production
3We appreciate a reviewer ’s comment about the importance of a critical perspective in regards to inter-
species relationality and the exploitation of animals in all agricultural systems, not only industrialized,
corporatized models of agriculture. We use the term “colonization ”to mean the colonization of the
biotic community, inclusive of land, people, and animals, and agree that we must be intentional —
even in our nascent re-imagining of new systems —if we are to avoid the replication of existing
systems of power and oppression within agricultural systems.CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 73
makes Iowa well-suited for efficient livestock production. There are just over
three million people live in Iowa (US Census 2017 ), but each year Iowa pro-
duces 22.4 million hogs and 60 million chickens (IDALS 2017 ). Iowa is first in
the nation in the export of hogs, pigs, layers, and pullets (USDA NASS 2016 ).
This productivity comes at the expense of community well-being and at sig-nificant cost to resources considered public goods, such as the quality of air,
soil, and water.
“Industrialized agriculture is toxic, and it is also unsustainable, ”writes
LaDuke ( 2017 , xii), and Iowa is perfect case study. As farms increase pro-
ductivity, Iowa ’s soil erodes away at the rate of tons per acre, and agricultural
run-off increasingly pollutes waterways (Cox, Hug, and Bruzelius 2011 ; Nai-
denko, Cox, and Bruzelius 2012 ). Marginal lands that otherwise may have
been placed into federal conservation programs have been cultivated duringrecent years of high market prices for corn and soybeans (Alexander et al.
2008 ), exacerbating the problems. In 2016, the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources listed 608 of 1378 assessed waterbodies on the federal 303(d) list
of impaired waters, meaning they were out of compliance with the federalClean Water Act (DNR 2016 ). The most frequently cited impairments (84
percent) were high rates of E. coli bacteria, biological indicators, and fish
kills (DNR 2016 ). The health risk posed by this high rate of water pollution
inspired a federal lawsuit against agricultural drainage districts brought
forward by Des Moines Water Works in 2015, the water utility providing
drinking water to half a million Iowans (Kardas-Nelson 2015 ). Though the
lawsuit was dismissed in 2017, Iowa ’s water quality continues to be debated
in the state legislature (Eller 2017 ). Only weeks after the lawsuit ’s dismissal,
Republicans in the state legislature proposed defunding the Leopold Center,suspicious timing that one Leopold Center staffer said “has led to many
Iowans scratching their heads ”(Collins 2017 ).
Iowa is a political powerhouse when it comes to agricultural practices and
policies in the United States and abroad. President Trump appointed formerGovernor Branstad as Ambassador to China, where Iowa exports an increas-
ing amount of pork and soybeans (Eller 2016 ). Iowan agricultural leaders have
twice served as Secretary of Agriculture. Former Governor Vilsack served as
Secretary of Agriculture under President Obama from 2009 to 2017, and
Henry A. Wallace —founder of the Hi-Bred Corn Company (now known as
Dow Dupont Pioneer) —served as Secretary of Agriculture from 1933 to
1940 before becoming vice president under President Roosevelt. Theseleaders have positioned the Iowa landscape as best used for the industrial-
scale production of monocropped commodities, and ISU continues to playa critical role in the proliferation of this system.
State and federal public funding historically provided the impetus for col-
laboration and innovation at ISU and other land-grant universities in theUnited States. However, beginning in 1982, with the passage Bayh-Dole74 A. CARTER ET AL.
Act, public science has come under threat as land-grant universities were
encouraged to partner with private partners to develop patented products
and public funding for public research began to decline (Food and WaterWatch 2012 ). As state funding to the university decreased, researchers and
their departments looked to the private sector for funding or, in some
cases, ceased to exist (Food and Water Watch 2012 ).
The agricultural private sector in Iowa is comprised of corporations such as
Monsanto, Syngenta, and DuPont Pioneer. As an example of agribusiness-university partnerships, Monsanto alone has provided ISU more than $2
million in research grants, including support for research on High-Beta Car-otene Maize, and $2.4 million in gifts, including mass spectrometers valued at
over $1 million to the Plant Sciences Institute (Iowa State University Foun-
dation, n.d.). The Leopold Center ’s offices sat at the end of a long, non-
descript hallway in ISU ’s Curtiss Hall above a newly remodeled Monsanto
Student Services and the Bruce Rastetter Center for Agricultural Entrepre-neurship, named for one of ISU ’s private donors whose company ’s partner-
ships with the university have included a questionable agriculturaldevelopment project in Tanzania deemed by many to be a land grab
(Oakland Institute 2011 ). The juxtaposition evident here is not unique to
ISU. Today land-grant universities ’research is heavily privatized, funded by
corporate sponsors and private endowments (Food and Water Watch2012 ). ISU ’s leaders defend these relationships; when an undergraduate
student questioned the relationship between Monsanto and the university,
the then-dean of the ISU College of Agriculture and Life Sciences responded
to the student with a personal attack (see Walsh 2008 ; Wintersteen 2008 ).
Between 2006 and 2010 ISU ’s agronomy department received $19.5 million
in research grants from private-sector donors, which comprised 48 percent of
the department ’s grant funding (Food and Water Watch 2012 ). We fear that
extent of private-sector support for research has had a significant influence onthe questions (not) researched by university researchers, privileging those thatfurther the advancement of an extractive rather than regenerative agriculture.
As Patricia Allen ( 2004 ) explains, governmental agricultural institutions and
land-grant universities in the United States perpetuate a “common sense ”of
the agrifood system that becomes hegemonic, limiting possibilities for greaterinclusivity and diversity in research and practice of agricultural science. ISU ’s
focus has been on “feeding the world”
4through input-intensive, industrialized
agriculture, even as research increasingly finds that small-scale, agroecologicalfarming is what actually feeds the world (Ahmed 2014 ; GRAIN 2014 ). The
explicit and implicit impacts of these funding changes come at great cost to
the public good:
4See the ISU-CALS Feeding the World Seminar Series http://www.ans.iastate.edu/feeding-world-seminar-
series-fall-2016 .CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 75
The power of epistemology —the process through which people come to know
their world —is that it can limit the ways in which solutions are derived, which
options are considered available and appropriate, and what types of changes are
likely to take place. (Allen 2004 , 90)
Epistemological constraints at the university limit practices on the ground,
resulting in a monoculture of thought and practices (Shiva 2015 ). It was of
little surprise, then, that even as ISU broke their own record for external
funding in the ﬁscal year 2016 (Krap ﬂ2016 ), they have not —to date —
initiated a fundraising campaign to refund the Leopold Center.
We take seriously the Morrill Act ’s legislated commitment to public
science while acknowledging the consequences of the land-grant university
upon contested lands with contested funding sources. We call into question
the inescapable history and present-day continuation of land ownershipand land granting as colonial practices that have dominated marginalized
peoples, diverse life forms, and diverse practices.
In the Belly of The Beast: The Leopold Center ’s Evolution
The Leopold Center was founded at a pivotal moment in Iowa ’s agricultural
history. Rural and farming communities were decimated by the 1980s Farm
Crisis when thousands of farm families lost their livelihoods as interestrates skyrocketed and grain prices plummeted. Meanwhile, increasingmono-cropping took a toll on Iowa ’s soil and water quality. Across rural
Iowa, families abandoned their communities to find work elsewhere. Withthe state ’s agricultural identity threatened, the Leopold Center offered a pub-
licly funded glimmer of hope.
The Leopold Center is named for Aldo Leopold, born in Burlington, Iowa
in 1887. His Sand County Almanac (Leopold 1989 ) advocates for humans to
co-exist with nature as a member, rather than conqueror, of the biotic com-
munity. The Leopold Center ’s founding through the 1987 Iowa Groundwater
Protection Act was an innovative and future-forward act of bipartisan policy-
making. The act established a tax on nitrogen fertilizer sales, a portion ofwhich was allocated to the Leopold Center for sustainable agriculture
research, education, and outreach, with a specific emphasis on agricultural
conservation to preserve water quality. The Leopold Center ’s founding pro-
vided communities an opportunity to partner with social and biological scien-
tists in developing an alternative trajectory for Iowa —a future where farms
thrive, water is clean, and communities lead and benefit from their agricul-
tural economies.
Additionally, its founding provided continued public agricultural science at
a time when the legacy of the land-grant university was being increasinglychallenged by the defunding of higher education and by corporatization of
science. Even as ISU focused on expert-driven, large-scale mono-cropping,76 A. CARTER ET AL.
the Leopold Center advocated for alternative agricultural research led in part-
nership with farmers and rural communities. It championed innovative
research topics rarely studied or funded at the university: integration of per-ennial and native species within agricultural systems, hoop barns for alterna-tive hog production, tools for creating more inclusive food systems, value-
added agriculture programs, organic crops research, and methods of partici-
patory conservation and food systems research. This work has supported localand statewide food systems groups, regional food hubs, and the work of non-
profit organizations. Since 1998 its projects established conservation practices
on over an estimated 22,500 agricultural acres, helping to diminish nitraterunoff and soil erosion (LCSA 2017 ).
Though the legislators ’move to defund the Leopold Center in 2017 was
unexpected, the center had been under pressure for nearly a decade. Agribusi-ness interference resulted in a failed 2010 search for a new Leopold Center
director, documented by national media (Bartlett 2010 ). Then-ISU President
Geoffrey stressed that the Leopold Center director should “walk the middle
ground ”between agribusiness groups and sustainable agriculture advocates
(Bartlett 2010 ). The center ’s mission to address the harms caused by industri-
alized agriculture challenged the status quo and left the center vulnerable to
attack even as it attempted to occupy middle ground. In 2015, the LeopoldCenter ’s local foods team moved to University Extension, further diminishing
the staffing capacity of the Leopold Center (ISU Extension and Outreach,n.d.).
Despite pressures and changes, the Leopold Center has accomplished a sig-
nificant body of work in support of sustainable agriculture:
The Leopold Center has a national reputation for how it had supported cutting-
edge research which has led to significant dividends for Iowa —cleaner water,
better conservation of natural resources, and greater agricultural vitality …
Between 1998 and 2017, the Leopold Center awarded more than 500 competi-tive grants coming from every Iowa county. These awards often acted as seedmoney to leverage other funding for research and demonstration projects, edu-cation, or planning and capacity-building efforts, aimed at developing profit-able and sustainable farming systems for Iowa. The work of the LeopoldCenter has made a difference in Iowa and beyond. (LCSA n.d. [ “About ”])
Some have theorized that it was this continued work examining and question-
ing the status quo of agriculture that made the Leopold Center a target forstate legislators (Collins 2017 ).
In April of 2017, Iowa ’s Republican-controlled state legislature approved
legislation to defund and close the center, and to redirect its funding to themore narrowly focused Iowa Nutrient Research Center housed at ISU
(Collins 2017 ). The Iowa Nutrient Research Center began in 2013 in response
to Iowa ’s 2008 Nutrient Reduction Strategy, a plan to reduce phosphorus and
nitrogen pollution in Iowa ’s waters and, eventually, Iowa ’s contribution to theCAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 77
Gulf of Mexico dead zone, by engaging farmers in specific voluntary conser-
vation practices (DNR 2013 ; LCSA, n.d. [ “Managing Nutrients ”]). While we
agree with the importance of water quality issues, we underscore the need
for public science, especially including transparency in funding allocationdecisions and greater accountability in disseminating and communicating
results to the public. With the Leopold Center being defunded, the public
has lost a research center that used a transparent review process for grants,had an advisory board comprised of stakeholders from various sectors of
Iowa agriculture with attention paid to nonprofit groups and farmers, and
was closely connected to the Graduate Program in Sustainable Agriculture,which critically examined agriculture ’s status quo.
In losing the Leopold Center ’s research we are concerned by a return to
narrow research agendas limited to technological fixes to corn and soybeansystems, solutions which do not inspire systems transformation nor challenge
the business models long held by agribusiness in Iowa. Emphasizing a narrow
technological fix approach, the Nutrient Research Center ’s appointed interim
director, Hongwei Xin, is well published in science specifically concerned withthe increased efficiency of poultry and swine confined feeding operations. We
argue that this type of narrowly focused research conflicts with the broad
community-based and ecologically based perspectives that underlie sustain-able agricultural research and ecofeminist practices of agriculture (Allen
2004 ; Shiva 2010 ).
These concerns are shared by Kamyar Enshayan, a former Leopold Center
advisory board member and director of University of Northern Iowa ’s Center
for Energy and Environmental Education, who argued in a statewide newspa-
per that redirecting the funding from the Leopold Center to the NutrientResearch Center would downplay Iowa ’s environmental problems, treating
symptoms of the modern agricultural system (the nutrients polluting the
waterways) rather than transforming the agricultural system itself:
That leaky cropping system has been planned and incentivized by federal pro-
grams, shaped by global grain merchants who also happen to control grainmarkets as well as seeds and inputs. It is well-documented that it is thissystem, this colonizing economy, that continues to lead to rural decline.(Enshayan 2017 )
Speci ﬁcally, Enshayan ( 2017 ) called into question the Nutrient Research
Center ’s existence:
It was a big mistake to create the “Iowa Nutrient Research Center. ”It renamed
the tragedy of industrial agriculture (soil erosion, water pollution, deliberateevading of public health and labor laws by multinational meat packing plantsor absentee owned egg factories, public health threats form massive hog con-finement operations, pesticides and fertilizer in drinking water, manurespills, etc.) as simply a “nutrient ”problem.78 A. CARTER ET AL.
Kathleen Delate, a professor of organic agriculture at ISU, shared similar
concerns about the transfer of funding from the Leopold Center to the Nutri-
ent Management Center:
I conduct research, supported by the Leopold Center, to strengthen the agricul-
tural economy of Iowa by finding practices that will reduce our dependence onpetrochemicals. These include best practices for manure management, identify-ing new crops and crop rotations, and determining if resistant varieties and bio-logical control can be replacements for pesticides that harm pollinators. Theseefforts are not duplicative with any other center. The Nutrient Research Centerfocuses solely on ways to reduce nitrogen runoff or leaching, and not on issuesof pest management or alternative crops. (LCSA Alumni Statements, n.d.)
Yet, in April 2017, Republican legislators argued that the Leopold Center had
“achieved its mission ”(Obradovich 2017 ), despite concurrent headlines in
Iowa ’s newspapers reporting that over half of the state ’s waterways were pol-
luted (Jordan 2017 ). Thanks to public outcry organized through our grass-
roots efforts to preserve the Leopold Center, Iowa ’s Governor Branstad
used a line-item veto in May 2017 to eliminate language closing theLeopold Center, while, unfortunately, maintaining the legislation as writtenthat redirected all of the Leopold Center ’s public funding to the Nutrient
Research Center (Charis-Carlson 2017 ).
As we write this in Fall 2017, the future of the defunded Leopold Center is
uncertain. A volunteer task force is in the process of leading vision sessionsacross the state to hear ideas from the public about how the Leopold
Center should move forward. The university has devoted little staff time or
budget to organizing and advertising the vision sessions and, unsurprisingly,they have been poorly attended. Though director Mark Rasmussen is hopeful,
he reported in August of 2017 that he had no reliable leads for alternative
sources of financial support for the Leopold Center (Charis-Carlson 2017 ).
A New Path Forward: Re-imagining the Future of the Leopold
Center
Since receiving news of the Leopold Center ’s impending funding cuts in late
March 2017, we have engaged in a campaign in partnership with grassroots
statewide and regional agricultural and environmental organizations includ-ing the Iowa Farmers Union, WFAN, Iowa Environmental Council, Center
for Rural Affairs, Iowa Policy Project, and Practical Farmers of Iowa. The
defunding of the Leopold Center presented an opportunity within the sustain-able agricultural community, one that we were able to leverage for ecofeminist
intervention. As has been documented elsewhere in the coalescence and trans-
formation of environmental movements (see Ordner 2017 ), the threat of loss
can encourage communities to create new collaborations and raise new con-
cerns, as unlikely partners strategize together to enact a different future. WeCAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 79
attempted to elevate such a reactive moment as an opportunity for
transformation.
As part of a core group of current students and alumni, we worked to
quickly connect supporters of the Leopold Center and align our work with
the work of different nonprofit agricultural organizations. Within 48 hours
of the news of the Leopold Center ’s potential closure, we launched a petition
that had national reach with over 600 signatories in its first weekend and
created a website to share press and details about the legislation.5Former stu-
dents and community members were quick to offer support by way of signa-tures, statements, and phone calls to legislators, many viewing the proposedcuts as part of the continued prioritization of production over community,
as expressed by Leigh-Ann Long, an ISU graduate and researcher studying
conservation. She stressed the need to bring in “diversity to Iowa ’s agricultural
system” rather than continue to elevate industrial agriculture in Iowa that
“needs fewer and fewer people to produce more and more corn, soybeans,
and hogs ”(LCSA Alumni Statements).
We collectively drafted memos and press releases compiling the petition
signatories and testimony for the state legislators and press, emphasizing
the importance of the continued funding and transparency of the Leopold
Center ’s science. These materials included comments from Leopold Center
grant recipients and former ISU students about Iowa ’s continued need for a
Leopold Center that funded research that challenges the status quo (LCSAAlumni Statements). Jessica Soulis, Farm Marketing Specialist at LutheranServices of Iowa ’s Global Greens refugee farmer program in Des Moines,
shared that the Leopold Center ’s funding for research is “innovative and
vital to the land, water, and people of Iowa, ”and paramount to the creation
of community and change for current and future generations of those engagedin sustainable agriculture (LCSA Alumni Statements). We posted these
materials online and began to organize turnout for the eventual state legisla-
tive budget hearing. Though ISU ’s Alliance for Iowa State did eventually issue
an action alert, urging Iowans to contact their legislators in support of the
Leopold Center, the initial delay of an immediate response from ISU leader-
ship provided us the opportunity to frame the issue.
Our initial efforts culminated on 13 April 2017 at the state capitol when
those testifying to the importance of the Leopold Center filled an overflowingpublic budget hearing. University leaders attended but did not speak at thehearing. Farmers and community leaders, such as Aaron Lehman, who ident-
ified himself as a 5th-generation family farmer and president of Iowa Farmers
Union, shared personal stories about the importance of the Leopold Centerthat emphasized health of future generations: “[W]e need more innovation,
not less. We need to build on our wise investments toward sustainability.
5Seehttp://iowasustainableag.com/ .80 A. CARTER ET AL.
And for this generation and the next, we need the Leopold Center more than
ever”(Iowa Farmers Union 2017 ). Such comments stressed identification
with settler narratives (e.g. 5th-generation family farmer). Indeed, the
public engaged by the Leopold Center largely reflects colonial legacies ofland access and distribution —leading us to problematize who the “public ”
in the “public science ”excludes. Yet in the comments made by Lehman
and others in our alliance, we identified an acknowledgment of systemic fail-ures and call for systemic changes toward a more just agricultural system, one
welcoming of diversification both in farmers and practices. Their testimonies
and the subsequent organizing and advocacy around a much different futurefor the Leopold Center demonstrate engagement and openness to new ideas
and new conversations about agricultural sustainability.
Following the hearing, the legislation to defund and close the center passed
swiftly in the Republican-controlled legislature. In response, we organized anationwide call-in to the Governor ’s office and letters to the editor demanding
he veto the legislation. To better shape the public narrative about the Leopold
Center ’s future, current, and former students collaboratively authored several
op-eds over the subsequent weeks that specifically identified the danger of
corporate overreach, while also lifting up a vision for the Leopold Center
valuing future generations and emphasizing a more holistic public science:
Leopold described Iowa not as a food factory but as a living, working landscape
in which farmers and citizens share in the abundance of its natural richness. Thegift of fertile soils and fresh water can continue to shape the prosperity of thestate. Yet seemingly overnight, a small group of politicians decided on thefate of a state-cherished, nationally recognized research institution without con-
sulting the farmers, communities, students, and researchers who rely upon the
Center as a key partner. This partisan politicking denigrates the spirit of Leopoldhimself and makes the shared goal of safeguarding our landscape for this andfuture generations less possible by the day. (Basche et al. 2017 )
Further, these editorials identiﬁ ed the shortcomings of the Leopold Center in
its current form and called for a better future:
[W]e envision a Leopold Center that is supported in a creative, scientific pursuitof holistic and interdisciplinary strategies to address the challenges of climatechange, soil erosion, water pollution, rural exodus, land transition and foodjustice in our state and in our agricultural system at large. The center ’s
history of collaboration and its state and national support position it well tolead this overdue work.
We know that now is the time for a bold new Leopold Center that builds upon
the work of the last 30 years to pursue research that partners with a variety ofcommunities long into the future. (Basche et al. 2017 )
The feedback in response to these letters —from the general public, Leopold
Center ’s current and former staff, and the center ’s stakeholders— was over-
whelmingly positive.CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 81
While our efforts to save the Leopold Center ’s funding were unsuccessful,
the Governor vetoed the Leopold Center ’s closure in May 2017 (Miller 2017 ).
This was a small victory; the Leopold Center was retained in name only, but
with the transfer of all public funding to the Nutrient Research Center. Thisinspired some to call publicly for a new accountability to and prioritization of
public health in the land-grant mission (Carter et al. 2017 ; Enshayan 2017 ).
As conversations about the Leopold Center ’s future continue, Paul Johnson,
a farmer, former chief of the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (now NaturalResources Conservation Service), and one of the Iowa state legislators who
authored the historic Groundwater Protection Act creating the LeopoldCenter, reminded supporters of the importance that the center be atthe uni-
versity but not ofthe university. Debate continues about the home of the
Leopold Center and if it is to continue to exist in some form at ISU or else-where. With an ecofeminist lens, we will contribute to the debate by under-
scoring the need for a decolonized public science.
Since the Leopold Center ’s defunding, our grassroots alliance has indepen-
dently initiated a project to re-imagine the Leopold Center ’s future. In
October 2017, we —the authors —applied to and were awarded a small grant
from the Union of Concerned Scientists Public Science for Public Good cam-
paign to create a series of short advocacy videos highlighting the testimonyand emergent momentum we have witnessed during the past six months in
support of the Leopold Center. In continued collaboration with nonprofit
and grassroots partners, we have begun to plan a larger and continued cam-paign demanding the restoration of the Leopold Center ’s public funding and
emphasizing the need for an institutional home that supports, rather thancompromises, the Leopold Center ’s future as a leader toward a more just agri-
cultural system.
It is not enough to save or restore the Leopold Center. The Center ’s sup-
porters call for a new path forward. In October 2017, we facilitated a brain-storming session among the grassroots group to outline what sort of workwe envisioned a transformed and rebuilt Leopold Center leading in Iowa.
We followed this with a campaign strategy call in November to plan the
launch of a larger, public-facing campaign. These meetings were wellattended, including staff of Center for Rural Affairs and Iowa Farmers
Union, board members of WFAN, members of Practical Farmers of Iowa,
current and former ISU students, community leaders, former legislators,farmers, and supporters. We asked the group to respond to the following
prompts: “Iowa needs a Leopold Center that …” and“The Leopold Center
supports work that …” The statements shared by the grassroots group
reflected elements of an ecofeminist, anti-capitalist, anti-colonial, and
future-oriented agricultural system, including phrases such as “farming in
harmony with nature, ”“community-led, ”“those growing, working with,
and consuming food lead the direction, ”“regenerative system grounded in82 A. CARTER ET AL.
relationships, ”“care,”“justice, ”“a place for experimentation with innovative
and creative solutions to current agricultural problems, ”“support for diversi-
fied land use, diversified rural economies, and diverse communities.” The
group emphasized that Iowa ’s agricultural future must not look like its past
if we are to preserve the health of soil and water while sustaining diversity
within our communities. One group member specified that the goal should
not be to make the current agricultural system “a little less bad, ”but to
create a new system.
The grassroots alliance ’s collaboration inspired seven former students to
draft a new vision for the land-grant university led by the Leopold Center—to“honor and celebrate diversity of landscapes and communities, putting
diversity into practice and action ”through a new land-grant mission that
partners “science with art, research with outreach, practicality with vision,
and utility with love ”(Carter et al. 2017 ). Central to this new vision is a
“well-funded, fully staffed ”Leopold Center that is “championed by ISU ’s lea-
dership as a transformative agent of change on campus and beyond ”(Carter
et al. 2017 ).
Our shared work to rebuild the Leopold Center extends beyond Iowa ’s
agricultural and political landscape to contribute to resistance against thegrowing corporatization of public science within the public university andgreenwashing of sustainable agricultural movements. Through our efforts,
we attempt to challenge the “monoculture of the mind ”that constrains
imagination and change in our practice of science (Shiva 2015 ). The privati-
zation of knowledge and resources detracts from the world we are working totogether, a world in which agriculture nourishes people, communities, and the
planet. We share the story of this grassroots campaign to encourage others touse moments of reaction as momentum for collectively enacting new futures.
Reclaiming the Public in Public Science
Our grassroots alliance continues to be proactive in restructuring our relation-ships with the land and one another, though often we are left reacting tochanges such as the center ’s defunding. We continue to use the campaign
to rebuild the Leopold Center as an opportunity to make visible how corpor-ate interests and reductive science have worked against a public science thatreclaims and protects the commons. Further, we rewrite what might be poss-
ible not only for the Leopold Center, but for a new vision for sustainable agri-
culture in Iowa and beyond. In emphasizing the multitude of voices of thosewho cared about the Leopold Center and the new vision for its future, we work
to move beyond defeatism by elevating the public ’s concerns and care for agri-
cultural change in our state. We pressured the governor to use his power
through line-item veto to maintain the Leopold Center, if in name only.
We were successful in creating a debate where there was none and in engagingCAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 83
a public who had seemingly given up on holding the land-grant university
accountable to its mission. Now we continue to actively maintain a space
for proactive re-visioning of the Leopold Center and its future.
We have yet to see if the process of the statewide vision sessions will be co-
opted or lead to the possibility of new collaborations or the remaking of the
center at ISU or elsewhere. It is amidst this uncertainty that we keep
working to move beyond the limitations of the land-grant university inorder to build a home for inclusive and diverse agricultural visions, practices,
and practitioners. We are excited to see where our vision leads and what the
Leopold Center will become —a multi-university consortium boldly renamed
the Leopold Center for Naturecultures (see Haraway 2016 ; Puig de la Bella-
casa 2010 ,2015 ) would easily be within grasp. Our campaign continues to
be an opportunity for ecofeminist praxis as we work to create a new systemeven while constrained within and reacting to the old. We are reminded
that this is a process, and one that is long. In making visible what is compro-
mised, missing, or colonized in the land-grant university ’s vision for agricul-
tural landscape change, we must also continue to collaborate with the publicin imagining a new vision for a public science mission that is participatory,
just, and transformative.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the supporters of the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture
and all who continue to work for its future mission.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
The authors also thank the Union of Concerned Scientists for their support of thiswork through the Science for Public Good Fund ( https://www.ucsusa.org/take-
action/science-network/science-public-good-fund-grant-recipients ).
References
Ahmed, Nafeez. 2014 .“UN: Only Small Farmers and Agroecology Can Feed the
World. ”Permaculture Research In stitute. September 26. https://permaculture
news.org/2014/09/26/un-small-farme rs-agroecology-can-feed-world/ .
Alexander, R. B., R. A. Smith, G. E. Schwarz, E. W. Boyer, J. V. Nolan, and J. W.
Brakebill. 2008 .“Differences in Phosphorus and Nitrogen Delivery to the Gulf of
Mexico from the Mississippi River Basin. ”Environmental Science & Technology
42: 822 –830.84 A. CARTER ET AL.
Alexander, M. Jacqui, and Chandra Talpade Mohanty. 2010 .“Cartographies of
Knowledge and Power: Transnational Feminism as Radical Praxis. ”InCritical
Transnational Feminist Praxis , edited by Amanda Swarr and Richa Nagar, 23 –
45. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Allen, Patricia. 2004 .Together at the Table: Sustainability and Sustenance in the
American Agrifood System . University Park: The Pennsylvania State University
Press.
Basche, Andrea, Angela Carter, Carrie Chennault, Maritza Pierre, and David
Weisberger. 2017 .“Celebrate and Support Leopold Center. ”The Des Moines
Register , April 16. http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/readers/
2017/04/16/celebrate-and-support-leopold-center/100514874/ .
Basche, Andrea, Angie Carter, Carrie Chennault, and Gabrielle Roesch-McNally.
2017. “Leopold Center Needs a Bold Vision for the Future. ”The Des Moines
Register , May 22. http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/
iowa-view/2017/05/22/leopold-center-needs-bold-vision-future/337322001/.
Bartlett, Thomas. 2010 .“Fields of Discord: At Public Colleges’ Sustainability Centers,
Farming Groups Sow Influence. ”The Chronicle of Higher Education , June 27.
https://www.chronicle.com/article/At-Public-Colleges/66044 .
Carter, Angie, Stefan Gailans, Gabrielle Roesch-McNally, Hannah Dankbar, Joe
Wheelock, Jackie Nester, and Ashley Noonan. 2017 .“Transforming the Land
Grant Mission: Iowa State ’s Next 20 Years. ”The Des Moines Register , October
17.http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/iowa-view/2017/
10/17/transforming-land-grant-mission-iowa-states-next-20-years/771598001/ .
Charis-Carlson, Jeff. 2017. “With State Funding Cut, What ’s Next for ISU ’s Leopold
Center? ”Iowa City Press-Citizen, August 3. http://www.press-citizen.com/story/
news/2017/08/02/leopold-center-iowa-budget-cuts-leave-questions-over-whats-
next/484403001/ .
Collins, John. 2017. “Rethink This Iowa: Do Not Gut the Leopold Center for
Sustainable Agriculture. ”In These Times , June 23. http://inthesetimes.com/rural-
america/entry/20270/iowa-leopold-center-for-sustainable-agriculture-water-soil-
cafos-nitrates .
Cox,
Craig, Andrew Hug, and Nils Bruzelius. 2011 .“Losing Ground. ”Environmental
Working Group. http://static.ewg.org/reports/2010/losingground/pdf/losingground_
report.pdf .
Eller, Donnelle. 2016. “Ambassador Branstad Could Be Huge Boost to Iowa-China
Trade. ”The Des Moines Register , December 7.
Eller, Donnelle. 2017 .“With Water Works ’Lawsuit Dismissed, Water Quality is the
Legislature ’s Problem. ”The Des Moines Register , March 17. http://www.
desmoinesregister.com/story/money/agriculture/2017/03/17/judge-dismisses-water-works-nitrates-lawsuit/99327928/ .
Enshayan, Kamyar. 2017 .“It Was a Big Mistake to Create the ‘Iowa Nutrient Research
Center ’.”The Des Moines Register , May 22. http://www.desmoinesregister.com/
story/opinion/readers/2017/05/23/big-mistake-create-iowa-nutrient-research-center/337599001/ .
Food and Water Watch. 2012 .Public Research, Private Gain . Corporate Influence
over University Agricultural Research. https://www.foodandwaterwatch.org/sites/
default/files/Public%20Research%20Private%20Gain%20Report%20April%202012.pdf.
Gibson-Graham, J. K. 2008 .“Diverse Economies: Performative Practices for ‘Other
Worlds ’.”Progress in Human Geography 32 (5): 613 –632.CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 85
Gibson-Graham, J. K. 2011 .“A Feminist Project of Belonging for the Anthropocene. ”
Gender, Place and Culture 18 (1): 1 –21.
Gilmore, Ruth Wilson. 2008 .“Forgotten Places and the Seeds of Grassroots Planning. ”
InEngaging Contradictions: Theory, Politics, and Methods of Activist Scholarship ,
edited by Charles R. Hale, 31 –61. Berkeley: University of California Press.
GRAIN. 2014. “Hungry for Land: Small Farmers Feed the World with Less than a
Quarter of all Farmland. ”May 28. https://www.grain.org/article/entries/4929-
hungry-for-land-small-farmers-feed-the-world-with-less-than-a-quarter-of-all-
farmland#sdfootnote6sym .
Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Harcourt, Wendy, and Ingrid L. Nelson. Eds. 2015 .Practising Feminist Political
Ecologies: Moving Beyond the “Green Economy ”. London: Zed Books.
Harlan, Edgar R. 1931 .A Narrative History of the People of Iowa . Chicago: American
Historical Society.
IDALS (Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship). 2017 .“A Look at
Iowa Agriculture. ”http://www.iowaagriculture.gov/quickFacts.asp .
DNR (Iowa Department of Natural Resources). 2013 .“Iowa Nutrient Reduction
Strategy: A Science and Technology-based Framework to Assess and ReduceNutrients to Iowa Waters and the Gulf of Mexico (2013). ”http://publications.
iowa.gov/23225/ .
DNR (Iowa Department of Natural Resources). 2016 .“The DRAFT 2016 Iowa List
of Clean Water Section 303(d) Impaired Waters. ”http://www.iowadnr.gov/
Environmental-Protection/Water-Quality/Water-Monitoring/Impaired-Waters .
Iowa Farmers Union. 2017 .“IFU President Gives Testimony at Public Hearing on the
Fate of the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture.” Grassroots: A Quarterly
Newsletter,1 –2.
Iowa State University Extension and Outreach. n.d. “Local Foods Program: History. ”
Iowa State University. https://www.extension.iastate.edu/localfoods/about/history/ .
Iowa 
State University Foundation. n.d. “The Monsanto Company Partnership with
Iowa State University. ”http://www.foundation.iastate.edu/s/1463/giving/interior.
aspx?pgid=1027&gid=1&cid=3248 .
Iowa State University. n.d. “History of Iowa State: Time Line, 1858 –1875. ”
Sesquicentennial Celebration. https://web.archive.org/web/20090513215211/http://
www.lib.iastate.edu/spcl/exhibits/150/template/timeline-1858.html .
Iowa State University. n.d. “Mission and Vision. ”Office of the President. http://www.
president.iastate.edu/mission.
Jordan, Erin. 2017 .“More than Half of Iowa Water Bodies Tested Are Polluted. ”The
Cedar Rapids Gazette , May 19. http://www.thegazette.com/subject/news/
government/more-than-half-of-iowa-water-bodies-tested-are-polluted-20170519.
Kardas-Nelson, Mara. 2015 .“Campaigners Aim to Make Environment Top Issue for
Iowa Caucuses. ”Al Jazeera America , June 16. http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/
2015/6/16/environment-becomes-issue-for-iowa-caucuses.html .
Krapfl, Mike. 2016 .“Iowa State Tops External Funding Record in FY16. ”Iowa State
University News Service , July 21. http://www.inside.iastate.edu/article/2016/07/21/
funding .
LaDuke, Winona. 2017 .“Recovering Our Land to Decolonize Our Food. ”InLand
Justice: Re-Imagining Land, Food, and the Commons in the United States , edited
by Justine M. Williams and Eric Holt-Giménez, xi –xiv. Oakland: Food First.86 A. CARTER ET AL.
Leopold, Aldo. [1949] 1989 .A Sand County Almanac: And Sketches Here and There .
New York: Oxford University Press.
LCSA Alumni Statements (Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture Alumni
Statements). n.d.“What Do ISU Students and Alumni Say About the Leopold
Center? ”http://iowasustainableag.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/LCSA-Alumni-
Statements-1.pdf .
LCSA (Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture). 2017. “LCSA Impact Data:
Making a Difference —Impacts and Leverage. ”http://iowasustainableag.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/LCSA-impact-data-b2.pdf .
LCSA (Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture). n.d. “About the Leopold Center. ”
http://www.leopold.iastate.edu/about/leopold-center .
LCSA (Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture). n.d. “Managing Nutrients. ”
http://www.leopold.iastate.edu/nutrients .
Miller, Vanessa. 2017 .“Governor Branstad Saves Iowa State Leopold Center with
Veto. ”The Cedar Rapids Gazette , May 12. http://www.thegazette.com/subject/
news/education/higher-education/governor-branstad-saves-iowa-state-leopold-
center-with-veto-20170512 .
Nagar, Richa. 2014 .Muddying the Waters: Coauthoring Feminisms Across Scholarship
and Activism . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Naidenko, Olga V., Craig Cox, and Niles Bruzelius. 2012 .“Troubled Waters: Farm
Pollution Threatens Drinking Water. ”Environmental Working Group. http://
static.ewg.org/reports/2012/troubled_waters/troubled_waters.pdf .
Oakland Institute. 2011 .“Agri Sol Energy and Pharos Global Agriculture Fund ’s Land
Deal in Tanzania. ”Understanding Land Investment Deals in Africa –Land Deal
Brief, June. https://www.oaklandinstitute.org/land-deal-brief-AgriSol-energy-and-
pharos-global-agriculture-fund%E2%80%99s-land-deal-tanzania .
Obradovich, Kathie. 2017 .“Mission Accomplished? GOP Plan Guts Research on
Floods, Water Pollution. ”The Des Moines Register , April 12. http://www.
desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/kathie-obradovich/2017/04/12/mission-accomplished-gop-plan-guts-research-floods-water-pollution/100378908/ .
Ordner, James P. 2017 .“Community Action and Climate Change. ”Nature
 Climate
Change 7: 161 –163.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2010 .“Ethical Doings in Naturecultures. ”Ethics, Place
and Environment 13 (2): 151 –169. doi:10.1080/13668791003778834 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2015 .“Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity
and the Pace of Care. ”Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691 –716.
Rocheleau, Dianne, Barbara Thomas-Slayter, and Esther Wangari, eds. 1996 .Feminist
Political Ecology: Global Issues and Local Experience . Abingdon: Routledge.
Shiva, Vandana. 2010 .Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Development . London: Zed
Books.
Shiva, Vandana. 2015 .“The Future of Food. ”Lecture at Iowa State University, Ames,
IA. March 11. http://www.event.iastate.edu/event/32739 .
Smith, Linda Tuhiwai. 1999 .Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous
Peoples . London: Zed Books.
United States Census Bureau. 2017. “Quick Facts: Iowa. ”https://www.census.gov/
quickfacts/IA .
USDA NASS (United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural
Statistics Service). 2016. “State Agriculture Overview for Iowa. ”https://www.
nass.usda.gov/Quick_Stats/Ag_Overview/stateOverview.php?state=IOWA .CAPITALISM NATURE SOCIALISM 87
Walsh, Ellen. 2008. “Motivation for Grant from ‘Soulless Entity ’Should Be
Examined. ”Iowa State Daily , September 17. http://www.iowastatedaily.com/
opinion/article_9b35568e-6062-5ac5-8aa6-d0a4d3f75ce3.html .
Wintersteen, Wendy. 2008 .“FEEDBACK: Monsanto ’s Generous Gift Will Benefit
Students. ”Iowa State Daily , September 21. http://www.iowastatedaily.com/
opinion/article_f13420d4-1644-5e44-a693-dbf618e60114.html .88 A. CARTER ET AL.
