Agriculture and Human Values (2023) 40:231–244
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-022-10350-1
example, because of climate change, or, they will occur 
through deliberate efforts for profound transformation of 
provision and consumption systems to mitigate significant 
impacts of these changes (Brown 2014 ; Folke et al. 2010 ) 
argue that the resilience of social-ecological systems (SES), 
requires transformation to involve not just changes to the 
variables that make up SES, but also ways of thinking, val -
ues, perceptions, meaning and ways of interacting, includ -
ing associated institutional and political arrangements and 
power relations. In the context of food system change, 
the need for food system transformation is “irrefutable” 
and will require “major shifts in mindsets” to address the 
impacts that food systems have on agriculture, value chains, 
health and planetary ecosystems (Webb et al. 2020 , p. 584). 
In this context, incremental changes to discrete components 
within agri-food systems are not sufficient, and more radi -
cal and holistic change is required. Efforts at food system Introduction
It is well-known that global systems of food production are 
environmentally polluting and socially destructive (Willett 
et al. 2019 ). As such, academic debate has focused on the 
nature of food system change and how to understand and 
create more positive and sustainable outcomes. But the com -
plexity of food systems and their power structures means 
achieving systemic change is difficult. Global environmen -
tal change and societal responses require systemic change 
that will either be forced, unplanned and detrimental, for 
 Sean Connelly
sean.connelly@otago.ac.nz
1 School of Geography, University of Otago, PO Box 56, 
Dunedin, New ZealandAbstract
A growing body of literature argues that achieving radical change in the agri-food system requires a radical renegotia -
tion of our relationship with the environment alongside a change in our thinking and approach to transformational food 
politics. This paper argues that relational approaches such as a more-than-human ethic of care (MTH EoC) can offer a 
different and constructive perspective to analyse agri-food system transformation because it emphasises social structures 
and relationships as the basis of environmental change. A MTH EoC has not yet been applied to regenerative agriculture, 
yet other literature on regenerative agriculture suggests that care may be present in these spaces and calls for the need for 
social science analysis of the regenerative movement. This paper uses a MTH EoC lens to reveal a diverse array of ways 
in which power is and can be deployed for change in the regenerative agriculture movement in Aotearoa, New Zealand. 
Globally, regenerative agriculture tends to be analysed through positivist, scientific approaches that focus on biophysical 
markers of ecological improvement. Yet, a relational approach reveals how engagement in regenerative agriculture is creat -
ing significant shifts in mindset towards more holistic and relational understandings of biological and social ecosystems. 
A regenerative mindset framework is suggested as a method of understanding the connection between a regenerative 
form of thinking, being and doing for farmers. Interviews suggested that this shift in farmers’ socio-ecological relations 
is crucial to the transformational potential of regenerative agriculture. This paper argues that relational analyses such as 
the MTH EoC approach used to analyse regenerative agriculture in this research, refresh the way we analyse agri-food 
system change. They also are critical to guiding and supporting on-the-ground socio-ecological shifts that are necessary 
to see agricultural transformation.
Keywords  Regenerative agriculture · Ethic of care · New Zealand · Transformation · More-than-humanAccepted: 5 August 2022 / Published online: 25 August 2022
© The Author(s) 2022Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a 
relational approach to understanding transformation
Madison Seymour1 · Sean Connelly1
1 3
M. Seymour, S. Connellytransformation are complex and multifaceted, which result 
in diverse entry points for analysis of their potential for long 
term, systemic change. Thus, how we understand the the -
ory and practice of achieving systemic change in the food 
system is a heavily contested question (McClintock 2014 ; 
Moragues-Faus and Marsden 2017 ).
In New Zealand, the challenge of food system change is 
also urgent. Despite the country’s “clean and green” mar -
keting reputation, the social and environmental cost of the 
primary industry sector has become more evident in recent 
years. Water over allocation and pollution, methane emis -
sions from livestock, biodiversity loss, poor farmer men -
tal health and wellbeing, and a degraded social license to 
farm are some of the major issues now at the centre of New 
Zealand’s debates about the future of farming (for example, 
Morgaine et al. 2017 ; New Zealand Productivity Commis -
sion, 2018 ; MfE and Stats NZ, 2019 ; One News, 2019 ). As 
a country that relies on agricultural exports, the need to cre -
ate sustainable pathways for food production is of critical 
economic value, on top of already essential socio-ecological 
concerns.
Rising pressure to move away from unsustainable levels 
(and practices) of production has meant that the controversial 
and somewhat ambiguous term ‘regenerative agriculture’ 
has become a buzzword in New Zealand agriculture over 
the past few years. The term ‘regenerative organic’ was first 
coined in the 1980’s by Robert Rodale as a holistic approach 
to farming that included social and economic improvements 
alongside environmental benefits (Rodale Institute 2019 ). 
Since then, the term has evolved beyond organic to broadly 
include land management approaches that aim to build 
soil health, crop resilience and nutrient density by aligning 
with natural processes such as the carbon and hydrologi -
cal cycles (The Carbon Underground 2017 ; Masters 2019 ). 
Practices such as minimizing soil disturbance, keeping the 
soil covered, integrating livestock, creating crop diversity 
and maintaining living roots in the soil year-round are seen 
as a pathway for restoring the chemistry of dirt to the biol -
ogy of soil (Brown 2018 ). Soils are weaned off heavy use 
of fertilisers and increased biodiversity is substituted for 
pesticides to keep plants healthy (LaCanne and Lundgren 
2018 ). As such, farm inputs decrease, reducing costs for 
farmers (Brown 2018 ; LaCanne and Lundgren 2018 ). Con -
cepts such as organic agriculture, agroecology, permacul -
ture, and biodynamics can all fall under the wider umbrella 
of regenerative agriculture (Grelet and Lang 2021 ). A key 
feature however is that regenerative practices are context 
specific, and therefore no two farms will practice or embody 
it in the same way. This poses particular challenges in defin -
ing regenerative agriculture and as a result, definitions sometimes include higher-level principles rather than prac -
tices alone1.
Regenerative agriculture has been developed in grass -
roots, predominantly farmer-led spaces, over the past sev -
eral decades as a systems design approach to agriculture 
that is a step beyond sustainability. Rather than focusing 
on reducing harm, agriculture is seen as an opportunity 
to actively improve the health of ecosystems (Siegfried 
2020 ). It is this feature of regenerative agriculture which 
drives Rhodes ( 2017 ) to label it as imperative to address 
impacts related to agricultural practices. In New Zealand, 
industry players such as farming cooperatives, govern -
ment ministries, research institutes and product marketing 
groups, are beginning to consider (and debate) the poten -
tial regenerative agriculture has to transform the country’s 
agri-food industry. Internationally, large multinational cor -
porations have similarly begun to make commitments to 
sourcing regeneratively grown products indicating a strong 
popularization and commercialization of the term (General 
Mills 2021 ; Nestlé 2021 ; PepsiCo 2021 ). However, the 
paradigm we use to analyse regenerative agriculture is criti -
cal for understanding the transformative potential it holds. 
Globally, regenerative agriculture is often analysed through 
positivist, scientific approaches that focus on biophysical 
markers of ecological improvement. Understanding pro -
cesses of agricultural change needs to go beyond the mea -
surement of discrete variables, practices and outcomes. Our 
argument is that a more-than-human ethic of care (MTH 
EoC) analysis of regenerative agriculture focuses attention 
on relationships and values of care that are overlooked in 
purely science-based analysis of changing agricultural prac -
tices. A MTH EoC offers a different, and constructive per -
spective for understanding processes of agri-food system 
change. We build on calls within the literature to expand 
approaches used to understand agri-food system transfor -
mation (Tregear 2011 ; Lamine et al. 2019 ) and explore the 
potential of socio-ethical concepts such as justice and care 
(Gottschlich and Bellina 2017 ) in the context of regenera -
tive agriculture. We argue that a MTH EoC lens reveals a 
diverse array of the ways power is and can be deployed for 
change in the New Zealand regenerative movement. This is 
because a relational approach aims to understand transfor -
mation in a way that emphasises social structures and rela -
tionships as the basis of environmental change.
The following section provides an overview of the theo -
retical context of this argument by exploring the features 
of a MTH EoC lens that were used to analyse regenerative 
agriculture in this research. The article then moves on to 
the case study research of regenerative agriculture in New 
1  For example, see similar but varying principles laid out by each 
Soloviev and Landua ( 2016 ), Jellie ( 2020 ) as well as Grelet and Lang 
(2021 ) for a New Zealand overview of the concept.
1 3232
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…Zealand. The methods of the research are covered, followed 
by presentation and discussion of some of the results that 
were revealed through a MTH EoC lens. The final section 
concludes with the potential of MTH EoC lens to refresh the 
way we analyse transformation and practice on-the-ground 
agri-food system change.
Relational politics: a more-than-human ethic 
of care
The use of MTH EoC as a relational lens for analysis of 
transformation is based in two areas of literature: more than 
humanism, and geographies of care. A MTH EoC approach 
connects care ethics and the natural world by using a rela -
tional understanding of the world that draws directly on 
connections between humans and all bodies around us. This 
relational approach creates a useful lens for revealing and 
understanding socio-environmental change and therefore, a 
more-than-human ethic is an ethic of care that has particular 
relevance for regenerative agriculture.
Geographies of care have similarly been developed 
though the relational approaches of feminist geographies 
in recent decades. Defining a care ethic, Fisher and Tronto 
(1990 , p.40) write that it is.
…everything that we do to maintain, continue, and 
repair our ‘world’ so that we can live in it as well as 
possible. That world includes our bodies, ourselves, 
and our environment, all of which we seek to inter -
weave in a complex, life-sustaining web.
An ethic of care lens places value on relationships, includ -
ing those that are intimate or personal. There are strong 
arguments for the connections between practices of care 
and processes of change. For example, Conradi ( 2015 ) con -
ceptualises care as being underpinned by the practice of 
attentiveness. It is attentiveness that makes activities of care 
feel genuine, unbounded by expectations of reciprocity, yet 
embedded in the relation between  two people. Social inter -
actions that are founded on this care practice generate atten -
tive interactions and in doing so create the possibility for 
societal transformation through noticing the need for care 
and acting accordingly (Conradi 2015 , p. 125). Similarly, 
Krzywoszynska ( 2019 ) builds on this conceptualisation 
with the theory of care networks. Individuals are considered 
to be surrounded by interdependent relationships with all 
living entities and recognising these connections demand 
that care-givers attend to these networks. Being attentive to 
the entities of a care network is a process of experiential 
and intellectual development, but one that can allow societal transformation to become visible through individual and 
collective learning (Krzywoszynska 2019 ).
Care has traditionally been viewed as a human-centered 
process of relationality where analysis has focused on care-
based practices such as care-work (McEwan and Goodman 
2010 ). However, care can be enacted through co-produced 
socio-ecological relations in a way that begins to diverge 
from such static humanism. Beacham ( 2018 , p 539), argues 
that an “ethic of care framework serves to problematize 
hierarchical normative ethical frameworks - which place 
the human at the top or centre - and instead proceeds with 
a vision of a horizontal web of interdependency between 
all matters”. Applying an ethos of care requires rethinking 
the order and structure in our world to reveal power imbal -
ances but also spaces of possibility. This rethinking extends 
beyond the thoughts of humanism and social constructivism 
which are situated in the human world to include more-than-
human entities into care networks. This therefore includes 
those entities not sense-able to humans but which are regard -
less present, in such networks (Krzywoszynska 2019 ).
Thus, the more-than-human approach provides further 
depth to an ethic of care to aid understanding of nature-based 
systems such as agriculture. The binaries of human/nature 
that have dominated socio-ecological relationships through 
western (and often colonial) discourse have legitimised the 
large-scale exploitation of people and the planet (Orr 2002 ; 
Alkon 2013 ; Parsons et al. 2017 ). To adequately address 
linked social and environmental challenges, removing this 
perceived separation is essential (Alkon 2013 ; Moragues-
Faus and Marsden 2017 ; West et al. 2020 ). It is important to 
acknowledge here that the creation of such dualisms between 
nature and culture are not universal and as such, neither is 
the act of deconstructing binaries. Many indigenous cul -
tures have never formed such divisional constructs (Whyte 
and Cuomo 2016 ; Hikuroa 2017 ; Winter 2019 ). Although 
the term ‘regenerative agriculture’ originated in the United 
States in the 1980’s (Rodale Institute 2019 ), indigenous 
cultures often have embodied care-full socio-ecological 
approaches to agriculture for centuries (Sundberg 2014 ). 
In the New Zealand context, indigenous-led approaches 
to addressing socio-ecological systems change often focus 
attention on how knowledge and practice are shaped by 
relations between human and non-human actors (Parsons 
et al. 2017 ). However, the dominance of western ontolo -
gies means that a far more exploitative conceptualisation of 
socio-ecological relations has been ingrained into dominant 
development discourse and into agriculture. Using a rela -
tional ontology such as more-than-humanism for environ -
mental challenges unsettles these views, reinforces humans 
and environment as co-constituting and co-produced (Booth 
2013 ) and therefore highlights these relationships as critical 
components of transformative change.
1 3233
M. Seymour, S. Connellycontacted through regenerative agriculture social media 
groups. Selective sampling was also used to seek partici -
pants from relevant organisations for the non-farmer par -
ticipants. All interviews were conducted between May and 
September 2020.
The farmers were from the regions of Otago, Canterbury 
and Southland. The criteria for farmers to participate in 
the study was that they must be currently using ‘regenera -
tive practices’ on their farm for two years or more. Since 
‘regenerative agriculture’ is not clearly defined, participants 
self-defined their regenerative practices based on a range of 
ecological practices such as an emphasis on biodiversity, a 
focus on building healthy soils, and a reduction or elimi -
nation of chemical fertilisers and pesticides/herbicides, and 
an emphasis on replicating natural cycles or farming ‘with 
nature’ (The Carbon Underground 2017 ; Rodale Institute 
2019 ). The study included farmers who practiced horticul -
ture (1), dairy (1), and sheep/beef farming (10). This ratio 
of farming types was due to the nature of the participants 
who indicated interest in this study which is likely due to 
regenerative agriculture currently being more established in 
pastoral farming in New Zealand. Farming organically was 
not seen as a prerequisite for regenerative agriculture and 
therefore 11 out of 12 farmers were not full organic practi -
tioners. All the farms were commercial operations that var -
ied in size from a few hundred hectares to several thousand. 
This was a specific design choice of the study due to the 
pivotal role commercial farms play in national and interna -
tional food systems. Ten of the interviews were in-person 
farm visits, the rest were online Zoom interviews due to 
location and availability of participants. The in-person farm 
visits also involved a short farm tour (where time permit -
ted) to allow the farmer to share aspects of their farm with 
the researcher. The farmer interviews were primarily one-
on-one interviews with male participants, but sometimes 
included spouses.
Interviews were semi-structured and conversational but 
guided around core thematic questions that asked farm -
ers about their relationships, values, their on and off-farm 
decision-making and how these had changed over time. For 
non-farmer participants, these interview themes were simi -
lar, but in some cases extended to wider discussions about 
the industry and their perceptions of how the regenerative 
movement in New Zealand was developing. Interviews 
were transcribed and analysed through inductive coding to 
allow for a more exploratory approach to the interviews, to 
identify emergent themes across interviews and to build a 
deeper understanding of processes and connections (Cope 
2016 ). These methods of analysis resulted in an emergent 
analytical framework that provided insight into the themes 
of more-than-human relationships, decision-making, A MTH EoC recognises that care that accommodates 
humans and non-humans is essential for the survival of 
both communities (or the combined singular) in current 
global socio/environmental crises (Beacham 2018 ). Thus, a 
MTH EoC is an ethic of care that is well suited to analys -
ing regenerative agriculture - a movement which claims to 
address such crises within agriculture. Gibson-Graham and 
Roelvink ( 2010 , p. 334) argue that “the needs of animals, 
plants, soils and water sources, for example, have become 
a matter of concern that is reorganizing the food production 
industry”. Therefore, applying a MTH EoC to regenerative 
agriculture provides insight into how care has not been met 
sufficiently in the past within the agricultural industry. There 
is some notable work that exists in this space already such 
as that done by Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2010 ; 2015 ; 2017 ) that 
focuses on more-than-human care and soil relations. While 
a MTH EoC has not yet been applied to regenerative agri -
culture, other literature on regenerative agriculture suggests 
that care may be present in these spaces (Gosnell et al. 2019 ) 
and which calls for the need for social science analysis of 
the regenerative movement in New Zealand (Burns 2020 ).
We argue that a MTH EoC provides beneficial and con -
structive ways for re-conceptualizing our understanding 
of transformational agri-food politics and has particular 
relevance for understanding the regenerative agriculture 
movement. Looking at care, with care, highlights aspects 
of system change that have previously been hidden in other 
forms of analysis. These areas of research focus our attention 
on the multiplicity of relationships in a more-than-human 
world, a contrast to the predominantly scientific reductive 
or technocratic perspectives that have been used to examine 
regenerative agriculture with the aim of validating the out -
comes of on-farm practices. Therefore, using a MTH EoC 
lens to understand New Zealand’s regenerative agriculture 
offers space to question paradigms that have traditionally 
shaped western agriculture and provide fresh insights for 
understanding agri-food system change.
Methods
Twenty-one semi-structured interviews were conducted 
with people involved in the New Zealand regenerative agri -
culture for this research: twelve farmer interviews, four 
farm advisors, four researchers, and one community group 
representative. Attendance to a two-day Organic Dairy and 
Pastoral Group conference in March 2020 allowed for ini -
tial scoping of the regenerative movement in New Zealand 
and identified key actors within the space. Participants were 
then recruited using a snowball sampling method where 
contacts from this conference were then used to recruit 
others (Valentine 2005 ). In addition to this, farmers were 
1 3234
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…daily lives. These relationship and decision-making features 
were found to embody a MTH EoC. Of particular interest 
are the conscious decisions by participants to reject nega -
tive relationships and create new ones that embody mutual -
ity, reciprocity, trust and interdependency with their human 
and non-human environments which conceptually are key 
features of an ethic of care. Regenerative relationships were 
categorised to have four major features. These are attentive -
ness, an understanding of the power dynamics of interre -
lation, conceding control to regain balance, and a shift in 
valuing of non-human species.
Attentiveness
As participants became more engaged with regenerative 
agriculture, they increasingly became more aware and 
observant of their surrounding environment, often including 
more-than-human bodies into their network of awareness 
and care. But also, vice versa, participants entered regenera -
tive networks as a pathway for action after becoming aware 
of or observing environmental or social degradation. Farm -
ers described points of difference between regenerative and 
conventional farming where they were actively “taking 
time out to actually go and just observe and be amongst the 
cows and see how everyone is…” (Farmer 15) or to be more 
attentive to soil life:
If you get down on your hands and knees and actu -
ally just sit there and look for five minutes, it’ s amaz -
ing what you’ll see move. You know you never notice 
that walking across the paddock or driving a tractor 
across a paddock or spraying a paddock. – Farmer 12
As seen here, attentiveness and observation were referred to 
in the context of directly using human senses such as sight, 
smell and sound to interpret farm environments, particu -
larly, how they change over time. At first, this may seem 
an obvious action, but for these farmers, this observation 
was strongly linked to a conscious action of being present  
in their surroundings. Participants at the beginning stages of 
their transition to regenerative processes (both mental and 
physical practices), or those who work closely with farm -
ers undertaking this process (e.g., consultants or advisors) 
were able to recall the important role of attentiveness and 
becoming “more ecologically aware” (Farmer 13) in this 
transition.
Power dynamics of interrelation
As farmers learn more about the world around them, their 
mindset continues to evolve and vice versa, their evolving 
mindset provides a new lens through which they see, learn identity, and wellbeing that were all embedded in processes 
of shifting to regenerative agriculture.
Results and discussion
We used a MTH EoC lens to understand the way in which 
regenerative agriculture creates space for shifting towards 
care-based socio-ecological relations. Interviews suggested 
that a shift in mindset was related to being regenerative : a 
state of being that involved reforming their socio-ecological 
relations rather than performing the technical practices of 
regenerative agriculture alone. This mindset is what peo -
ple use to form and re-form their connections to the world 
around them (regenerative relationships), make decisions 
(regenerative decision-making), and therefore begin to 
influence the industry within which their livelihood work 
exists. The mindset has implications for sense of self, iden -
tity and perceptions of how they fit into larger group dynam -
ics that are shaped by wider agri-food discourses and rural 
identities.
The following results and discussion  sections will cover 
three key points that emerged from this research and the 
implication of understanding regenerative agriculture as a 
pathway to being regenerative. The first two sections explore 
in more detail how a MTH EoC lens reveals the components 
of being regenerative that can exist in a farmer’s everyday 
experience of regenerative agriculture. Themes that emerged 
from the interviews were categorised into ways of engaging 
with relationships and decision-making. A MTH EoC lens 
allows the linkages between thinking, being and doing to be 
identified and analysed.
This discussion section then goes on to propose how 
these components of regenerative relationships and deci -
sion-making are strongly interlinked and co-produced. A 
process-based framework is proposed here to represent this 
interconnection. The cumulative effect of these components 
is explored, particularly with regard to how being regen -
erative has implications for participant’s identity and well -
being. Lastly, the wider implications of taking a relational 
understanding of regenerative agriculture are discussed. 
This section considers how a relational understanding shifts 
the way we might approach transformation in New Zealand 
agriculture by considering the ways that the power dynam -
ics of a mindset shift may contribute to the adoption of new 
paradigms in the wider industry.
Applying a MTH EoC lens: regenerative relationships
Thematic coding of the interviews reveals that there were 
certain components of relationships and decision making 
that participants frequently referred to as important in their 
1 3235
M. Seymour, S. Connellyare hybridised; smashed together, and/or artfully carved into 
to form a variety of power dynamics that acknowledges that 
people and the environment are always co-constituting and 
have internal bearing upon each other (Booth 2013 ).
Conceding control to regain balance
In all the complexity and fluidity of natural systems, farm -
ers recognised that their need to manage nature reflected 
the common human response to be in control. The mindset 
of domination over nature is rooted in colonial and west -
ernised conceptions of nature that have historically shaped 
New Zealand’s agricultural systems (Holland et al. 2002 ; 
Campbell 2020 ). Participants recognized the need to reform 
this mindset by embracing chaos and diversity.
In New Zealand specifically, there’ s a culture like this 
kind of tidy culture, that a landscape should be tidy. 
But in nature, there’ s nothing tidy… When you walk 
into a forest, it’ s chaos and diversity… that diversity 
is what drives the productivity of that ecosystem. So 
that’ s the big change in the way we look at the land -
scape, and also how we look at our farms that people 
need to achieve. – Farm Advisor 1
So, I think getting your head around the fact that you 
don’t need to kill everything all the time. Modern agri -
culture is, if you’ve got wheat, there can only be wheat 
in that paddock. You can’t have a weed. You can’t have 
an aphid …There’ s no living life, other than wheat in 
that paddock. – Farmer 12
To practice a regenerative mindset, farmers noted the 
conscious choice to relinquish parts of this control and to 
instead trust in the complexity of natural systems to restore 
balance or teach them how to assist in creating that balance.
Rather than seeing something... say it’ s a weed, so we 
need to kill everything and so we nuke it with some 
chemical. But maybe we need to think, why is that 
growing? Is it bringing up a nutrient that’ s going to 
benefit things? – Farmer 5
While this sentiment was not universal, it was explored by 
the majority of participants and was often connected to and 
supported by the value they began to place on non-human 
species.
Valuing non-human species
By recognising interrelation and conceding control, farm -
er’s approaches to natural systems and more-than-human 
bodies changed. Other species were “becoming relevant and (re)form relationships with their more-than-human 
environment. Acknowledging the power dynamics of this 
interrelation with the more-than-human is a critical part of 
forming regenerative relationships. Farmers spoke to the 
realisation of the interconnection between bodies in these 
networks and the power that runs through these structures. 
A sense of insignificance and humility in place becomes 
visible.
I think you become a lot more humble doing this 
because you realise that, fluff, I’m not as sharp as 
what I thought I was and you just realise how much 
you do not know. – Farmer 4
While this understanding of the world as a “complex, life-
sustaining web” (Fisher and Tronto 1990 , p. 40) of relations 
created a humbling, and occasionally uneasy, sense of place 
for farmers, at the same time, a newfound consciousness 
emerged around the power of human action to influence 
these delicate assemblages. The ability of on-farm actions 
to disrupt such complexity accidentally or purposefully was 
a common realisation. With this reframing, we see a second, 
paradoxical sense of place forming. Human action is framed 
as powerful and therefore becomes the area and focus 
requiring management, rather than the natural environment:
I probably saw myself like most people do, as out -
side of the environment. You can buy 100 acres and 
you can be the boss…but you’re really only fooling 
yourself. Now you realise that you’re at the mercy of 
things, but you also realise just how much what you do 
next can change the outcomes. – Farmer 15
It is through these two somewhat contradictory realisations 
which come with the regenerative mindset that the social  
part of socio-natures is engaged. To an extent, the agency of 
humans is thrown into turmoil as they are perceived as both 
actors and actants, both in control and out of it. This concep -
tualisation acts to hybridise the contrasting power dynam -
ics of everyday more-than-human agricultural relations. 
The relationships humans have with non-human agents are 
embedded in unequal power, where humans are not always 
the most powerful.
You shift as your farm shifts. People shift. And remem -
ber, people are part of this ecosystem. So, we shift as 
our farm shifts. – Farm Advisor 1
My view is that your land is… not necessarily, well 
maybe it is a reflection of you. – Farmer 11
This framing reinforces the idea of reciprocity and interde -
pendence of all life and all agents on all others. Relationships 
1 3236
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…long-standing identities and practices associated with being 
a “good” farmer (Burton et al. 2020 ). However, these indi -
vidual on-farm shifts in mindsets can collectively have an 
impact on the way the agricultural sector recognizes and 
responds to the emergence of regenerative agriculture.
Applying a MTH EoC lens: regenerative decision-
making
Regenerative relationships often flowed on to impact deci -
sion-making on the farm and vice versa, decision-making 
often led to more evolved regenerative relationships. 
Regenerative decision-making can be understood as when 
an ethic of care lens is used to influence ways of knowing 
and being which translates into ways of doing for regen -
erative actors. There were four main features that emerged 
around the theme of regenerative decision-making. These 
were: a holistic approach, the learning process, timescales, 
and responsibility.
Holistic approach
One of the strongest themes to emerge from the research 
regarding the mindset of being regenerative was that of the 
holistic approach. Holism was found to be something that 
was referenced by all participants (directly or indirectly) in 
a way that guided their worldview and their on and off-farm 
decision making. A phrase that was frequently repeated by 
multiple participants was: “healthy soils, healthy plants, 
healthy animals, healthy people”. This is a verbal recogni -
tion of the flow on effects and interconnections of various 
aspects of the more-than-human environment. As partici -
pants discussed, to focus on only one of these dimensions 
compartmentalised and separated it from the other elements 
of the system, ignoring the interdependency of the whole 
system. Striving for healthy people requires a healthy sys -
tem and therefore, the health of everything which consti -
tutes that system.
Decisions that are embedded within holistic perspectives 
recognise that management of one part of the farm or the 
ecosystem has flow on effects for other parts. If one part of 
the system is non-functioning, for example, pest insects on 
a crop, being regenerative means meeting this with curios -
ity and engagement about what in the system is causing it 
to occur.
When [farmers] shift to regenerative approach, …the 
pest is just a symptom of some parts that they haven’t 
managed to make better. So, they are not looking at the 
pest as a problem. They’re looking at a pest as a cue 
for what it is that they have to make better. So, they 
look at, I think they probably see their system more as again” (Farmer 4) because they were seen to be an inter -
dependent part of ecosystem function. Species previously 
seen as unproductive in farming systems became windows 
through which to see and learn about how the ecosystem is 
functioning on a level that is usually invisible to humans, 
such as soil microbiology and weeds:
Farmer 16: So, a lot of it’ s about looking after the 
plants. I think everyone on the farm loves the animals, 
loves the little baby animals especially. But they don’t 
love their grasses and they don’t love their weeds.
Interviewer: but you do?
Farmer 16: Yeah. Well, you realise what the weeds are 
actually doing… Now I’m realizing that all of these 
things that the stock don’t eat are actually just as valu -
able as the things they do eat.
Agricultural production no longer becomes the sole purpose 
of that system’s existence. Boundaries of what is consid -
ered productive and unproductive are blurred. Extractive 
mentalities begin to be set aside, and worlds are seen to be 
organised with humans rather than for humans (Harrison 
and Anderson 2010 ). This framing of socio-ecological rela -
tions therefore demands not only respect but care for the rest 
of that environment as a more-than-human habitat.
The four components of attentiveness, power dynam -
ics, conceding control and valuing non-human species all 
interact to create regenerative relationships. However, it is 
important to note that engaging with regenerative relation -
ships is a conscious choice and is not universal to people 
who practice regenerative agriculture practices. However, 
when farmers do decide to engage with this relational way 
of being we can see how the transformative potential of an 
ethic of care begins to translate into their decision-making 
practices. This is how the relationship between ways of 
knowing and being, and ways of doing in regenerative agri -
culture are revealed. It is a pattern that farm advisors, likely 
due to their position in regenerative circles, can observe 
across the farmers they interact with:
What I tell regenerative farmers or people who are 
thinking about doing it, once you decide to become a 
regenerative farmer, once you feel in your heart that it 
makes sense, and your mind says, I can do this, that is 
the moment that you start regenerating your farm. It’ s 
not about what you start doing. It’ s the moment your 
mind goes there. – Farm Advisor 1
These regenerative relationships developed by individuals 
on-farm do have limitations to which they are able to disrupt 
1 3237
M. Seymour, S. Connellyinterconnectedness also acknowledges that the web shifts, 
changes and persists through time.
Oh, you know, the Ballance farm awards2? Their 
[target] is to be sustainable for 100 years. And I’m 
like, you can’t actually put a time... why not a million 
years? Because sustainability doesn’t have a timeline. 
– Farmer 4
This rethinking of temporalities resonates with Puig de la 
Bellacasa’s (2015; 2017) descriptions of farmers and the 
soil. Shifting timescales to appreciate the more-than-human 
has implications for how these farmers make decisions on 
their farm in the present. Farm management and the role of 
the farmer in the process is reconceptualised to extend well 
beyond any individual’s life. As such, the decisions made 
by farmers are reframed as a small but critical contribution 
towards a collective aspiration of present and future genera -
tions that guide long term care for, and with, bodies of the 
more-than-human care network.
Responsibility
The integration of these timescales and more-than-human 
webs into decision making inevitably becomes a pathway 
for farmers to enact ideas of responsibility. Responsibility 
was most strongly tied to timescales through concepts of 
intergenerational stewardship. While most farmers, even 
those in the conventional system likely already feel respon -
sibility for their farm and express the desire to pass it on 
healthy to the next generation, being regenerative becomes 
a pathway for farmers to act on these already held ideas of 
responsibility for their farm. This is something that Farmer 
9 specifically notes as “the driving force why we had to 
change. Because the values of care were there…. And I 
wasn’t able to look after those values and cares by the old 
conventional system.”
If we view farmer relations through this lens of geogra -
phies of responsibility it allows a deeper conceptualisation 
of how regenerative actors are “assigning, accepting, defer -
ring, deflecting or meeting responsibility” (Tronto 2012 , 
p. 308). Farmers are able to accept and meet responsibility 
through practices rather than only through ideology. This 
contributes to farmers feeling they can be solutions to issues 
such as climate change and water pollution, rather than 
the polluters. Their sense of stewardship radiates beyond 
their own farm gate, the shared responsibility creating an 
avenue for collective action. The idea of responsibility for 
2  The Ballance Farm Environment Awards are an annual award pre -
sented to the most sustainable farms across New Zealand. The awards 
are run by one of the two major fertiliser companies in New Zealand, 
Ballance Agri-Nutrients.an ally rather than something that they have to con -
trol, and tame, and dominate. – Researcher 4
This approach leads farmers to embrace diversity of the 
more-than-human world to contribute towards balance in 
their farm (and wider) ecosystem.
Learning process
The process of understanding and re-writing how farmers 
interact with the world through more-than-human relation -
ships is a significant personal and collective learning pro -
cess. Regenerative relationships form a basis which farmers 
can learn and understand their ability to choose manage -
ment practices or make decisions that support holistic eco -
system regeneration or promote social or physical health. 
This learning process often involves using the senses such 
as sight, smell and sound to observe the environment and 
mimic how nature would work. These individual experi -
ences are pooled through strong peer-to-peer learning net -
works that utilise social media groups, regenerative field 
days and workshops to support momentum to think and 
practice differently. Many farmers note that when making 
decisions on farm, “the questions keep coming back to how 
would this work in nature? Instead of, how do I control, how 
do I dominate, how do I spray and kill?” (Farm Advisor 3). 
The process of transition to regenerative practices therefore 
involves a willingness to experiment and make mistakes 
which can be a significant mindset shift.
A big thing on my regenerative journey, is that I’ve 
gone from sort of trying to work out “this works” 
recipe, to everyday trying to do better than the day 
before . – Farmer 16
Importantly, the learning process is also reinforced as an 
ongoing and collaborative process. “Nature is constantly 
teaching” (Farmer 13) and regenerative farmers must be 
“prepared to learn, prepared to listen, prepared to take on 
new things” (Farmer 10) from both human and non-human 
actors as they continue their journey.
Timescales
The interconnected, relational web that constructs the basis 
of our world is explored temporally as well as spatially in 
regenerative decision-making. Most participants referred 
to future issues in some form, with many referring to 
timescales beyond one or two human lifespans. Intergen -
erational thinking becomes an integral part of regenerative 
decision-making as understanding place within the web of 
1 3238
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…relationships to contribute to the mindset of being regen -
erative. They can be thought of co-constituting parts of a 
regenerative mindset framework  (Fig. 1). But it is also at the 
intersection of relationships and decision-making where we 
find that these components are closely tied to the notions of 
identity and wellbeing of participants. These are discussed 
below.
The power of being regenerative: impacts on 
identity and wellbeing
Each of the features of regenerative relationships and 
decision-making are interconnected to create the mindset 
shift experienced for farmers to be regenerative. The rela -
tionships can influence decision-making processes that 
farmers undertake to run and manage their businesses, 
farms, and personal lives. And vice versa, decisions made 
by farmers were found to either initiate attentiveness to or 
reinforce care-full more-than-human relationships. There -
fore, it is this connection that we have used as the basis of 
the process-based framework created to represent the mind -
set of being regenerative (Fig. 1).
From the outset, it is important to note that being regener -
ative is not something that is simply or statically ‘achieved’. 
This distinguishes it from the way undertaking physical 
practices of regenerative agriculture could be classified and 
cements being regenerative as a socially engaged process. 
Being regenerative is fluid and unable to be pinned down 
as a tick-box exercise. As a mindset shift, the concepts and 
components of being regenerative flow together, and should 
be thought of not as separate but more like embodied and 
conceptual strands that are knitted together. Thus, Fig. 1’s 
shape design is purposeful and represents this interconnec -
tion of more-than-human being and doing for participants.regenerative farmers also reflects the need to rethink beyond 
dependence-based care relations (Noxolo et al. 2012 ; 
Raghuram 2016 ). The mentality of agriculture dominating 
over the natural environment that is based in colonial con -
structions of nature can be re-framed through emphasis on 
co-dependence, reciprocity and co-production. The accep -
tance and assignment of responsibility by the farmer occurs 
towards previously inanimate non-humans such as the soil:
It’ s all about looking after Papatūānuku, Mother 
Earth, and I guess that is the principle of regen ag, 
looking after the soil and it will look after you. – 
Farmer 6
I think one of the biggest things for me is that the 
Whanganui River is actually treated now as a legal 
entity. I reckon that’ s pretty cool. I’d love to be able 
to do something rather like that for our soil, like put it 
in a covenant that just protected it from future abuses. 
But I don’t know how to do that. – Farmer 16
We see connections with concepts of reciprocity but also, 
Farmer 16 shows a desire to derive and embed this respon -
sibility in much larger and more complex relationships with 
non-human worlds. The granting of legal personhood of the 
Whanganui River in 2018 was part of a series of major steps 
forward in recognising te ao Māori as a valued ontologi -
cal basis for care within western constructs of legislation 
and environmental management (Winter 2019 ). To suggest 
a similar proposal for soil, indicates the extent to which 
Farmer 16 is recognising the rights of soil and the responsi -
bilities humans have as persons who interact and are inter -
connected with such a body.
The four components of regenerative decision-mak -
ing interconnect with the components of regenerative 
Fig. 1  The regenerative mindset framework: A visual representation of the themes from the interviews and how they interact to contribute to being 
regenerative. At the intersection of regenerative relationships and regenerative decision making, identity and wellbeing are impacted 
1 3239
M. Seymour, S. Connellylarger structural changes in agriculture. Being regenerative 
offers a lifestyle and a worldview that is much more than 
technical practices. For some farmers it “re-enthused [their] 
passion for farming” (Farmer 11). Others were “pumped” 
to be solutions to climate change (Farmer 4). The sense of 
purpose that comes with such positive collective belonging 
contrasts to the narratives of blame that are often put on 
farmers for environmental and climate issues in New Zea -
land and beyond. These shifts in mindsets offer promising 
opportunities for reframing dominant attitudes that shape 
farming discourse, identities and practices. Revitalised 
identity/wellbeing provided a greater sense of agency and 
purpose for participants, a basis for how their social license 
to farm could be revitalized as well as how they might be a 
part of that revitalisation.
Connecting regenerative mindsets to food system 
transformation
Using a relational lens enables the technical practice of 
regenerative agriculture to be viewed as connected to but 
not the same as the mindset shift of being regenerative. 
This creates insight into several features of the regenerative 
agriculture movement that may otherwise be overlooked. 
The on-farm practices may indeed create beneficial envi -
ronmental outcomes, but the mindset is what makes people 
within the regenerative movement radical and transforma -
tive. This is because viewing the world relationally and with 
care challenges deep-seated values, attitudes, and assump -
tions about how agriculture should exist. A MTH EoC lens 
enables these aspects of the regenerative agriculture move -
ment to be highlighted and suggests the potential for change 
beyond individual farm practices.
For example, farmers are tapping into more-than-human 
networks, which can vary from relationships with microbi -
ology in the soil, to global online communities in the move -
ment. A MTH EoC lens highlights how the social aspects 
of these spaces are essential to supporting the mindset shift. 
Many farmers enjoyed being able to collectively identify, 
not necessarily with the term regenerative agriculture, 
but with a group of farmers with shared experiences and 
challenges.
I think with having the [community group], it’ s actu -
ally got me out of... got people out of their shells. It’s 
actually made people think that ‘I’m not that alone’ . 
I can actually talk about what I’m doing…my cards 
aren’t quite so close to my chest now. Like I always 
enjoyed sharing what I was doing, but no one used 
to listen . – Farmer 12 (author’ s emphasis)The cumulative effect of these different dimensions of 
being regenerative creates spaces that are collaborative, 
interconnected and ultimately, caring. It is through these 
kinds of relationships where “the magic” and “gold” is 
of farming regeneratively (Farm Advisor 2), that helps to 
set ‘being regenerative’ apart from practicing regenerative 
agriculture. This is because for many participants, practices 
of self-reflection and interactions with more-than-human 
environs amalgamate to produce and maintain a mindset 
that underpins regenerative relationships and subsequently, 
endorses regenerative decision-making and behaviour. This 
process is as important as the physical practices of farming 
because it is shifting the why as well as the how of farming 
to more a more-than-human, care-based paradigm.
Naturally, with such shifts in internal and external mech -
anisms of thinking, being and doing, being regenerative 
also was connected to social constructs such as identity and 
wellbeing. These concepts were found to both influence and 
be influenced by engagement in regenerative agriculture to 
create a shift in how farmers perceive the more-than-human 
world around them and the way they enacted care. Themes 
of vulnerability, courage, self-care and agency became 
woven through the regenerative mindset as farmers chal -
lenged themselves and their worldviews. Thus, it is this 
interconnection of relationships, decision-making, identity, 
and wellbeing where many of the wider implications of 
being regenerative emerge.
For example, farmers and farm advisors frequently 
referred to the emotions they experienced through learn -
ing about and connecting with the more-than-human world. 
For example, the expressions of joy where “you couldn’t 
help but smile” (Farmer 12) at the colour and life that non-
human bodies such as multi-species pasture brought back to 
farmscapes. In some cases, being regenerative challenged 
the masculine farming identity. Farm Advisor 2 noted that 
“to be stubborn and tough and masculine doesn’t allow for 
much curiosity” that is needed to be regenerative. Some 
farmers noted they and their friends were more “fluffy” 
about things such as a protecting ground nesting birds in 
a paddock (Farmer 4) and Farm Advisor 3 discussed the 
conversations of self-care they have with their regenerative 
farmers:
If you’re working 24 hours in a day, and you’re not 
eating very well, how is that regenerative? How does 
that fit into what you’re trying to do on land? – Farm 
Advisor 3.
While more research is required to determine the impacts 
that being regenerative has beyond an individual level, 
there are signs that changes to on-farm relationships, deci -
sion making and sense of being offers potential for creating 
1 3240
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…the farm gate and the place-based restrictions of a physical 
practice. A key feature of an ethic of care is that care is based 
on a collaborative rather than individual form of interrela -
tion that can then blur and flatten any presumed boundar -
ies of scale. When participants were asked to describe what 
regenerative agriculture meant to them, they overwhelm -
ingly identified the features of the mindset, rather than on-
farm practices (see Fig. 2). This lack of agricultural focus 
when describing regenerative agriculture indicates that the 
mindset includes opportunities for personal and community 
growth to occur as a result of the dialectical relationship 
between knowing, being and doing agriculture differently. 
And it is this shift that appears to be most meaningful to 
participants.
Therefore, a relational approach to analysing regenera -
tive agriculture emphasises that ‘being regenerative’ is not 
specific to agriculture. It is an individual mindset that grows 
out of interpersonal relations and an ethic of care for the 
community of humans and non-humans alike. Therefore, it 
has potential to influence wider structural power dynamics 
at community, regional and national levels and be applied as 
a design tool that concerns the processes of thinking, being, 
and doing at different scales of system change.
Conclusion
The use of a MTH EoC to analyse regenerative agriculture 
in New Zealand revealed the importance of distinguishing 
between the practice of regenerative agriculture and being 
regenerative. Thus far, the literature on regenerative agri -
culture has largely focused on the assessment of practice, 
and our purpose was to draw attention to the processes 
involved in being regenerative. While the two overlap, it 
is the mindset that is crucial to the transformational poten -
tial of regenerative agriculture. A MTH EoC lens creates 
opportunities for a relational approach to be used to under -
stand the transformation of socio-ecological systems such 
as agriculture. Using a MTH EoC lens demands attention 
to our everyday socio-ecological relationships in agricul -
ture and doing so makes the connection between mindset 
and practice visible as a key part of the regenerative move -
ment. Re-framing the world with this lens has implications 
for how agriculture exists and the narratives that are visible 
in agricultural spaces. Thinking, being and doing differently 
encourages more a care-full direction for agriculture and is 
a fundamental shift away from a reductionist and productiv -
ism-based paradigm. Being regenerative creates space for 
care in agriculture and when people are forming regenera -
tive relationships and making regenerative decisions, there 
is a mentality that can also be applied to any aspect of life 
rather than solely to the farm.Surrounding themselves with like-minded people and tap -
ping into peer-to-peer learning networks was considered 
essential for support. Because farmers are undertaking 
regenerative journeys that often result in changing not only 
their physical practices but also their thinking, farmers are 
essentially changing their paradigms and worldviews. Thus, 
finding these support systems aids what can be a challeng -
ing period for many people as they begin to unlearn much of 
what guides their existing worldview. As such, these farm -
ers are networking and extending their care networks across 
distance and beyond their own individualised farms.
Regenerative mindsets also stem from a shift in socio-
ecological relations. Being truly regenerative highlights 
human-nature connections and demands a reconfiguration 
of humanity’s place in a world of more-than-human webs. 
It aids the reframing of humans from being at the top of the 
hierarchy to being within a “horizontal web of interdepen -
dency between all matters” (Beacham 2018 , p. 539). Farm -
ers can be part of a system that is “more than just about 
them” (Farmer 13) or their own needs and requirements for 
production. This is a significant part of the paradigm shift 
where “we’re talking about change from a central control, 
kind of command control to around equity and mutualism” 
(Farm Advisor 4). These changes are not accounted for in the 
methods used to assess the sustainability of farms or wider 
system change. The strong focus on quantifiable biophysi -
cal markers such as water quality, soil nutrients and biodi -
versity, while critical to ecological health, overlook deeper 
conditions of mindset shifts and the impact they have of 
dimensions such as farmer identity and wellbeing. A MTH 
EoC lens instead highlights these and labels mindset shifts 
as a key component of system change. ‘Being regenerative’ 
is helping farmers to address the root cause of environmen -
tal issues: the perceived separation of society and nature. 
Being regenerative requires people to “feel” rather than only 
see the results of regenerative agriculture (Farm advisor 2). 
It demands a connection to the earth and the people around 
them that is deeper than simply filling a tick box exercise to 
achieve a regenerative certification.
When you walk into your property and you put a spade 
in the ground, which people become addicted to, that 
you pick up that soil and bring it up to your nose and 
take a whiff. It just fills you with something and that’ s 
not so easy to measure. – Farm Advisor 2
A potential strength of paying more attention to the mind -
set is that in contrast to technical practices, it is not easily 
captured or co-opted for the purposes of creating market -
able brands or certifications. Furthermore, acknowledging 
the power that sits in the relations of a mindset recognises 
the potential it has to navigate and create change far beyond 
1 3241
M. Seymour, S. Connellythat are currently underway interact with existing regimes 
that shape agricultural practice. The regenerative mindset 
framework created from relational analysis of regenera -
tive agriculture provides a glimpse of how this paradigm 
shift is functioning. It is messy, interconnected and per -
sonal. Yet there is a significant gap between these individ -
ual level changes and calls that we need paradigm shifts in 
our worldview of socio-ecological relations (Alkon 2013 ; 
Moragues-Faus and Marsden 2017 ; West et al. 2020 ). Being 
regenerative provides a glimpse of the mindset and there -
fore the seeds of such a shift.
Despite this messiness, insights gained from a MTH EoC 
analysis of regenerative agriculture are critical for creating 
supportive structures to cultivate and encourage the produc -
tive spaces that do exist, i.e., that of mindset shifts. Research 
and investment into creating pathways for the implementa -
tion of sustainable technology and practices are common. 
Further research is needed to determine how we might 
develop, assess or integrate measures of mindset shifts asso -
ciated with being regenerative. It is critical that we address 
the question “how can we create pathways for new mindsets 
to spread?” from a socio-ethical and relational perspective 
alongside the research taking place on regenerative practices 
such as soil health and biodiversity. A MTH EoC lens can 
be an important tool for this analysis and contribute towards 
an understanding of how to create a new natural-social con -
tract within agriculture (Huntjens 2021 ). But, the potential Thus, without an analytical lens that can value these 
outcomes of regenerative agriculture, the transformational 
potential of the movement could go unseen. A MTH EoC 
reveals the links between relationships and decision-mak -
ing that shape the practice of being regenerative that would 
otherwise go under analysed and undervalued when con -
sidering its potential to contribute toward agri-food system 
transformation. For example, creating the space to highlight 
ideas such as identity, wellbeing and other intimate emo -
tions allows these relationships to be better understood and 
valued as points of internal-external transformation. These 
aspects are crucial to transformation because they con -
tain the mindset shift which is vital to making long-term, 
permanent change in human behaviour and human-nature 
relations.
The processes of change highlighted through the mindset 
framework provide an insight into where and how sustain -
ability and regenerative thought and practice evolves. When 
we talk about transforming polluting and unjust agri-sys -
tems, we need to understand system change as starting from 
and emanating from mindset changes if we are to address 
the fundamental issue of a perceived human-nature separa -
tion. While our focus was on the shifts in mindsets of indi -
vidual farmers, there are potential research opportunities 
to extend this analysis across scales. For example, linking 
the mindset framework to a multi-level perspective analysis 
could provide further insight into how niche-level changes 
Fig. 2  Word cloud showing the lack of agriculture in ‘being regenerative’.  This word cloud is produced from participant responses to the ques -
tion “If you could use 2–3 words to summarise your sentiments for regenerative agriculture, what would they be?“. Words in a larger font were 
mentioned more frequently. The only two agriculture related responses were “soil” and “just farming” 
1 3242
Regenerative agriculture and a more-than-human ethic of care: a relational approach to understanding…References
Alkon, A. H. 2013. The socio-nature of local organic food. Antipode  
45 (3): 663–680.
Beacham, J. 2018. Organising food differently: Towards a more-than-
human ethics of care for the Anthropocene. Organization  25 (4): 
533–549.
Booth, K. I. 2013. Deep ecology, hybrid geographies, and environ -
mental management’s relational premise. Environmental Values  
22 (4): 523–543.
Brown, G. 2018. Dirt to soil: One family’ s journey into regenera -
tive agriculture . White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsea Green 
Publishing.
Brown, K. 2014. Global environmental change I: A social turn for 
resilience? Progress in Human Geography  38 (1): 107–117.
Burns, E. A. 2020. Thinking sociologically about regenerative agricul -
ture. New Zealand Sociology  35 (2): 189–213.
Burton, R. J. F., J. Forney, P. Stock, and L. Sutherland. 2020. The good 
farmer: Culture and identity in food and agriculture . London: 
Routledge.
Campbell, H. 2020. Farming inside invisible worlds: Modernist agri -
culture and its consequences . London: Bloomsbury Publishing 
Plc.
Conradi, E. 2015. Redoing care: Societal transformation through criti -
cal practice. Ethics and Social Welfare  9 (2): 113–129.
Cope, M. 2016. Organising and analysing qualitative data. In Qualita -
tive research methods in human geography , ed. I. Hay, 4th edi -
tion, 373–393. Ontario: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, B., and J. C. Tronto. 1990. Towards a feminist theory of caring. 
In Circles of care: Work and identity in women’ s lives , eds. E. K. 
Abel, and M. K. Nelson, 36–54. New York: SUNY Press.
Folke, C., S. R. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Chapin, and 
J. Rockström. 2010. Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, 
adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society  15 (4): 20.
General Mills. 2021. General Mills Inc. 2021 Global Responsibility 
Report. https://globalresponsibility.generalmills.com/HTML1/
general_mills-global_responsibility_2021_0036.htm . Accessed 
10 May 2021.
Gibson-Graham, J. K., and G. Roelvink. 2010. An economic ethics for 
the Anthropocene. Antipode  41 (1): 320–346.
Gosnell, H., N. Gill, and M. V oyer. 2019. Transformational adaptation 
on the farm: Processes of change and persistence in transitions to 
‘climate-smart’ regenerative agriculture. Global Environmental 
Change  59: 101965.
Gottschlich, D., and L. Bellina. 2017. Environmental justice and care: 
Critical emancipatory contributions to sustainability discourse. 
Agriculture and Human Values  34 (4): 941–953.
Grelet, G., and S. Lang. 2021. Regenerative agriculture in Aote -
aroa New Zealand: Research pathways to build science-based 
evidence and national narratives. https://ourlandandwater.nz/
wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Grelet_Lang_2021_Regen_Ag_
NZ_White_ePaper.pdf . Accessed 27 April 2021.
Harrison, P., and B. Anderson. 2010. The promise of non-represen -
tational theories. In Taking-place: Non-representational theories 
and geography , ed. P. Harrison, 1–34. Farnham: Routledge.
Hikuroa, D. 2017. Mātauranga Māori—the ūkaipō of knowledge in 
New Zealand. Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand  47 
(1): 5–10.
Holland, P., K. O’Connor, and A. Wearing. 2002. Remaking the grass -
lands of the open country. In Environmental histories of New Zea -
land, eds. E. Pawson, and T. Brooking, 69–83. Auckland: Oxford 
University Press.
Huntjens, P. M. J. M. 2021. Towards a natural social contract: Trans -
formative social-ecological innovation for a sustainable, healthy 
and just society . Cham: Springer.of MTH EoC also lies in its ability to be applied in decision-
making alongside being a tool for academic analysis. As 
found in this research, regenerative actors are re-evaluating 
their role in society and what is fit for purpose through the 
mindset of being regenerative, underpinned by a MTH EoC 
worldview. This highlights the importance of embedding 
more-than-human care into both academic analysis and 
on-the-ground system change narratives. A relational lens 
reinforces the importance of political decisions recognising 
the interconnection between all systems. More-than-human 
care ultimately challenges many of the approaches that our 
society uses that result in exploitative systems (Moriggi et 
al. 2020 ). This is because it encourages us to flip how west -
ern paradigms think about socio-ecological connections and 
therefore how we think about solutions to some of our great -
est challenges.
In this research, care has been applied as a research lens 
and a research ethos to look at caring practice in regenera -
tive agriculture in response to the need for broader theoreti -
cal approaches to transformative agri-food politics (Tregear 
2011 ). A MTH EoC contributes to a more rounded grasp 
of change as it reveals the ways in which social and mind -
set shifts are occurring and have transformative potential in 
regenerative agriculture spaces. However, currently system 
change analysis rarely accounts for relational care. Some 
literature has started to investigate the ability to integrate 
loops of care for people and environment into frameworks 
for sustainable or circular economies (Schildberg 2014 ; 
Pla-Julián and Guevara 2019 ). However, mostly, an ethic of 
care lens remains bound to care-work practices rather than 
applying care in other sectors such as agriculture. Bring -
ing more-than-human care to the forefront of wider system 
change analysis has potential to widen transformation anal -
ysis by offering a relational approach that can more directly 
acknowledge the power of social constructs to guide sus -
tainability pursuits.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and 
its Member Institutions.
Declarations  The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial 
interests to disclose.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
1 3243
M. Seymour, S. ConnellyPuig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific 
futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science  45 (5). 
SAGE Publications Ltd: 691–716.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2017. Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more 
than human worlds . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Raghuram, P. 2016. Locating care ethics beyond the global north. 
ACME  15 (3): 511–513.
Rhodes, C. J. 2017. The imperative for regenerative agriculture. Sci-
ence Progress  100 (1): 80–129.
Rodale Institute. 2019. The original principles of regenerative agri -
culture. Rodale Institute. https://rodaleinstitute.org/blog/original-
principles-of-regenerative-agriculture/ . Accessed 19 May 2020.
Schildberg, C. 2014. A caring and sustainable economy: A concept note 
from a feminist perspective. Friedrich Ebert Foundation. http://
library.fes.de/pdf-files/iez/10809.pdf . Accessed 18 June 2020.
Siegfried, A. 2020. Insight into regenerative agriculture in New Zea -
land: The good, the bad, and the opportunity. Pure Advantage. 
https://pureadvantage.org/news/2020/04/30/insight-into-regen -
erative-agriculture-in-new-zealand-the-good-the-bad-and-the-
opportunity/ . Accessed 5 August 2020.
Soloviev, E. R., and G. Landua. 2016. Levels of regenerative agricul -
ture. Terra Genesis International. https://ethansoloviev.com/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/Levels-of-Regenerative-Agriculture.
pdf. Accessed 27 April 2020.
Sundberg, J. 2014. Decolonizing posthumanist geographies. Cultural 
Geographies  21 (1): 33–47.
The Carbon Underground. 2017. Regenerative agriculture definition. 
The Carbon Underground. https://thecarbonunderground.org/our-
initiative/definition/ . Accessed 19 May 2020.
Tregear, A. 2011. Progressing knowledge in alternative and local food 
networks: Critical reflections and a research agenda. Journal of 
Rural Studies  27 (4): 419–430.
Tronto, J. C. 2012. Partiality based on relational responsibilities: 
Another approach to global ethics. Ethics and Social Welfare  6 
(3): 303–316.
Valentine, G. 2005. Tell me about… Using interviews as a research 
methodology. In Methods in human geography: A guide for stu -
dents doing a research project , eds. R. Flowerdew and D. Martin, 
2nd edition, 110–127. Essex: Pearson Education.
Webb, P., T. G. Benton, J. Beddington, D. Flynn, N. M. Kelly, and S. 
M. Thomas. 2020. The urgency of food system transformation is 
now irrefutable. Nature Food  1 (10): 584–585.
West, S., L. J. Haider, S. Stålhammar, and S. Woroniecki. 2020. A rela -
tional turn for sustainability science? Relational thinking, leverage 
points and transformations. Ecosystems and People  16 (1): 304–325.
Whyte, K. P., and C. Cuomo. 2016. Ethics of caring in environmental 
ethics: Indigenous and feminist philosophies. In Oxford hand -
book of environmental ethics , S. M. Gardiner, and A. Thompson, 
eds. V ol, 1, 234–248. Oxford University Press.
Willett, W., J. Rockström, B. Loken, M. Springmann, T. Lang, S. Ver -
meulen, and T. Garnett, et al. 2019. Food in the Anthropocene: the 
EAT–Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food 
systems. The Lancet  393 (10170): 447–492.
Winter, C. J. 2019. Does time colonise intergenerational environmen -
tal justice theory? Environmental Politics  29 (2): 278–296.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris -
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Madison Seymour  is a recent masters graduate of the University 
of Otago. This paper is derived from her thesis work which investi -
gated the transformative potential of regenerative agriculture in New 
Zealand.
Sean Connelly  is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Geography, Uni -
versity of Otago.Jellie, H. 2020. An introduction to the principles of being regenerative. 
Ata Regenerative. https://ata.land/introduction-principles-regen -
erative/ . Accessed 11 June 2020.
Krzywoszynska, A. 2019. Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: The 
role of attentiveness in more-than-human ethics. Transactions of 
the Institute of British Geographers  44 (4): 661–675.
LaCanne, C. E., and J. G. Lundgren. 2018. Regenerative agriculture: 
Merging farming and natural resource conservation profitably. 
PeerJ  6: e4428.
Lamine, C., I. Darnhofer, and T. K. Marsden. 2019. What enables just 
sustainability transitions in agrifood systems? An exploration of 
conceptual approaches using international comparative case stud -
ies. Journal of Rural Studies  66: 144–146.
Masters, N. 2019. For the love of soil: Strategies to regenerate our 
food production systems . New Zealand: Printable Reality.
McClintock, N. 2014. Radical, reformist, and garden-variety neolib -
eral: coming to terms with urban agriculture’s contradictions. 
Local Environment  19 (2): 147–171.
McEwan, C., and M. K. Goodman. 2010. Place geography and the 
ethics of care: Introductory remarks on the geographies of eth -
ics, responsibility and care. Ethics Place & Environment  13 (2): 
103–112.
MfE, and N. Z. Stats. 2019. New Zealand’s environmental reporting 
series: Environment Aotearoa. New Zealand Government. https://
www.mfe.govt.nz/publications/environmental-reporting/environ -
ment-aotearoa-2019 . Accessed 16 May 2020.
Moragues-Faus, A., and T. Marsden. 2017. The political ecology of 
food: Carving ‘spaces of possibility’ in a new research agenda. 
Journal of Rural Studies  55: 275–288.
Morgaine, K., L. Thompson, K. Jahnke, and R. Llewellyn. 2017. 
GoodYarn: Building mental health literacy in New Zealand’s rural 
workforce. Journal of Public Mental Health  16 (4): 180–190.
Moriggi, A., K. Soini, A. Franklin, and D. Roep. 2020. A care-based 
approach to transformative change: Ethically-informed practices, 
relational response-ability & emotional awareness. Ethics Policy 
& Environment  23 (3): 281–298.
Nestlé. 2021. Accelerate, transform, regenerate: Nestlé’s net zero road -
map. https://www.nestle.com/sites/default/files/2020-12/nestle-
net-zero-roadmap-en.pdf . Accessed 10 May 2021.
New Zealand Productivity Commission. 2018. Low-emissions econ -
omy. https://www.productivity.govt.nz/inquiries/lowemissions/ . 
Accessed 24 February 2019.
Noxolo, P., P. Raghuram, and C. Madge. 2012. Unsettling responsi -
bility: Postcolonial interventions. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers  37 (3): 418–429.
One News. 2019. Hundreds of farmers march on parliament protest -
ing emissions targets, water regulation. TVNZ. https://www.tvnz.
co.nz/one-news/new-zealand/hundreds-farmers-march-parlia -
ment-protesting-emissions-targets-water-regulation . Accessed 25 
May 2021.
Orr, D. 2002. Four challenges of sustainability. Conservation Biology  
16 (6): 1457–1460.
Parsons, M., J. Nalau, and K. Fisher. 2017. Alternative perspectives on 
sustainability: Indigenous knowledge and methodologies. Chal -
lenges in Sustainability  5 (1): 7–14.
PepsiCo. 2021. PepsiCo announces 2030 goal to scale regenerative 
farming practices across 7 million acres, equivalent to entire agri -
cultural footprint. PepsiCo, Inc. Official Website. http://www.
pepsico.com/news/press-release/pepsico-announces-2030-goal-
to-scale-regenerative-farming-practices-across-7-mil04202021 . 
Accessed 10 May 2021.
Pla-Julián, I., and S. Guevara. 2019. Is circular economy the key to 
transitioning towards sustainable development? Challenges from 
the perspective of care ethics. Futures  105: 67–77.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2010. Ethical doings in naturecultures. Ethics 
Place & Environment  13 (2): 151–169.
1 3244
