npj | urban sustainabi lity Perspective
Published in partnership with RMIT University
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5
Rethinking trade-offs in nature-based
solutions from a multispecies justiceperspective
Check for updates
Katinka Wijsman1, Melissa Pineda-Pinto2,S i m oS a r k k i3,4, Charlotte Stijnen1,
Janneke den Dekker-Arlain1& Christopher M. Raymond5,6,7
Trade-offs in nature-based solutions are increasingly recognized, with novel research interrogating
their justice implications. Yet, these trade-offs and justice implications remain entrenched in ananthropocentric orientation, which is problematic in ecological and ethical terms. We discuss fourcommon assumptions on trade-offs in NBS (instrumentalism, neutrality of science, collaborativeconsensus, and unitemporality) and rethink them through a multispecies justice lens, maintaining thatdealing with trade-offs is a form of interspecies politics.
Research on the co-bene ﬁts of Nature Based Solutions (NBS) (e.g., refs. 1,2)
typically assesses how diverse ecosystem se rvices (e.g., carbon sequestration,
pollination, air and water puri ﬁcation) and wider elements of health and
livelihood (such as risk reduction, equit y, sustainability transformation) can
be simultaneously served through NBS (see ref. 3). Besides the potential for
synergies between diverse ecosystem services, however, assessments also
reveal disservices (e.g. refs. 4,5)a n dap o t e n t i a lf o rc o n ﬂict between and
among ecologically and soci ally desirable outcomes6–10. The consideration of
potential trade-offs and their effects in practice re ﬂects a recognition that
multiple bene ﬁtscan con ﬂict with one another, and that choices are inherent
in the design and functioning of NBS, with implications for their desirabilityand appropriateness. Yet, the justice implications of how trade-offs arediscussed and settled remain largely overlooked
8, despite justice having
become a key concern in NBS applications11. Leaving justice considerations
in the periphery can increase, entrench, and aggravate social-ecologicalinequalities and vulnerabilities, particularly for individuals and commu-nities that are already at risk. If NBS are to be designed and implemented in
just ways, trade-off thinking needs to make justice implications explicit.
At the same time that scholarship on trade-offs largely overlooks
q u e s t i o n so fj u s t i c e ,d i s c u s s i o n so nj ustice in NBS have traditionally pro-
ceeded from an anthropocentric viewpoint
12–14. The discussion of the dis-
tribution of bene ﬁts and burdens, the participation in decision-making, and
the recognition of stakes typically proceeds from the perspective andinterests of human individuals and communities. However, given thatc h o i c e si nt h ed e s i g na n di m p l e m e n t ation of NBS can have repercussions
ranging from positive to detrimental for many living beings (and theirrelations) beyond the human, a narro w focus on humans is problematic inboth ecological and ethical terms
15–17. In ecological terms, a narrow focus on
humans misses out on ecological relati onships that are easily overlooked in
an Anthropocentric frame and risks un dermining ecological integrity. In
ethical terms, failing to acknowledg et h ev a l u e( b e y o n dh u m a nu t i l i t y ) ,
capabilities, and needs of the wide r living world is a moral mistake,
undermining multispecies justice (MSJ). It is in this context of recognition
and consideration that justice is recon ceptualized, and the subject of justice
expanded to include nonhuman living b eings and the interlinkages between
species through the notion of MSJ16. At its core, MSJ recognizes that non-
human beings and ecosystems can be bearers of rights and deserving ofequitable consideration in decision-m aking processes, and advocates ethical
relationships with and responsibili ties to these species and ecosystems
18,19.I t
is therefore critical to consider MSJ as a process and practice of re ﬂexivity,
not only a set of outcomes to be examined13.
This article does some of this re ﬂexive work. Taking MSJ as a starting
point, in this article, we expand the notion of which actors are due con-sideration in thinking about synergi e sa n dt r a d e - o f f si nN B Sd e s i g na n d
implementation. In particular, we rethink trade-offs in NBS, asking how the
expansion of the notion of justice to a wider set of subjects changes thecharacteristics, con ﬂicts, and concerns that we see in NBS trade-off
assessments. We thus focus on trade-offs rather than co-bene ﬁts,
acknowledging that MSJ can also bring synergies into view, but insisting onthe crucial work of considering who “loses out ”in those cases that synergetic
win–win scenarios are not possible. We stress that, ultimately, the ethical
crux of working with NBS lies in how trade-offs are considered and dealtwith. We do the work of rethinking trad e-offs by critically discussing four
assumptions underlying trade-off th inking in NBS, either explicitly or
1Department of Human Geography and Spatial Planning, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.2Melbourne Centre for Cities, Faculty of Architecture
Building and Planning, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.3Cultural Anthropology Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.4University of Erfurt,
Erfurt, Germany.5Helsinki Institute of Sustainability Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.6Ecosystems and Environment Research Program, Faculty of
Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.7Department of Economics and Management, Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. e-mail: k.m.wijsman@uu.nl
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
implicitly: an assumption of instrumentality, one of neutrality of science,
one of collaborative consensus, and one of unitemporality. Each of theseassumptions is discussed by bringing NBS and MSJ literatures into con-versation with each other, and illustrated through a case study of urban NBS.
We propose alternative foci for NBS tr ade-off discussions informed by the
MSJ lens, and conclude that trade-offs should be understood as an issue ofinter- and intraspecies politics, where being explicit about the stakes andjustice implications of NBS interven tions from a more-than-human per-
spective is both ecologically and ethi cally necessary. MSJ does not endorse a
simple solution to the management of complex trade-offs, but rather analternative lens through which to identify challenges, as well as understandproblems and con ﬂicts.
Ecocentric politics and ethics: lessons about multi-
species spaces for multispecies justice
The human-centered approach to justice considerations in NBS has recently
been challenged12,14. Central to this call to abandon anthropocentrism is the
urge to consider bene ﬁts and harms related to NBS interventions from a
multispecies perspective, including more-than-human beings and ecologi-
cal communities' needs and interest s. This expansive framing of multi-
species bene ﬁts and harms is at the core of MSJ: an ethical and political
project that argues for the moral co nsideration of nonhuman beings as
bearers of justice16. MSJ is both an ethical and a political project because it
fundamentally re-evaluates our moral obligations to the nonhuman world,and seeks to translate these obligations into concrete changes in our social,legal, and political structures. Ethically founded on the idea of intrinsic
value, the understanding that “all living organisms have a good of their
own”
20and“that nonhuman beings are not simply of value as a means to an
end”21, the crux of this thinking is that beings have value independent of
human interests. The ethical proj ect of MSJ argues that intrinsic value
warrants extending moral consideration , responsibility for, and respect to all
living beings16,22. Politically, this framework necessitates a rethinking of
justice itself, aiming to broaden its scope beyond humans to include diverse
species and their relationships, ulti mately advocating for new forms of
governance, laws, and social practices that foster a more just and sustainablemultispecies world
23.
Fundamental to this ethico-politi cal project is MSJ recognition of the
agency and capabilities of living beings —that is, their functionings and
abilities to ﬂourish, develop, and live a life worth living16,24–26.F o rs o m e
scholars, this is justi ﬁed through arguments of animal sentience25,w h i l s t
others argue for the integrity of life27–29. These arguments underline the
interdependence and interconnectedness between living beings (includinghumans) and ecosystems, and maintain t hat extending moral consideration
to the more-than-human realm opens diverse ways to include multispeciesneeds and interests in decision-making processes. This can be expressed bybeing more attentive, responsive, and embracing of more-than-humanbeings and collectives, as well as ways of knowing and being. Going further,rights-based approaches call for deeper political and legal transformations
that challenge colonial, destructiv e, and violent legacies and histories
30.T h i s
can lead to rethinking political pro cesses and institutions that support
reparations and Indigenous self-deter mination. It is important to recognize
that MSJ aligns with and builds on Indi genous and relational worldviews,
and similar ethical frameworks like the ethics of care, that emphasize deep,reciprocal relationships between hu mans and the natural world, viewing
land, waters, animals, and plants as kin or relatives. Ethics are rooted inresponsibility, reciprocity, and inter connectedness, rather than individual
rights or instrumental value. When encountering con ﬂicts and trade-offs,
these frameworks, like MSJ, seek solutions that maintain the health ofrelationships, often prioritizing long-term ecological balance and bio-cultural continuity over short-term human gain.
The extension of moral consideration, however, does not by itself
provide a balanced and con ﬂict-free situation. On the contrary, it highlights
and obliges us to think about the man y and complex effects of decisions,
actions, and types of relations that unfold across human and more-than-human worlds, the stakes of these decisions, and the processes throughwhich we organize them. MSJ does not offer a set of normative principles or
a universalist approach that can be imp lemented in different contexts and
settings. While this could be considered a shortcoming in the eyes of thosethinking about applications of MSJ, what MSJ offers is a starting point to
recognize con ﬂict and trade-offs through pla ce-based approaches. MSJ does
not eliminate con ﬂict; it provides a framework for acknowledging the full
spectrum of beings involved, understanding their interconnectedness, andseeking solutions that do not simply p rioritize human interests. Put dif-
ferently, the extension of moral consideration begs the question of inter-species politics that is attentive to t he relations and interactions between
multiple species “about the conditions of shared life ”
31.
Drawing attention to several ethical dilemmas, it requires us to ask:
what are the obligations that MSJ imposes? For example, when can wildanimals or introduced plants be treated as disruptive in urban settings andrendered removable or killable if the y also deserve moral consideration?
H o wd ow er e c o g n i z ea n dd e a lw i t hc o n ﬂicts of interest between different
more-than-human species
32,33or between more-than-human species and
disadvantaged communities32,34,35? When do humans have an obligation of
action, and when is human interference a problem? How should we tackle alack of human willingness to coexist w ith other species, whether or not based
on human supremacist thought? And how do we change the techniques,ideas, and terminology that constitute a logic of domination? In short, MSJinsists on attention to the intra- and interspecies politics and ethics ofenvironmental beings and communities that seek an “inclusive, relational
ecological world as the shared community of justice ”.
At the same time that an MSJ approach underlines con ﬂicts and trade-
offs by centering more-than-human beings and communities, the approach
is powerful because it does not exclude humans from consideration. Instead,
by emphasizing interconnectedness and mutual dependence, MSJ drawsattention to shared vulnerabilities and resilience. For example, authorswriting from an MSJ perspective have addressed entrenched dehumaniza-tion while acknowledging the real, embo died hardship of social inequalities,
multidimensional poverty, and pervasive injustices in all societies ’
16,a n d
asked whether the institutionalization of rights to nature is a continuation ofWestern, colonial tools of oppression
36. What MSJ offers is a radically dif-
ferent way to debate, think about, and transform socio-natural and politicalprocesses.
Interrogating stubborn NBS trade-off assumptions
For urban NBS, a crucial question that emerges from the moral con-sideration of more-than-human oth ers is how the concept of MSJ governs
decisions about what NBS should look like, what living beings should behelped in their survival through NBS, and how these decisions should bem a d e .I nt h i ss e c t i o n ,w et u r nt ot h i sq u e s t i o nf r o mt h ev a n t a g ep o i n to ftrade-offs in the design, planning, implementation, and use phases of urbanNBS. As situations where achieving on e thing requires giving up another,
trade-offs are where con ﬂicts and priorities come into play, and where
decision-making involves making cho ices between competing alternatives
with consequences for who receive the bene ﬁts or carry the costs of NBS
interventions. As such, trade-offs in NBS can be considered political
8,b u t
“allegories of good versus evil ”are unhelpful in understanding and dealing
with trade-offs because they are often complex37. Yet, trade-offs are how
competing visions of NBS are debated, and their settling is consequential inecological, ethical, and political regi sters. Given this, below we interrogate
four common assumptions in NBS trade-offs, informed by an MSJperspective.
We examine four key stubborn assumptions on NBS design and
implementation with respect to i) instru mentalism, ii) neutrality of science,
iii) collaborative consensus, and iv) unitemporality. The assumption ofinstrumentalism regards the goals of NBS, which are typically de ﬁned from
an anthropocentric viewpoint and trea t ecological beings and processes as
means towards ends. The assumption of neutrality of science concerns the
k n o w l e d g eb a s eo fN B S ,w h i c ht y p i c a l l yt reats science as factual and outside
of value judgment. The assumption of co llaborative consensus regards the
process of NBS, which prioritizes deliberative strategies that presumehttps://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 2
agreement can be achieved and con ﬂict can be resolved. Finally, the
assumption of unitemporality concer ns the temporal scale of NBS, which
remains entrenched in modern temporality. We identi ﬁed these assump-
t i o n sb a s e do np r i o rr e v i e ww o r ko nt r a d e - o f f si nN B St h a th i g h l i g h t sf o c io n
ecosystem services, land-use con ﬂict, governance values, and socio-
ecological dynamics8. Based on this systematic review, we went through a
brainstorm and grouping exercise, t hrough which it became evident that
these assumptions are among the most widely held assumptions in NBSpolicy and governance, and that these assumptions show to be problematic
once we take MSJ as the central ambiti on in the application of NBS. The
assumptions and the implications of t heir problematization through an MSJ
lens are illustrated with short case study vignettes. These case studiesrepresent different life forms (rivers, p lants, birds, insects; all in relation to
other species) and are taken from vari ous regions (Central America, North
America, Europe, and Oceania), to sho wcase how questioning these stub-
born assumptions is of relevance in a variety of different settings.
Assumption of instrumentalism
It is common practice in NBS planning to understand trade-offs by focusing
on ecosystem services and disservices (ES(D)) and mapping how theseinteract or con ﬂict, in theory (during the NBS design phase) and in practice
(once NBS are implemented) (e.g., refs. 38–40)T h ef r a m e w o r ko fE S ( D )i sa
tool to understand which services, understood as bene ﬁt s ,N B Sa r ea b l et o
provide at the cost of others, while enabling a translation of generic stake-holder interests and preferences into explicit terms. Thereby, the ES fra-mework can map how different stakeholders' preferences can ﬁnd synergies
or stand in con ﬂict with each other. For example, Mosleh et al.
41indicate the
differences in preferred ES for green infrastructure planning at the city level,while Wagner et al.
42illustrate the potential discrepancies between the
desired ES of an area and the (in)ability of the area to provide those services.
The distribution of bene ﬁts (services) such as recreational opportunities,
esthetic value, and the provision of sha de; and negative impacts (disservices)
such as allergenicity, unwanted species, and perceived infrastructure risks iscentral herein
43–45. A focus on stakeholder perceptions, preferences, and
participation in NBS trade-off analyses9,46seeks to bring a focus on inclu-
sivity and justice of NBS processes and outcomes.
Although ecosystem services and disservices provide a useful frame-
work for understanding trade-offs and con ﬂicts during the design, planning,
implementation, and use phases of NBS, it has ethical and practical lim-itations. Ethically, the ES(D) framework inherently values nature based onthe services it provides to humans, of ten emphasizing those that can be
easily quanti ﬁed or have direct economic bene ﬁts (e.g., water puri ﬁcation,
carbon sequestration, ﬂood regulation), whilst undervaluing the intrinsic
worth of biodiversity, ecological com munities and ecological processes
47.
This can contribute to the commodi ﬁcation of nature and, in turn, allow for
market-based mechanisms (e.g., carbon markets, biodiversity offsets) where
nature is treated as a form of capi tal that can be traded or offset48and has
been an ineffective tool in achieving public support for nature
conservation49. At a practical level, the predominance of a single-city and
single-service focus prevents a holist ic assessment of biodiversity and eco-
system services synergies and trade-offs50, which is ampli ﬁed by a mis-
understanding between ecosystem functions and biodiversity51.T h e s e
analyses reveal that “[t]he impact of trade-offs is often related to the intensity
of use of ecosystem[s] ”and that the most frequent trade-offs occur among
provisioning and regulating ES46. An MSJ lens invites researchers and
planners to consider how exactly life- supporting ecosystem functions at the
foundation of human and non-human species ’wellbeing are negatively
impacted. For example, how the misappropriation and biopiracy of Indi-genous ecological knowledge affects the stewardship of ecosystems, and thewell-being of Indigenous communities
52, or how discounting biodiversity
and ecological communities that do not hold a signi ﬁcant value for people
can risk the ecological integrity of nature-based solutions17.
A MSJ perspective also invites a deeper understanding of who bene ﬁts,
who bears the harms, who is recogni zed and who is counted through NBSplanning (see Case 1). Broader framin gs and deeper analyses that recognize
the interconnections and relationali ty of the complex interrelated multi-
species world we inhabit are now considered essential51,53. Similar arguments
have been raised regarding the plural valuation of nature as a way to foster
inclusivity amongst “beneﬁts, stakeholders, knowledge systems and
worldviews ”54–56, and as a means to foster recognitional justice through the
diverse representation and empowerment of marginalized worldviews57.
Such a recognition requires moving aw ay from a perspective of instrumental
v a l u e ,i nw h i c hn a t u r ei sv a l u e da sam e a n st os a t i s f yh u m a nn e e d sa n dinterests and which still dominates ES literature
58, and instead incorporates
non-instrumental and plural values.
Case 1: Interurban Biological Corridors, San José, Costa Rica . The
Interurban Biological Corridors is a nature-based planning initiative inthe metropolitan urban area of San José, Costa Rica. The corridors are
developed as mechanisms for ecological conservation and social-
ecological wellbeing
59by concretizing a vision of social-ecological con-
nectivity, restoration, and conservation in cities. The interurban biolo-gical corridors connect protected areas at the regional scale, promotinghabitat restoration, wildlife movement, and preservation of geneticdiversity through the protection of river basins
60. These Corridors,
however, are also framed and managed as a social-ecological tool toimprove human wellbeing; its effectiveness is measured and managementinterventions are based on the ES(D) framework
61. To understand trade-
offs, the managing institution uses an “analysis of con ﬂict zones ”
approach to understand how, why, and between whom con ﬂicts emerge
and play out. This framework locates the emerging and unfolding of
conﬂict in land-use practices, people ’s values, tensions between biodi-
versity conservation and establishing protection areas, and tensions dueto land tenure and the use of the river as a resource. Trade-offs andconﬂicts are managed through a zoning approach aiming to regulate
land-use changes in a top-down fashion, and based on principles ofproductivity and ef ﬁciency of space. While thus managing certain trade-
offs, it simultaneously generates new trade-offs, such as polluted andenvironmentally degraded areas, areas that are protected in a static way,and unevenly distributed burdens and bene ﬁts
62.
Bringing the MSJ approach to bear on the Corridors, a different picture
emerges. Rivers would be considered a living system, rather than a resource
for consumption or a production point of services. This could be recognizedthrough the provision of legal personhood and independent rights toﬂourish; or through Indigenous colla borative governance representing the
river’s stakes in decision making settings
63“Management ”then becomes
undesirable, as that would misrecognize the “radically diverse life project,
capabilities, phenomenologies, way s of being, functionings, forms of
integrity, and relationalities ”16of living organisms. Instead, the recognition
and dealing with trade-offs and con ﬂict would have to facilitate a process
that considers the interest of the river, as a living being ,r a t h e rt h a nt h e
interests of those around the river, as a resource. For example, diverting
water for irrigation is not just a technical or economic decision —it becomes
a question of whether such an action infringes upon the river ’s“right ”or
capabilities to ﬂow, to sustain its ecosystems, or to exist in a healthy state.
This reframes trade-offs as negotiations among stakeholders, where theriver’s needs —such as maintaining ecological integrity, ﬂow, and self-
renewal —hold similar weight to human interests.
This shift complicates trade-offs, making them less about optimizing
outcomes and more about navigating responsibilities, obligations, andrelationships. It may lead to decisions that favor ecological integrity overshort-term economic gain, or that prioritize restoration over exploitation.Ultimately, including a river in justice considerations invites a broaderethical imagination: one in which trade-offs are not simply technical
dilemmas but moral dialogs among interdependent beings. It challenges
dominant anthropocentric paradigms and opens space for more reci-procal, respectful, and sustainable ways of relating to the more-than-human world.https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 3
Assumption of neutrality of science
A core feature of NBS is that they sho uld provide environmental bene ﬁts
alongside social and economic ones, co ntributing to biodiverse futures and
healthy ecosystems simultaneously. Knowledge stemming from the sub-
disciplines of ecology is therefore s een as pivotal to guide the planning and
management of NBS, and to understand potential trade-offs betweenmanagement options to ultimately ensu re positive contributions to biodi-
versity. This knowledge comes into pla y, for example, through the provision
of indicators, which are thought to capture potential improvement or
deterioration of biodiversity thro ugh NBS by looking at such things as
species variation and diversity, and by sorting native from non-nativespecies (e.g. refs. 64–66. For example, assessments of trade-offs related to
biodiversity place a strict division be tween native and non-invasive species
as being conducive to biodiversity, w hereas non-natives and invasives are
seen as disservice to biodiversity
64. The underlying assumption is that eco-
logical knowledge can objectively bring into view the bene ﬁts to biodiversity
that NBS provide, and that the ecological concepts and techniques usedfacilitate an impartial descr iption unhindered by bias.
While ecological knowledge on trad e-offs brings much needed atten-
tion to issues of environmental proce sses and quality, and to the multi-
fariousness of (managing for) ecological bene ﬁts (e.g. ref. 67), important
ethical and political dimensions regarding the stakes for and treatment ofdiverse living beings in NBS have been overlooked due to the ways weconceptualize and represent relationships between and among differentspecies. These dimensions come into view when we broaden the scope ofconsideration in NBS as inspired by an MSJ lens, challenging narrow or
omitted representation of diverse species in NBS
13. Here, we argue that this
representation is not merely of conce rn regarding planning discourses but
equally involves re ﬂexive consideration of the conceptual and epistemolo-
gical apparatus of science. How we know affects what we know, and ongoing
engagement with concepts, frameworks, and practices is therefore critical to
reveal blind spots and offer alternative approaches to understanding trade-offs in NBS in ways that are more conducive to MSJ
68–70.
Two developments in ecological sci ence illustrate the need to trouble
the common assumption of neutrali ty of ecological knowledge and the
indicators for NBS derivative of it: the widespread disregard of the cognitive
and emotional capacities of animals, and their well-being; and the insistence
on nativeness as a conservation principle. As our understanding deepens
regarding the cognitive and emotional capacities of animals —and even the
abilities of plants —our approach to ecological knowledge is undergoing a
profound transformation. No longer can we view ecosystems as collectionsof passive resources or lifeforms as mere data points. Instead, we are beingcalled to recognize them as active participants in their own right, capable ofexperience, response, and relationship . For example, animal intelligence has
long been disregarded in ecological scienti ﬁc practice, where behaviorist
views of animals as stimulus-response machines were dominant. This dis-
regard is a problem when we consider that the capacity for intelligence is aprominent basis upon which moral co nsideration is dispensed, and the
Descartian model of the animal as automaton popular in science ipso facto
excludes animals from moral conside ration. Recent work on animal cog-
nition challenges this view of anim als, reminding us that our scienti ﬁc
concepts and models are not outside of scrutiny, and that re ﬂection on their
limits remains important, especially when those scienti ﬁc categorizations
and understandings carry ethical and political implications of worth andconsideration
65. The exclusion of a concern for animal well-being in eco-
logical sciences based on a supposed in commensurability with processes of
predation and death, then can be called into question as well, based on theduty of moral consideration (whether based on intelligence, sentience, or
another criterium). Similarly, typical classi ﬁcatory systems of ecology, that
sort out belonging and desirability of plant and animal species by differ-
entiating between native and non-native species, can be questioned from an
MSJ perspective
13,71. Sometimes non-native species are harmless, provide
beneﬁts to their environments, and have conservation value72–74.M o r e
fundamentally, species travel, landscapes are dynamic, and many ecosys-tems are transformed by humans, making the designation “native ”to someextent arbitrary and linked to a Romantic notion of pristine Nature
75,76.T h e
common conceptualization of native s pecies as good and non-native species
as bad, typically accompanied with metaphors drawing action into mili-taristic terms of ﬁghting
77, might not serve conservation efforts in the way
that is customarily thought74,78. The presumed neutrality of science might
then get in the way of alternative frames, such as cohabitation79.
Taking a MSJ perspective, which brings attention to the ethical and
political dimensions of species and their organization, the critique of theassumption of neutrality is that ecological knowledge —like all knowledge
—is not purely objective or universal, but instead in ﬂuenced by broader
social, cultural, and historical contexts, so that it becomes governed bydiscursive framings that inadvertently express ontological views andvalue judgment
80,81. Paying attention to such framings and how they
enable or hinder justice, then, is a key analytical task71. From the MSJ
perspective we can see that, for instance, once animals are rendered
intelligent, or animal sentience and welfare become a legitimate concern,
the design and maintenance of NBS should not merely focus on themanagement of speci ﬁc species, but should take life trajectories into
consideration that acknowledge that NBS and the ecosystems makingthem up are multispecies communities in which social bonds are key
71,79.
Taking such a relational understanding of moral signi ﬁcance could thus
enable NBS scholars to rethink the “entities ”traded off, as not merely
about ecosystem services, but different interspecies constellations, thusrecognizing sentience and sociability as dimensions impacting the just-ness of decisions. Not doing so risks failure to account for the needs andwell-being from an intrinsic point of view and thus potential exploitation
or mistreatment. Furthermore, an MSJ perspective invites us to have a
more contextual understanding of the threats posed by non-native spe-cies. This includes rethinking which trade-offs are captured, and how torecategorise the threats and bene ﬁts posed by non-natives based on their
combined ecological and human wellbeing bene ﬁts or harms (Case 2).
Overall, the lessons from MSJ invite us to take a second look at theecological concepts and knowledge we rely on in our approach to NBS,acknowledging that these concepts and knowledge have histories, alter-natives, and world-creating abilities. They are not politically or morallyinnocent, but instead in ﬂuence academic and policy practice in ways that
can stand in tension to goals of justice. To move beyond the assumption
of the neutrality of science, then, means to practice re ﬂexivity to enable
forms of accountable and just practices.
Case 2: Urban wetlands and Phragmites Australis in North East
America . Land managers of urban wetlands focus their efforts on lim-
iting the dangers to the health of these ecosystems, in order for them toprovide habitat and food for a biodiverse constituency and to offer eco-system services to humans as well. The control of invasive species, forexample through removal projects, is a key management strategy forwetland health. In the American North East, the Phragmites Australis ,o r
common reed, is one of the main targets to control or eradicate, and lots
of time, effort, and money are spent on removal. The non-native strain of
this aquatic grass, introduced some 200 years ago through ship ballast, isnow the most common Phragmites on the East Coast. It is typically seenas harmful because it is believed to compete with native vegetation,crowding or shading it out, and to alter habitats in ways that are inhos-pitable to diverse bird, ﬁsh, insect, and invertebrate species, destroying
sites for reproduction and rearing of the young.
And yet, the onset of climate change leads some ecologists and com-
munities to reconsider the view of Phragmites as a pest and a danger towildlife and plants. With sea levels ris ing and extreme weather events such as
storm surges expected to become more common, urban wetlands areincreasingly recognized and valued f or their capacity to slow down wind and
water and thus protect property and life. However, crunched by the speed of
sea level rise and the inability to migrate inland because of human structures,some urban wetlands are at risk of drowning
82. The deep roots and fast-
growing, dense stands of stems of the Phragmites, its ability to stabilize soil,and its ability to create more detritus and opportunity for elevation thanhttps://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 4
other grass species, “may provide resource managers with a strategy of
combating sea-level rise ”83.A d d e db e n e ﬁts in the context of climate change
are its ability to sequester carbon dioxide84and nitrogen85. Killing and
removing Phragmites may make soils, e specially on vulnerable coastlines,
more prone to erosion.
The reconsideration of Phragmites ’bad reputation should, however,
not only be understood in terms of trading off biodiversity concerns overclimate change impact considerations. The common sense knowledge oninvasive species as harmful by de ﬁnition has been questioned, with research
suggesting that assumptions about lo w habitat value, detriment to biodi-
versity, and disturbance of marsh function may not hold in each case
86–89.
What is more, the eradication of Phragmites does not “just”kill these
grasses, but impacts other species —including the native muskrat, American
beaver, cottontail and diverse insects —who eat and live in these plants87.
This suggests that speci ﬁcity matters, and that the treatment of native and
invasive species should be context-speci ﬁc, especially in contexts like the
urban, where environmental altercation has been irreversible and long-lasting.
Assumption of collaborative consensus
Recent literature emphasizes the need for collaborative approaches in NBS
planning and implementation through concepts like co-creation90,91,c o -
production92,93,c o - d e s i g n94, and collaborative governance95,96.T h e s e
approaches are thought to help manage trade-offs and catalyze synergies inNBS implementation
97, assuming that consensus between diverse actors can
be found98. For example, it has been argued that searching consensus on the
beneﬁts and costs of NBS can help decision-makers to design and imple-
ment NBS4,99,100, and accounting for stakeholders ’perceptions on the likely
co-bene ﬁts can enhance acceptability of the NBS9. However, these views lack
sensitivity towards diverse persp ectives on the claimed co-bene ﬁts; in par-
ticular, multispecies perspective s are generally lacking (exceptions
refs.14,101).
The assumption of co-bene ﬁts is debatable when we take an MSJ
perspective, because it challenges the subject of bene ﬁt, recognizing that the
distribution of harms depends on ho w the relationships between humans
and other species are considered within speci ﬁcc o n t e x t s .F o re x a m p l e ,t h e
habitats provided by NBS can also attr act wild animals that are unwanted by
their human neighbors, while rewildi ng efforts can be at odds with creating
culturally appropriate foodscapes34.O n ew a yt om a n a g em u l t i s p e c i e sc o n -
ﬂicts is to include more-than-human species in an “interspecies democracy ”
by considering their actions as a form of political communication31,102.
Furthermore, more-than-human speci es are also embedded in historical
and political contexts, which shap e multispecies coexistence and con ﬂicts103.
Assuming consensual co-bene ﬁts of NBS often masks legitimately diverse
viewpoints behind the alleged consensus104. Theories of rational deliberation
have been criticized for their ignorance of con ﬂict and the bene ﬁts of con-
ﬂicts for democratic societies105–107. For example, the taken-for-grantedness
of the idea that birds in urban green space will enhance human
well-being108,109,m a y ,i na c t u a l i t y ,m a s kd i v e r s ec o n ﬂicting views behind the
assumed consensus on the co-bene ﬁts.
Overall, instead of assuming consensus on the co-bene ﬁts of NBS, we
should interrogate whether and why consensus or dissensus is at play. Here,we should seek to understand the political and historical contexts of themultispecies encounters, the type of con ﬂict occurring, the alternative ways
to build consensus for con ﬂict management, and how to engage more-than-
human species in con ﬂict management. Raymond et al. encourage the
creation of “transdisciplinary safe ”spaces for dealing with intractable
conﬂicts, which are never complete in NBS planning when representing
multispecies needs
13.
Case 3: The con ﬂict between barnacle geese and humans in Hel-
sinki, Finland . This case illustrates the dif ﬁculty of consensus-seeking
methods in managing con ﬂicts, and MSJ can offer an alternative means of
negotiating partial settlements. In the 1970s, barnacle geese were close toextinction and therefore protected under the Bern convention, while thehunting of these geese was forbidden through the EU ’s Birds directive in
1979
110. This led to revitalization of the population reaching 1.4 million in
2020110, with around 6000 nesting individuals since in Helsinki 2015111.
The geese arrive in Finland during their spring migration, and stay there
until winter retreats from their Arctic breeding grounds112.
The presence and litter of barnacle geese has been considered to
decrease the attractiveness of urba n green spaces for people, and makes
cleaning of the parks more expensive and dif ﬁcult112.I nt h em e d i a ,a r g u -
ments made range from those arguing that the protection of barnacle geeseshould be ended
113,t ot h o s et h a ts t a t e “goose rage ”is incomprehensible114,
and others that insist urgent solutions to a catastrophic geese problem areneeded
115. In 2024, the City of Helsinki launched a competition seeking new
tools to collect litter from the city parks and beaches, and hired 45 employeesb e c a u s eo ft h eg e e s es i t u a t i o n .I ti ss u ggested that a previously vibrant picnic
culture has ended in the Kaivopuisto city park, nearby kindergartens do not
make trips to the park anymore, and that prior to outdoor gymnastic ses-
sions, the geese litter has to be collected in bags
116,117.
Failed consensus-seeking management efforts include proposals for
a branding campaign to produce a positive image of the geese, and geeseguides, who would circle around the parks and tell people about the livesand positive aspects of the geese
118. However, these proposals were not
transformed into mainstream practices. Recently, the coexistence of geeseand people has been proposed in urban green space management
111,f o r
example, by letting the city lawns grow higher to attract less geese, and bybuilding small fences to limit the movements of baby geese who cannotﬂy
119,120. From this checkered history with geese, what seems to be
emerging are multispecies negotiations. In these negotiations, material
changes in the physical environment (e.g., fences, dogs, height of thegrass) enable changes in geese behavior in ways that support the sub-jective well-being of humans in urban areas.
Assumption of unitemporality
Commonly, trade-off consideration s in NBS focus on how different bene ﬁts
and burdens manifest across time, f rom current situations to future
scenarios121,122. For example, a study on the perceived bene ﬁts from a pro-
tected area in Manila, the Philippines, identi ﬁes current con ﬂicting stake-
holder interests between values for b iodiversity, ecotourism, and urban
development potential and the implications for future land-use changes121.
Similarly, a study on con ﬂicting values connected to urban coastal man-
groves positions values in the pres ent with projections for the future123.S o m e
studies investigate changes over time, looking at the recent past, for example,tracing the dispersion of green spaces in a context of increasing urbandevelopment
124,125, or investigating forced displacement in informal settle-
ments resulting from greenbelt development126.
Yet such studies do not fully engage with the multiple temporalities of
place. For example, historical time can be transformed by atmosphericcarbon, reproductive time can be qu eered by microplastics, and species
extinction affects notions of multispecies time (see ref. 127). In particular,
studies commonly ignore the potential for phenological mismatches (e.g.,
between plants and pollinators), as wel l as mismatches between ecological,
social, and political systems, for example the disconnects between short-term thinking of political cycles a nd the requirement for longer-term
thinking to manage the biodiversity and climate crises (e.g., refs. 127–129)
(Case 3). Also, bene ﬁts and burdens are not always expressed in the same
time period
130–132,a n dt h e longue duree h a sal a s t i n gl e g a c yo ns o c i o -
ecological constellations a nd their perceived justice19,133. The MSJ lens shows
that social life cannot be conceived as d istinct from the environment, and
therefore, a rapprochement of differ ent temporal worlds is critical to
addressing temporal mismatches. It r equires an improved understanding of
how time is both embedded and contested within the intertwined social and
ecological crises127, and in socio-ecological practices. It requires a deeper
exploration of lived, situated exper iences that take shape in particular
expressions of time134, including seasonal rhythms and the different cycles,
durations, and tempos involved in speci ﬁc nature management practices
(ibid), as re ﬂected in the case of urban beekeeping (Case 4). The MSJ lenshttps://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 5
thus encourages temporal re ﬂection for NBS trade-offs: whose future do we
care for? Whose pasts and presents do we recognize? How can we becomeattentive to a diversity of rhythms, life cycles, and experiences over speciesboundaries?
76
Two related analytical moves can help in attending to
polytemporality135and its repercussions for NBS trade-offs: decolonial
thinking and more-than-human thinking . First, decolonial thinking reveals
how colonial narratives of “Nature ”and practices of taming “Nature ”
endure in and in ﬂuence NBS planning and governance79,136,137. For example,
the siting of port cities and the design of drainage systems in Suriname andGuyana hinged on Dutch and British colonial ideas of waterways as con-trollable and exploitable, ideas that remain central through notions such as“ﬂood control ”and“utilizing natural resources ”
79,138.E v e nw h e nb i o c e n t r i s t
pre-colonial notions of “Nature ”(as not separate from humanity, as
something to be respected and lived in harmony with) are expressly revi-
talized in contemporary times, such as through Buen Vivir principles in
Ecuador, this remains a theoretical exe r c i s em o r et h a nas u c c e s si np r a c t i c e35.
Attending to this longue duree is a necessary step to understand how legacies
of past social and multispecies injusti ce leave imprints on the present that
may constrain breaking ou to fp r o b l e m a t i cp a t h w a y s79.A tt h es a m et i m e ,
scrutinizing colonial modes of p lanning and governance in NBS is a
necessary step to recognize and redress past harms, current needs, anddesired futures
136. Second, more-than-human thinking challenges huma-
nistic conceptions of time in favor of more-than-human timescales,
assigning us to recalibrate ourselves to the different speeds of different forms
of life139. This move brings into view how human timescales can disrupt
those of other species, for example, wh en practices of environmental off-
setting fail to account for the slowness of tree growth when a habitatsacriﬁced for urban development goals is supposedly unproblematically
replaced by a new one
140.
Case 4: Multispecies temporalities in urban beekeeping in Australia .
Integrating beekeeping programs into urban areas is an NBS that servesas a refuge for pollinators
141and that fosters learning about biodiversity
and responsible actions around the home or of ﬁce142. Such programs can
be used to address trade-offs, such as how the use of commercial bug-sprays (i.e., pesticides) can have sub-lethal effects on urban bee
populations
143. This brings into focus the plurality of times at play in
beekeeping practices, where plural versions of the future (e.g., collapse,recovery) ﬁnd expression in trade-offs in the present (e.g., harvesting for
honey or leaving honey for bees; whether or not to manage swarms).Urban beekeeping, then, requires coordination between human and beetemporalities made through diverse and imbricated more-than-humanrelations
134,144,145. Accounts of urban beekeeping inf Australia134highlight
that beekeeping requires a kind of “slowing down ”and becoming “in
tune”with bees —for example, slowing one ’s body, focusing on bees, and
keeping one ’s distance.The importance of time keeping and time telling over species
boundaries is critical in beekeeping practices. Harvesting honey in ways thatbest protect the health of bees requires skillful sequencing, timing, and
pacing of checking hives and the coordination of humans and bee tellings of
time, which is never fully complete
134. Beekeepers need to be attuned to the
rhythms of seasonal changes, growt h patterns, and circadian cycles to
ensure the persistence of colonies. For example, beekeepers need to payattention to the seasonality of the ﬂowering of plants for bees (including
differences in ﬂowering frequencies, durat ions, and intensities between
species), and the timing of swarming. Importantly, these plural temporal-ities are place-speci ﬁc, meaning that urban beekeeping and its rhythms are
not a homogenous (temporal) experi ence, but instead a situated practice
146.
In Australia, for example, where mass bee loss has not occurred and yetshapes attitudes towards beekeeping, honey production hinges on theirregular blossoming of Eucalyptus inst ead of seasonal cycles. The temporal
coordination between diverse species that is critical to beekeeping is also
diverse, warranting attention to the poly-temporal nature of the world. Suchsituated accounts of more-than-huma n relationships show how they stretch
beyond current spacetimes (building on refs. 134,147), and that beekeeping
is a negotiated, place-based practice where multiple more-than-humantemporalities become entwined.
Conclusion: necessary shifts for multispecies justice in
trade-offs thinking for NBS
In this paper, we explored how the expansion of the notion of justice to a
wider set of subjects changes the characteristics, con ﬂicts, and concerns that
we see in NBS trade-off assessments. Usi ng insights from the project of MSJ,
which urges us to attend to life projects a nd relationalities of living beings
and systems for ecological and ethica l reasons, we interrogated four com-
mon and unquestioned assumptions in how trade-offs are typicallyunderstood in NBS –assumptions of instrumentalism, neutrality, colla-
borative consensus, and unitemporalit y. MSJ helps us to rethink trade-offs
and con ﬂict in NBS by insisting on (1) plural and non-instrumental values;
(2) alternative frames of knowledge production and assessment; (3) ongoingnegotiations with political stakes; and ( 4) different temporalities coexisting
and clashing. The resulting shifting te rrain of approaching t rade-offs (Table
1) therefore insists on the situatedness of NBS in political, ethical, and
historical contexts alongside ecologi cal ones, while questioning the useful-
ness of thinking about trade-offs in nea r-universal terms. Thus, theorizing
trade-offs as an issue of intra- and in terspecies politics, we argue for an
approach to NBS trade-offs that is explicit about both the stakes and justiceimplications of NBS interventions beyond the human, and about theinevitability of making, sometimes dif ﬁcult, choices.
Overall, the MSJ approach to NBS tra d e - o f f sc h a l l e n g e sn a r r a t i v e so f
control and exploitation by centering more-than-human ontologies andepistemologies. How can we integrate such considerations into NBS plan-ning and governance practice? A ﬁrst step is to acknowledge that existing
Table 1 | Traditional and MSJ-informed approaches to trade-offs in NBS
Assumption Traditional approaches to trade-off assessments MSJ perspectives on trade-offs
Instrumentalism Focus on bene ﬁts/services and disservices Recognition of plural and non-instrumental values and considers questions of
costs and bene ﬁts“for whom? ”, leading to more nuanced assessments of
conﬂict.
Neutrality Tendency to use indicators as measures of costs, bene ﬁts,
and effectiveness, which are assumed to “objectively ”
measure realityEmphasizes the ethical and political dimensions of costs and bene ﬁts,
including issues of intelligence and sentience. Openness to critiqueassumptions of neutrality and reassess conservation principles.
Collaborative consensus Assumes that consensus can be found by comparing and
deliberating on co-bene ﬁts and costs within speci ﬁc casesRecognizes that consensus is unlikely. Rather, parties need to commit to an
ongoing process of negotiation between human and more-than-human
interests. The process needs to respect the situatedness of co-bene ﬁts and
costs, including how injustices are embedded in historical and political
contexts.
Unitemporality Often views time in a single dimension, for example, as
calendric or geological time.Bene ﬁts and burdens are not always related to one time period or temporality
of place. MSJ emphasizes a rapprochement of different temporal worlds,
including how experiences are situated in different cycles, durations, and
tempos over species boundaries.https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 6
tools for trade-off assessments may be overlooking bene ﬁts and costs
associated with NBS across different su bjectivities. We therefore posit that
the development of new trade-off tools, processes, and practices that attend
to multispecies needs is warranted. What is more, it would be useful to have
processes in place where constructive critique of the neutrality of trade-off
assessment tool can be expressed, and ﬁnd approaches through which to
interrogate whether, how, and throug h what means collaborative consensus
can be achieved —o rh o wt om a k ec h o i c e s ,a n d “pick sides ”, in accountable
ways, when con ﬂict is inevitable. This means being more re ﬂexive about
what is being traded off and how it affects the well-being of humans andmore-than-human species. Relatedly , planners need to respect the different
temporalities of place and how this provides meanings and functions to bothhumans and more-than-human species, changing the way that trade-offsare recognized and distributed over space and time. In this regard, inter-generational thinking
148could become part and parcel of NBS trade-off
assessments. All this together points to the need to ﬁnd ways to fairly
represent more-than-human perspectives —in both ecological and social
terms —in planning processes in order to get a better understanding of the
unfolding dynamics of interspecies relations in place and how these help —
or hinder —some lives to ﬂourish.
Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Received: 6 December 2024; Accepted: 7 August 2025;
References
1. Raymond C. M. et al. A framework for assessing and implementing
the co-bene ﬁts of nature-based solutions in urban areas. Environ.
Sci. Policy 77,1 5–24 (2017).
2. Lafortezza, R. & Sanesi, G. Nature-based solutions: settling the issue
of sustainable urbanization. Environ. Res. 172, 394 –398 (2019).
3. Aghaloo, K., Shari ﬁ, A., Habibzadeh, N., Ali, T. & Chiu, Y.-R. How
nature-based solutions can enhance urban resilience to ﬂooding
and climate change and provide other co-bene ﬁts: a systematic
review and taxonomy. Urban For. Urban Green 95, 128320
(2024).
4. Yang, S., Ruangpan, L., Torres, A. S. & Vojinovic, Z. Multi-objective
optimisation framework for assessment of Trade-Offs betweenbene ﬁts and Co-bene ﬁts of nature-based solutions. Water. Resour.
Manag. 37, 2325 –2345 (2023).
5. Pistón, N., Silva Filho, D. S. E. & Dias, A. T. C. Social inequality deeply
affects people ’s perception of ecosystem services and disservices
provided by street trees. Ecosyst. Serv. 58, 101480 (2022).
6. Martin, A. et al. Justice and conservation: the need to incorporate
recognition. Biol. Conser. 197, 254 –261 (2016).
7. Knapp, S. & MacIvor, J. S. Nature-based solutions and biodiversity:
synergies, trade-offs, and ways forward. in Nature-Based Solutions
for Cities (eds. McPhearson, T., Kabisch, N. & Frantzeskaki, N.)
82–103. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781800376762.00014 (Edward
Elgar Publishing, 2023).
8. Stijnen, C., Frantzeskaki, N. & Wijsman, K. Beating around the bush:
a scoping review of trade-offs for just planning and governance ofurban nature-based solutions. Urban For. Urban Green. 102, 128525
(2024).
9. Giordano, R., Pluchinotta, I., Pagano, A., Scrieciu, A. & Nanu, F.
Enhancing nature-based solutions acceptance throughstakeholders ’engagement in co-bene ﬁts identi ﬁcation and trade-
offs analysis. Sci.Total Environ. 713, 136552 (2020).
10. Megyesi, B. et al. Perceptions of stakeholders on nature-based
solutions in urban planning: a thematic analysis in six Europeancities. Urban For. Urban Green. 96, 128344 (2024).
11. Wijsman, K. & Berbés-Blázquez, M. What do we mean by justice in
sustainability pathways? Commitments, dilemmas, and translationsfrom theory to practice in nature-based solutions. Environ. Sci.
Policy 136, 377 –386 (2022).
12. Pineda-Pinto, M., Frantzeskaki, N. & Nygaard, C. A. The potential of
nature-based solutions to deliver ecologically just cities: lessons for
research and urban planning from a systematic literature review.
Ambio 51, 167 –182 (2022).
13. Raymond, C., Rautio, P., Fagerholm, N., Aaltonen, V. & Andersson,
E. Applying multispecies justice in nature-based solutions and urbansustainability planning: tensions and prospects. npj Urban Sustain .
5, 2 (2025).
14. Maller, C. Re-orienting nature-based solutions with more-than-
human thinking. Cities 113, 103155 (2021).
15. Arcari, P., Probyn-Rapsey, F. & Singer, H. Where species don ’t meet:
invisibilized animals, urban nature and city limits. Environ. Plan. E
Nat. Space 4, 940 –965 (2021).
16. Celermajer, D. et al. Multispecies justice: theories, challenges, and a
research agenda for environmental politics. Environ. Polit. 30,
119–140 (2021).
17. Pineda-Pinto, M. et al. Finding justice in wild, novel ecosystems: A
review through a multispecies lens. Urban For. Urban Green. 83,
127902 (2023).
18. Haraway, D. Staying with the trouble for multispecies environmental
justice. Dialog. Hum. Geogr. 8, 102 –105 (2018).
19. Chao, S., Bolender, K. & Kirksey, E. The Promise of Multispecies
Justice (Duke University Press, 2022).
20. Sandler, R. Intrinsic value. Ecology and conservation. Nat. Educ.
Knowl 3, 4 (2012).
21. O ’Neill, J. The varieties of intrinsic value. Monist 75, 119 –137 (1992).
22. Tschakert, P. et al. Multispecies justice: climate-just futures with, for
and beyond humans. WIREs Clim. Chang. 12, e699 (2021).
23. Celermajer, D. et al. Institutionalising Multispecies Justice
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2025).
24. Kortetmäki, T. & Center for Environmental Philosophy, The
University of North Texas. Applying the capabilities approach toecosystems: resilience as ecosystem capability. Environ. Ethics 39,
39–56 (2017).
25. Nussbaum, M. C. Beyond ’Compassion and Humanity ’: Justice for
Nonhuman Animals . 299 –320 (Oxford University Press, 2004).
26. Schlosberg, D. Climate justice and capabilities: a framework for
adaptation policy. Ethics Int. Aff. 26, 445 –461 (2012).
27. Schlosberg, D. De
ﬁning Environmental Justice: Theories,
Movements, and Nature . (Oxford University Press, 2007).
28. Schlosberg, D. Challenging pluralism: Environmental justice and the
evolution of pluralist practice. The Ecological Community 270–291
(Routledge, 2014).
29. Fulfer. The capabilities approach to justice and the ﬂourishing of
nonsentient life. Ethics Environ. 18, 19 (2013).
30. Fitz-Henry, E. Multi-species justice: a view from the rights of nature
movement. Environ. Politics 31, (2022).
31. Youatt, R. Ecologies of Globalization: mountain governance and
multinatural planetary politics. Non-human nature in world politics(eds Pereira, J. C. & Saramago, A.) 73 –90 (Springer International
Publishing, 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-49496-4_5
32. Heise, U. K. Conservation humanities and multispecies justice.
Humanities 13, 43 (2024).
33. Van Aarde, R., Whyte, I. & Pimm, S. Culling and the dynamics of the
Kruger National Park African elephant population. Anim. Conserv. 2,
287–294 (1999).
34. Moyano-Fernández, C. Building ecological solidarity: rewilding
practices as an example. Philosophies 7, 77 (2022).
35. Ordóñez, M. F., Shannon, K. & d ’Auria, V. The materialization of the
Buen Vivir and the rights of nature: rhetoric and realities of GuayaquilEcológico urban regeneration project. City Territ. Archit. 9, 1 (2022).
36. Fitz-Henry, E. Multi-species justice: a view from the rights of nature
movement. Environ. Polit. 31, 338 –359 (2022).https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 7
37. Heise, U. K. & Christensen, J. Multispecies justice in the wetlands.
Ecozon@: Eur. J. Lit. Cult. Environ. 11, 169 –177 (2020).
38. Pereira, P., Yin, C. & Hua, T. Nature-based solutions, ecosystem
services, disservices, and impacts on well-being in urban
environments. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health 33, 100465 (2023).
39. Soto, J. R., Escobedo, F. J., Khachatryan, H. & Adams, D. C.
Consumer demand for urban forest ecosystem services anddisservices: examining trade-offs using choice experiments andbest-worst scaling. Ecosyst. Serv. 29,3 1–39 (2018).
40. Washbourne, C.-L., Goddard, M. A., Le Provost, G., Manning, D. A.
C. & Manning, P. Trade-offs and synergies in the ecosystem servicedemand of urban brown ﬁeld stakeholders. Ecosyst.Serv. 42, 101074
(2020).
41. Mosleh, L., Negahban-Azar, M. & Pavao-Zuckerman, M.
Convergence in perceptions of ecosystem services supports green
infrastructure decision-making in a semi-arid city. Environ. Manag.
71, 885 –898 (2023).
42. Wagner, S. et al. Ecosystem services and importance of common
tree species in coffee-agroforestry systems: local knowledge ofsmall-scale farmers at Mt. Kilimanjaro. Tanzan. For. 10, 963
(2019).
43. Barnes, M. R., Nelson, K. C. & Dahmus, M. E. What ’s in a yardscape?
A case study of emergent ecosystem services and disservices withinresident yardscape discourses in Minnesota. Urban Ecosyst. 23,
1167 –1179 (2020).
44. Kim, W.-M., Kim, S.-Y. & Song, W. Microhabitat characteristics
affecting the occurrence and diversity of queen hornets (genus
Vespa) in an urban green area. Landsc. Ecol. Eng. 16, 173 –186
(2020).
45. Speak, A. F. & Salbitano, F. Thermal comfort and perceptions of the
ecosystem services and disservices of urban trees in Florence.Forests 12, 1387 (2021).
46. Turkelboom, F. et al. When we cannot have it all: ecosystem services
trade-offs in the context of spatial planning. Ecosyst. Serv. 29,
566–578 (2018).
47. Welden, E. A. et al. Leveraging nature-based solutions for
transformation. Nat. People 3, 966 –977 (2021).
48. Kotsila, P. et al. Nature-based solutions as discursive tools and
contested practices in urban nature ’s neoliberalisation processes.
Environ. Plan. E Nat. Space 4, 252 –274 (2021).
49. Bekessy, S. A., Runge, M. C., Kusmanoff, A. M., Keith, D. A. & Wintle,
B. A. Ask not what nature can do for you: a critique of ecosystemservices as a communication strategy. Biol. Conserv. 224,7 1–74
(2018).
50. Ziter, C. The biodiversity –ecosystem service relationship in urban
areas: a quantitative review. Oikos
125, 761 –768 (2016).
51. Lele, S., Springate-Baginski, O., Lakerveld, R., Deb, D. & Dash, P.
Ecosystem services: origins, contributions, pitfalls, and alternatives.
Conserv. Soc 11, 343 (2013).
52. Cottrell, C. Avoiding a new era in biopiracy: Including indigenous and
local knowledge in nature-based solutions to climate change.Environ. Sci. Policy 135, 162 –168 (2022).
53. Muradian, R. & Gómez-Baggethun, E. Beyond ecosystem services
and nature ’s contributions: is it time to leave utilitarian
environmentalism behind?. Ecol. Econ. 185, 107038 (2021).
54. Arias-Arévalo, P., Martín-López, B. & Gómez-Baggethun, E.
Exploring intrinsic, instrumental, and relational values forsustainable management of social-ecological systems. ES22, art43
(2017).
55. Díaz, S. et al. The IPBES Conceptual Framework —connecting
nature and people. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 14,1–16 (2015).
56. Raymond, C. M. et al. An inclusive typology of values for navigating
transformations towards a just and sustainable future. Curr. Opin.
Environ. Sustain. 64, 101301 (2023).57. Martín-López, B. Plural Valuation of Nature Matters for
Environmental Sustainability and Justice (The Royal Society, 2021).
58. Kadykalo, A. N. et al. Disentangling ‘ecosystem services ’and
‘nature ’s contributions to people ’.Ecosyst. People 15, 269 –287
(2019).
59. Brenes, M. B. F. & Sibaja, G. S. Experiencia y buenas prácticas en el
Corredor Biológico Interurbano Río Torres Reserva de la Biosfera.Ambientico 54–60 (2019).
60. Schlönvoigt, M. La importancia de los corredores biológicos como
estrategia de conservación de la biodiversidad y adaptación alcambio climático. Ambientico 13–19 (2019).
61. SINAC (Sistema Nacional de Áreas de Conservación. Herramienta
Para Medir La Efectividad de La Gestión de Corredores Biológicos .
90https://www.enbcr.go.cr/sites/default/ ﬁles/mg2_sinac_2018_
herramienta_para_medir_la_efectividad_de_gestion_de_
corredores_biologicos.pdf (2018).
62. Shingne, M. C. The more-than-human right to the city: a
multispecies reevaluation. In Animals in the City 30–55 (Routledge,
2021).
63. O ’Donnell, E. & Macpherson, E. Voice, power and legitimacy: the role
of the legal person in river management in New Zealand, Chile andAustralia. Australas. J. Water Resour. 23,3 5
–44 (2019).
64. Maradiaga-Marín, M. F. & Cariñanos, P. An indicator-based
approach to assess the readiness of urban forests for futurechallenges: case study of a mediterranean compact city. Forests 12,
1320 (2021).
65. Potgieter, L. J., Gaertner, M., O ’Farrell, P. J. & Richardson, D. M. A
ﬁne-scale assessment of the ecosystem service-disservice
dichotomy in the context of urban ecosystems affected by alienplant invasions. For. Ecosyst. 6, 46 (2019).
66. Dickinson, D. C. & Ramalho, C. E. A balancing act: biodiversity and
human wellbeing considerations in the management of urban forestin a global biodiversity hotspot. Urban For. Urban Green. 74, 127656
(2022).
67. Haase, D., Schwarz, N., Strohbach, M., Kroll, F. & Seppelt, R.
Synergies, trade-offs, and losses of ecosystem services in urbanregions: an integrated multiscale framework applied to the Leipzig-
Halle Region, Germany. Ecol. Soc 17, 22 (2012).
68. Wijsman, K. & Feagan, M. Rethinking knowledge systems for urban
resilience: feminist and decolonial contributions to justtransformations. Environ. Sci. Policy 98,7 0–76 (2019).
69. Cronon, W. The trouble with wilderness: or, getting back to the
wrong nature. Environ. Hist. 1,7–28 (1996).
70. Keim, B. Meet the Neighbors. Animal Minds and Life in a More-than-
Human World . (W. W. Norton & Company).
71. Pineda-Pinto, M., Kennedy, C., Nulty, F. & Collier, M. Leverage
points for improving urban biodiversity conservation in theAnthropocene: a novel ecosystem lens for social-ecological
transformation. Environ. Sci. Policy 162, 103926 (2024).
72. Breining, G. Courting controversy with a new view on exotic species.
Yale Environ. 360,1–6 (2009).
73. Davis, M. A. et al. Don ’t judge species on their origins. Nature 474,
153–154 (2011).
74. Thompson, K. Where do camels belong? The story and science of
invasive species (2014).
75. Raf ﬂes, H. Against purity. Social Research: An International Quarterly
84, 171 –182 (2017).
76. Wijsman, K. Species. in Handbook of Ideology and Temporality
(Routledge, Forthcoming).
77. Roy, H. E. et al. IPBES Invasive Alien Species Assessment: Summary
for Policymakers .https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.7430692
(2024).
78. Ticktin, M. Invasive others: toward a contaminated world. Soc. Res.
84, xxi–xxxiv (2017).https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 8
79. Wijsman, K. Assembling Coasts: Climate Change, Resilience, and
the Politics of Belonging (The New School, 2022).
80. Kuhn, T. S. The Structure of Scienti ﬁc Revolutions, Vol. 962
(University of Chicago Press, 1997).
81. Latour, B. & Porter, C. We Have Never Been Modern (Harvard
University Press, 1993).
82. Hartig, E. K., Gornitz, V., Kolker, A., Mushacke, F. & Fallon, D.
Anthropogenic and climate-change impacts on salt marshes ofJamaica Bay, New York City. Wetlands 22,7 1–89 (2002).
83. Rooth, J. E. & Stevenson, J. C. Sediment deposition patterns in
Phragmites australis communities: Implications for coastal areasthreatened by rising sea-level. Wetl. Ecol. Manag. 8, 173 –183
(2000).
84. Duman, T. & Schäfer, K. V. R. Partitioning net ecosystem carbon
exchange of native and invasive plant communities by vegetation
cover in an urban tidal wetland in the New Jersey Meadowlands
(USA). Ecol. Eng. 114,1 6–24 (2018).
85. Windham, L. & Ehrenfeld, J. G. Net impact of a plant invasion on
nitrogen-cycling processes within a brackish tidal marsh. Ecol. Appl.
13, 883 –896 (2003).
86. Yuhas, C. E., Hartman, J. M. & Weis, J. S. Benthic communities in
Spartina alterni ﬂora-and Phragmites australis-dominated salt
marshes in the Hackensack Meadowlands. N. J. Urban Habitats 3,
158–191 (2005).
87. Kiviat, E. Phragmites management sourcebook for the tidal Hudson
River and the northeastern states. Hudsonia Ltd., Annandale 1–74
(2010).
88. Kiviat, E. Ecosystem services of Phragmites in North America with
emphasis on habitat functions. AoB Plants 5, plt008 –plt008 (2013).
89. Kiviat, E. Organisms using Phragmites australis are diverse and
similar on three continents. J. Nat. Hist. 53, 1975 –2010 (2019).
90. Langemeyer, J. & Baró, F. Nature-based solutions as nodes of
green-blue infrastructure networks: a cross-scale, co-creationapproach. Nat. Based Solut. 1, 100006 (2021).
91. Zingraff-Hamed, A. et al. Stakeholder mapping to co-create nature-
based solutions: who is on board?. Sustainability 12, 8625 (2020).
92. Chambers, J. M. et al. Six modes of co-production for sustainability.
Nat. Sustain. 4, 983 –996 (2021).
93. Hölscher, K. et al. Embedding co-production of nature-based
solutions in urban governance: emerging co-production capacitiesin three European cities. Environ. Sci. Policy 152,103652 (2024).
94. Lupp, G. et al. Stakeholder perceptions of nature-based solutions
and their collaborative co-design and implementation processes inrural mountain areas —a case study from PHUSICOS. Front.
Environ. Sci. 9, 678446 (2021).
95. Malekpour, S., Taw ﬁk, S. & Chester ﬁeld, C. Designing collaborative
governance for nature-based solutions. Urban For. Urban Green. 62,
127177 (2021).
96. Sarkki, S. et al. Integrative literature review on co-concepts in
connection with nature-based solutions. Environ. Sci. Policy 169,
104073 (2025).
97. Wickenberg, B., McCormick, K. & Olsson, J. A. Advancing the
implementation of nature-based solutions in cities: a review offrameworks. Environ. Sci. Policy 125,4 4–53 (2021).
98. Naumann, S. et al. Harnessing the power of collaboration for nature-
based solutions: new ideas and insights for local decision-makers. inHarnessing the Power of Collaboration for Nature-Based Solutions6–25 (European Commission, 2023).
99. Colléony, A. & Shwartz, A. Beyond assuming co-bene ﬁts in nature-
based solutions: a human-centered approach to optimize social and
ecological outcomes for advancing sustainable urban planning.
Sustainability 11, 4924 (2019).
100. Ommer, J. et al. Quantifying co-bene ﬁts and disbene ﬁts of nature-
based solutions targeting disaster risk reduction. Int. J. Disaster Risk
Reduct. 75, 102966 (2022).101. Herrmann-Pillath, C., Hiedanpää, J. & Soini, K. The co-evolutionary
approach to nature-based solutions: a conceptual framework. Nat.
Based Solut. 2, 100011 (2022).
102. Meijer, E. When Animals Speak: Toward an Interspecies Democracy .
vol. 1 (NYU Press, 2019).
103. Lacan, L., Vehrs, H.-P. & Bollig, M. Introduction: multispecies
encounters in conservation landscapes in Southern Africa.Anthropol. South. Afr. 47, 109 –117 (2024).
104. Fickel, T. An agonistic perspective on the challenge of biodiversity
value integration. Sustainability 15, 16932 (2023).
105. Mouffe, C. Agonistics: Thinking the World Politically (Verso Books,
2013).
106. Machin, A. Democracy, disagreement, disruption: agonism and the
environmental state. in The political prospects of a sustainability
transformation 155–172 (Routledge, 2021).
107. August, V. Understanding democratic con ﬂicts: the failures of
agonistic theory. Eur. J. Polit. Theory 23, 182 –203 (2024).
108. Camacho-Guzmán, A., Ávila Akerberg, V. D., Martínez-Soto, J.,
Rodríguez-Soto, C. & Reyes, R. P. R. Connectedness to nature, well-being and presence of birds. Fronteiras 12, 248 –264 (2023).
109. Methorst, J. et al. The importance of species diversity for human
well-being in Europe. Ecol. Econ. 181, 106917 (2021).
110. Hiedanpää, J. et al. Amidst the ﬂyway: co-designing
accommodation ﬁelds for the barnacle goose in south-eastern
Finland. in Handbook of Transdisciplinarity: Global Perspectives (ed.
Lawrence, R.) 367 –383 (Edward Elgar Publishing, 2023). https://doi.
org/10.4337/9781802207835.00033 .
111. SYKE. Korjattu tiedote: Valkoposkihanhien poikasten määrä laski
merkittävästi pääkaupunkiseudulla. https://www.sttinfo. ﬁ/tiedote/
70427703/korjattu-tiedote-valkoposkihanhien-poikasten-maara-laski-merkittavasti-paakaupunkiseudulla?publisherId =
69819243&lang =ﬁ(2024).
112. Daily Scandinavian. How the Finnish Try to Solve Their Geese Poop
Problems .https://www.dailyscandinavian.com/how-the- ﬁnnish-
try-to-solve-their-geese-poop-problems/ (2024).
113. HS. Valkoposkihanhia on liikaa. Helsingin sanomat, mielipide.
https://www.hs. ﬁ/mielipide/art-2000010428002.html (2024).
114. Ruissalo, P. “Hanhista on tullut joillekin vihan kohde numero yksi ”–
kokenut lintumies kummastelee kansalaiskeskustelua.Tamperelainen. https://www.tamperelainen. ﬁ/paikalliset/3125384
(2020).
115. Hämäläinen, J. Katastrofaaliselle hanhiongelmalle vaaditaan loppua
–kaupunki: ‘Alamme valmistella ratkaisua ’.https://www.
helsinginuutiset. ﬁ/paikalliset/2344869 .
116. OmaStadi (2024).117. Korhonen, J. Helsinkiin tulee ihmisaitaus. Iltalehti. https://www.iltalehti.
ﬁ/kotimaa/a/946599b6-5e3c-4ec4-9913-528a2abc95f8 (2024).
118. Kauppinen, P. ”Hanhioppaat ”ja muut pehmeät keinot ovat ihmisten
pilkkaamista. Iltalehti, pääkirjoitus. https://www.iltalehti. ﬁ/
paakirjoitus/a/4325b724-c52f-433f-be2c-289c80fb950d (2020).
119. Valtioneuvosto. Valkoposkihanhityöryhmä esittää kokonaisvaltaista
ratkaisua: karkotusta myös ampumalla ja lintupeltoja. https://
valtioneuvosto. ﬁ/-//1410837/valkoposkihanhityoryhma-esittaa-
kokonaisvaltaista-ratkaisua-karkotusta-myos-ampumalla-ja-lintupeltoja (2020).
120. Sonerva, A. Tästä syystä Helsingin järjenvastainen hanhivapaa
ihmisaitaus toimii. https://www.iltalehti. ﬁ/kotimaa/a/bf6879c5-
3d08-4a59-af9d-df3a59e94439 (2024).
121. De Leon, R. C. & Kim, S. M. Stakeholder perceptions and
governance challenges in urban protected area management: the
case of the Las Piñas —Parañaque Critical Habitat and Ecotourism
Area, Philippines. Land Use Policy 63, 470 –480 (2017).
122. Nóblega-Carriquiry, A., March, H. & Sauri, D. Community
acceptance of nature-based solutions in the delta of the TorderaRiver. Catalonia. Land 11, 579 (2022).https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 9
123. Simpson, S., Brown, G., Peterson, A. & Johnstone, R. Stakeholder
perspectives for coastal ecosystem services and in ﬂuences on value
integration in policy. Ocean Coast. Manag. 126,9–21 (2016).
124. Badiu, D. L., Nita, A., Ioj ă,C .I .&N i ţă, M. R. Disentangling the
connections: a network analysis of approaches to urban green
infrastructure. Urban For. Urban Green. 41, 211 –220 (2019).
125. Mabon, L. Environmental justice in urban greening for subtropical
Asian cities: the view from Taipei. Singap J Trop Geogr 41, 432 –449
(2020).
126. Anguelovski, I., Connolly, J. J., Garcia-Lamarca, M., Cole, H. &
Pearsall, H. New scholarly pathways on green gentri ﬁcation: what
does the urban ‘green turn ’mean and where is it going?. Prog. Hum.
Geogr. 43, 1064 –1086 (2019).
127. Bastian, M. & Bayliss Hawitt, R. Multi-species, ecological and
climate change temporalities: opening a dialogue with phenology.
Environ. Plan. E Nat. Space 6, 1074 –1097 (2023).
128. Giddens, A. The politics of climate change. Policy Polit. 43, 155 –162
(2015).
129. Gan, E. Timing rice: an inquiry into more-than-human temporalities
of the Anthropocene Elaine. Gan. New Form. 92,8 7–101 (2017).
130. Brice, J. Attending to grape vines: perceptual practices, planty
agencies and multiple temporalities in Australian viticulture. Soc.
Cult. Geogr. 15, 942 –965 (2014).
131. Schrader, A. The time of slime: anthropocentrism in harmful algal
research. Environ. Philosophy 9,7 1–94 (2012).
132. Puig De La Bellacasa, M. Making time for soil: technoscienti ﬁc
futurity and the pace of care. Soc Stud Sci 45, 691 –716 (2015).
133. Winter, C. J. Introduction: what ’s the value of multispecies justice?
Environ. Polit. 31, 251 –257 (2022).
134. Phillips, C. Telling times: more-than-human temporalities in
beekeeping. Geoforum 108, 315 –324 (2020).
135. Bjornerud, M. Timefulness: how thinking like a geologist can help
save the world (2018).
136. Grabowski, Z. J., Wijsman, K., Tomateo, C. & McPhearson, T. How
deep does justice go? Addressing ecological, indigenous, andinfrastructural justice through nature-based solutions in New YorkCity. Environ. Sci. Policy 138, 171 –181 (2022).
137. Den Dekker-Arlain, J., Frantzeskaki, N., Wijsman, K. & Rojas-
Marchini, F. Towards a decolonial NBS planning praxis: bridginginclusive planning of NBS in cities with decolonial thinking through asystematic literature review. Submitted to Environmental Science
and Policy Journal) (Status: under review) .
138. Robinson, S., Douma, A., Poore, T. & Singh, K. The role of colonial
pasts in shaping climate futures: adaptive capacity in Georgetown,Guyana. Habitat Int. 139, 102902 (2023).
139. Wolfe, C. Foreword. In Extinction Studies: Stories of Time, Death,
and Generations vii–xvi (Columbia University Press, 2017).
140. Sheikh, H., Mitchell, P. & Foth, M. Reparative futures of smart urban
governance: a speculative design approach for multispecies justice.
Futures 154, 103266 (2023).
141. Hall, D. M. et al. The city as a refuge for insect pollinators. Conserv.
Biol. 31,2 4–29 (2017).
142. Alveole. How a nature-based urban beekeeping program bene ﬁts
the environment. https://www.alveole.buzz/blog/urban-
beekeeping-bene ﬁts/(2024).143. Siviter, H. et al. Wild bees are exposed to low levels of pesticides in
urban grasslands and community gardens. Sci. Total Environ. 858,
159839 (2023).
144. Bastian, M. Fatally confused: telling the time in the midst of
ecological crises. Environ. Philos. 9,2 3–48 (2012).
145. Moore, L. J. & Kosut, M. Buzz: Urban Beekeeping and the Power of
the Bee .https://doi.org/10.18574/nyu/9780814763070.001.0001
(New York University Press, 2020).
146. Gramatakos, A. L., Rawluk, A. & Phillips, C. Considering temporality
for SES analysis with re ﬂections from urban food forests and
orchards. Ecosyst. People 20, 2396912 (2024).
147. Fitz-Henry, E. Multiple temporalities and the nonhuman other.
Environ. Humanit. 9,1–17 (2017).
148. Winter, C. J. & Schlosberg, D. What matter matters as a matter of
justice?. Environ. Polit. 33, 1205 –1224 (2024).
Acknowledgements
We thank Niki Frantzeskaki for feedback on an early draft, and Chiara
Holtschneider for bibliographic assistance.
Author contributions
K.W., M.P.P., S.S. and C.M.R. conceived of the argument. K.W., C.S. andM.P.P. collected and analyzed literature. All authors drafted particular papersections, with K.W. and M.P.P. writing most of the manuscript text, and K.W.and C.M.R. edited the entire paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Katinka Wijsman.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as longas you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changeswere made. The images or other third party material in this article areincluded in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article ’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need toobtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of thislicence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
.
© The Author(s) 2025https://doi.org/10.1038/s42949-025-00261-5 Perspective
npj Urban Sustainability |            (2025) 5:67 10
