Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Agriculture and Human Values (2021) 38:301–312 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-020-10156-z
SYMPOSIUM/SPECIAL ISSUE
Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land 
titling campaign in Cambodia
Laura Schoenberger1  · Alice Beban2 
Accepted: 12 September 2020 / Published online: 12 October 2020 
© Springer Nature B.V. 2020
Abstract
In areas of land conflict, fear and the threat of violence work to reproduce imaginaries of land as a resource that powerful 
people can grab. An urgent question for agrarian scholars and activists is how people can overcome fear so that alternative 
imaginaries might flourish. In this article, we argue for attention to the affective dimension of imaginaries; ideas of what land 
is and should be are co-constituted through the material and social, imbued with powerful emotions that enable imaginaries 
to be reproduced, to be challenged, and even to be transformed. We draw from long-term research projects in Cambodia—a 
country known for plantation-fuelled dispossession—where the Prime Minister’s surprise announcement of a land titling 
campaign in 2012 ruptured the wave of land grabbing, creating openings to imagine different outcomes that are rooted in the 
potential for legal recognition of smallholder claims. Although the campaign was an uncertain rupture in land imaginaries, 
these moments matter. Land claimants sought to create affective ties with volunteer land surveyors that embedded hopeful 
land imaginaries in rural areas and into the national cadastral system. The land title in this context is the material bearer 
of a land imaginary that centres on rural people’s connection to the land, and also reinforces rural people’s connection to 
the Cambodian state and the potential to gain the state’s protection. We contribute to an emerging literature that locates the 
formative effects of hope as an orientation and as a method by exploring the possibilities inherent in rupture.
Keywords Land imaginary · Hope · Emotional political ecology · Land grabbing · Land titling · Cambodia
Introduction
Land imaginaries are crucial for understanding the spatio-
temporal unevenness in land transformations. Distinct, and 
potentially conflicting, imaginaries of what land is (its ontol -
ogy), what it should do (its affordances) and how humans 
should interact with it, alter the arrangements and possible 
transformations of land (Li 2014; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). 
Literature on the construction of land as global commodity 
focuses primarily on land as an ‘assemblage’ of technologi-
cal devices and development discourses, which dis-embed 
land from its biophysical and socio-cultural context (Li 2014). These explanations of how particular land imaginar -
ies become dominant pay less attention to another crucial 
dimension: the affective dimension of imaginaries. In order 
to understand what enables particular imaginaries of land 
to take hold and to effect material transformation on the 
ground, we must recognise that imaginaries are emotional; 
ideas of what land is and should be are imbued with power -
ful emotions that enable imaginaries to be reproduced, to be 
challenged and even to be transformed.
We ground our analysis in Cambodia, where the gov -
ernment has granted more than 2 million hectares of land 
(approximately 53% of Cambodia’s arable land) as economic 
land concessions for agro-industrial plantations since the 
early 2000s (Neef et al. 2013). State and corporate narra-
tives of isolated upland areas as underutilised, disorderly 
and in need of agribusiness development belie the violence 
through which land concessions have transformed the land-
scape and rural life (Schoenberger and Beban 2018). The 
market imaginary of land has never became fully hegem-
onic in rural Cambodia and people continue to resist in vari-
ous ways. But the political economic and affective force of  * Alice Beban 
 a.beban@massey.ac.nz
 Laura Schoenberger 
 Lschoenb@uottawa.ca
1 School of International Development and Global Studies, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
2 School of People, Environment and Planning, Massey 
University, Palmerston North, New Zealand
302 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
politico-business elite limits the possibilities for people to 
secure competing imaginaries of land. This raises questions: 
why do some land imaginaries become dominant and remain 
stable for long durations? And where does the impetus for 
change come from?
Our analysis shows that moments of rupture in these vio-
lent landscapes can break open dominant imaginaries and 
enable people to imagine and enact alternative futures. In 
2012, amidst violent land conflicts, the dominant land imagi-
nary in concession areas was momentarily ruptured by a 
one-year government land titling campaign to award legal 
land rights to smallholder farmers in the form of private 
titles. We take this campaign as our entry point to explore 
how moments of rupture enable new collective understand-
ings of possible futures—what Sheila Jasanoff (2015a) terms 
‘sociotechnical imaginaries’. We bring this together with 
work on power and affect to draw attention to the embodi-
ment of imaginaries as they are embedded and extended 
across time and space. The power of affect as a core compo-
nent of imaginaries lies in its potential; hope is ‘the ground 
of not yet’ (Bloch 1998), it is constantly under negotiation 
and contains the potential for positive change as well as 
for disappointment, subversion and failure within it. Many 
people found hope in the campaign’s promise to recognise 
individual land tenure and their encounters with campaign 
volunteers in land concession areas produced an opening to 
materialise imaginaries that had been marginalised.
Our contribution is therefore two-fold. Epistemologically, 
this paper advances the agenda for hopeful research—for 
hope as an orientation and as a method—by exploring the 
possibilities inherent in rupture. Theoretically, we contend 
that affect underpins the material, discursive and social ele-
ments of land imaginaries, and that emotions are central 
to the ways imaginaries are reproduced and challenged. In 
what follows, we first set out our theoretical frame, bring-
ing together work on socio-technical imaginaries, power, 
rupture, and the space-based practices of hope. Following a 
discussion of methodology, we lay out the rural imaginaries 
in land conflict areas prior to the land titling campaign. We 
then trace the process of rupture that the titling campaign 
entailed in three parts: origins, embedding and resistance 
(Jasanoff 2015b). In the final section, we expand on Jasa-
noff’s analytic by tracing the challenges to the campaign, 
showing that while actors that benefited from dominant land 
imaginaries sought to re-establish their power, rupture can 
have lasting effects.
Theoretical frame: affective land imaginaries
Drawing from the work of Spinoza, we understand imagi -
naries as ‘affectively laden thought patterns’ (Gatens and 
Lloyd 1999, p. 5), which constitute our modes of being in the world and thereby constitute our subjectivity. Much of 
the work on imaginaries in sociological literature runs the 
risk of positioning imaginaries as existing separately from 
material relations, and as such falls back on a dualist rela-
tion between idealism and materialism (Dawney 2011). But 
imaginaries are not separate from the material: they play a 
role in the production of ways of life and they are carried 
by material objects like food, clothes and trinkets, as well 
people and technologies (Dawney 2011; Salazar and Gra-
burn 2016). The construction of boundaries between ‘our’ 
space and ‘theirs’—the bedrock of an imaginary of land as 
property—is effected through the socio-technical markers 
of maps, titles, as well as stories, policies, and discourses 
of development (Said 1978). In this way, ‘technological 
objects’ are enmeshed in society as integral components of 
social order (Jasanoff and Kim 2015). To begin answering 
the question of how existing imaginaries are reproduced, and 
how they are transformed, we turn to Jasanoff’s (2015a) ana-
lytic of ‘sociotechnical imaginaries’, which she defines as:
collectively held, institutionally stabilized, and pub-
licly performed visions of desirable futures, animated 
and shared understandings of forms of social life and 
social order attainable through, and supportive of, 
advances in science and technology. (5)
Jasanoff (2015b) posits a four stage process by which imagi-
naries are established and contested, moving from origins 
(involving the ideas of individuals and social groups), to 
embedding (turning ideas into material, institutional and 
behavioural realities), to resistance (by defenders of previ-
ously dominant imaginaries) and to extension of the imagi-
nary into new contexts. We focus on the first three stages of 
the process because the land titling campaign was an inher -
ently national process with state-building aims, rather than 
a campaign with global ambitions.
We bring to Jasanoff’s framework a focus on the power 
of affect to ‘embed’ imaginaries across space and time, con-
tributing to the emerging literature that seeks to locate how 
affect is interwoven with physical environments such that 
imaginaries are co-constituted with the material dimension 
(Hauer et al. 2018). Here we lean on neo-Gramscian work on 
power and hegemony that recognises affect and emotion as 
integral to politics, rather than outside of it (Mouffe 2005). 
Laclau ( 1990 , p. 63) understands the social imaginary to be 
located in the space between attempts of meaning-making 
and the impossibility to conclusively fix meaning, a ‘mythi -
cal space’ that entails the ‘intuition of fullness that cannot 
be granted by the reality of the present’. Universalising 
notions such as ‘nation’, ‘peace’, ‘development’, ‘law’ and 
‘the people’ must be filled with meaning through constant 
affective investment to provide the force that binds together 
subjectivities around a common focal point. Imaginaries are 
thus a field of contestation; dominant imaginaries vie for 
303 Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cambodia  
1 3
social positioning while ‘competing imaginaries lurk on the 
edges’ (Bouchard 2017, p. 19), and competition, clashes, 
and changes occur. This work to produce a common subjec-
tivity also creates (and depends on) its outside; the ‘other’ 
against which the collective defines itself (Laclau 1990, pp. 
110–111). Institutions of power, like legislatures, courts, the 
media, policy documents, as well as shadowy and opaque 
actors and backroom negotiations work to elevate some 
imagined futures above others, according them a dominant 
position (Schoenberger and Beban 2018).
Despite the attempts of powerful actors to embed offi-
cial imaginaries across space, however, the politics of the 
everyday—the diversity of land imaginaries that people 
hold—reveals that the official, political discourse is rarely 
fully hegemonic and the everyday is a site of substantive 
meaning (Robinson and Tormey 2008 ). People resist power -
ful state imaginaries by both resisting the state and articu-
lating competing imaginaries (or, as Jansen 2014 calls it, 
‘hoping against the state’), and also by appealing to power -
ful institutions to recognise their land claims, rearticulat-
ing their imaginaries of land to cohere to those of official 
discourse. These practices produce state authority (Lund 
2016). In Cambodia, a diverse group of actors work to resist 
land concessions through legal training, petitions, mapping, 
organizing and protesting. Many of these strategies focus on 
pursuing goals outlined in law to the limit of other goals, and 
at the same time elevate the concession imaginary as being 
based in law, power, and contracts, thereby reproducing the 
imaginary of the concession as the object of contestation as 
they work to open new possibilities. Thus, social movements 
exist in a dynamic relationship with the state. The enactment 
of a counter‐ hegemonic strategy presupposes the existence 
of a hegemonic force against which the former contingently 
positions itself (Laclau, 1990). But where political elites 
are able to establish popular support, it is usually by chan-
nelling identities and concerns already arising in everyday 
life, rather than constructing imaginaries from scratch, and 
state actors therefore take on elements of counter-movement 
demands to retain legitimacy.
How, then, do we explain moments when alternative 
imaginaries have space to establish? We bring to this dis-
cussion a focus on moments of ‘rupture’, when the contra-
dictions within dominant imaginaries are exposed and the 
rhythms of everyday life that seemed stable are revealed 
as contingent (Bryant 2014). We draw from Lund’s (2016, 
p. 1202) work on ruptures in land relations, the ‘moments 
when opportunities and risks multiply, when the scope of 
outcomes widens, and when new structural scaffolding is 
erected’, to show how the land titling campaign ruptured the 
dominant fearful land imaginary with its own distinct imagi-
nary of land for citizens. This opened up space to articulate 
other imaginaries, spawning multiple interpretations and 
efforts to shape the idea of how land titling ought to proceed.Ruptures are processes that may be imbued with hope as 
they enable new ideas about the future as ‘that-which-might-
become’ (Popke 2009, p. 83). A significant body of social 
science literature inspired by feminist, social justice-oriented 
work seeks to illuminate hope by identifying imaginaries 
that lie outside of dominant political-economic structures 
(Gibson-Graham 2006), and finding hope in seemingly hope-
less situations. This literature is criticized for a tendency to 
understand hope as a normative category rather than an ana-
lytical category (see Kleist and Jansen 2016, for example); 
that is, for focusing on establishing that hope is present rather 
than attention to what it is that people actually hope for. One 
response to this critique is to focus on the labour of producing 
and spreading imaginaries. Hope is more than a psychological 
state or an affect emanating from an individual, rather, hope 
‘takes place’ in that ‘it does not only (re)orient and shape life 
trajectories, but is co-constitutive of shaping and changing of 
the … landscape’ ( Hauer et al. 2018, p. 61). Conceptually, the 
opening of space for contestation following dislocatory events 
is often accompanied by attempts to reconstitute the social 
order (Laclau, 1990), what Jasanoff refers to as ‘resistance’ 
of previously dominant imaginaries. Our approach similarly 
interweaves the temporal and the spatial to focus on how hope-
ful imaginaries emerge, embed and conflict in social spaces 
through material objects, embodied encounters, and relation-
ships with land.
This approach to interweaving the social, material and 
affective dimensions of imaginaries reveals that technical 
objects and state policies, such as land titles, are traveling 
universals (Tsing 2005) that take on different meanings as 
they touch down in different contexts and are enrolled into 
different imaginaries of land. An extensive literature on land 
titling shows that the land title as a focus of claims making 
has ambiguous, and potentially devastating effects; it can 
enable (legal) dispossession, break up solidarity between 
those who are titled and ‘untitled’, and make people more 
vulnerable to debt and extractive state surveillance; and it 
can also provide security and the potential for economic 
improvement (de Soto 2000; Akram-Lodhi et al. 2007; Scott 
1998). Much of this literature, from both critics and propo-
nents, takes for granted the meanings people give to the land 
title, and the questions of who surveyed land, and how this 
process was negotiated. But these questions matter. As later 
sections in this paper explain, the use of technoscientific 
tools are negotiated in affective interpersonal encounters and 
can transform titles into objects of hope.
Methodology
This paper is part of a collaborative writing project to under -
stand how affect transforms land relations in the midst of 
protracted conflict. It took root in 2014 and has been an 
304 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
ongoing source of ‘critical hope’ (Zembylas 2014) for us. 
Our previous writing focused on the production of fear and 
uncertainty in land concession areas (Beban and Schoen-
berger 2019). In this article, we shift to focusing on the 
production of hope and the question of how alternative 
land imaginaries become embedded. This shift of analyti -
cal focus mirrors the shifts we observed and experienced in 
the field. We began our long-term research projects prior 
to the announcement of the land titling campaign, at a time 
when hope was difficult to locate in the midst of violent 
dispossession. Even when the Prime Minister made a sud-
den announcement initiating the land titling campaign in the 
lead-up to the 2013 national election, we were sceptical. But 
as we observed people’s encounters in rural areas, we began 
to reconsider the significance of the campaign as part of a 
proliferation of openings for things to become otherwise, 
and we became attuned to the possibilities that moments 
of rupture enable—what Anderson (2017) terms a ‘method 
of hope’.
Imaginaries are produced and embedded through dis-
course, material objects, and practices that are imbued 
with affect; thus, epistemologically, knowing an imaginary 
requires attention to the myriad ways that ideas circulate 
across spaces and moments to produce collectively held 
meaning. This necessitates a multi-method approach that 
focuses on the multiple conduits through which imaginar -
ies become visible in the form of objects, bodies, words, 
images, metaphors, lines on a map, relationships with others, 
land use practices and concrete material outcomes (Dan-
iels 2011; Jasanoff and Kim 2015; Taylor 2002). We draw 
primarily from fieldwork in rural areas conducted between 
2010 and 2015, covering the period before, during, and 
after the land titling campaign, and we complement this 
data with reflections from interviews undertaken in 2020. 
Our methods toolkit includes participatory methods, group 
discussions and interviews with multiple actors; analysis of 
official discourse (through performative speeches and policy 
statements) and cultural production (such as karaoke songs 
and videos about the campaign that circulated in rural areas); 
attention to rumour and gossip; and observations of people’s 
interactions with the survey volunteers, with the material 
objects of titles, and with the land itself. We bring these 
elements together as we trace how policies and processes 
of land titling are a ‘traveling universal’ (Tsing 2005) that 
overflow their temporal-spatial location to emerge as an 
imaginary.
We each conducted research for around two years in dif-
ferent parts of the country and our insights on imaginar -
ies here are formed particularly from our long-term ethno-
graphic work in communities experiencing land conflict—all 
areas where land concessions are prevalent and targeted by 
the land titling campaign. This paper does not include the 
experience of communities in lowland areas far from land concessions, nor does it include the experiences of indig-
enous communities seeking legal rights to communally held 
land. Indigenous communities had very different experiences 
as the campaign only allowed for private land title and thus 
undermined communal claims (see Milne 2014). Because 
many of our research participants requested anonymity, and 
due to the threats land activists face in Cambodia, we do 
not name informants or specific research sites in this arti-
cle. While this does limit the ability for us to provide spe-
cific context, our point here is to trace the ways imaginaries 
embed as collectively held visions, looking for the patterns 
in people’s words, encounters and practices that exceeded 
any one research site or moment. The titling campaign was 
a national-scale intervention that was intended to be applied 
without deviation, and we focus on the ways this imaginary 
embedded, and was challenged as people occupying different 
positions of social power sought to use the campaign and 
assert their own imaginaries of land.
Competing imaginaries of land in postwar 
Cambodia
To show the rupture of the land titling campaign, it is first 
necessary to understand the trajectory of land imaginaries 
prior to the campaign. Cambodia’s political elite have long 
depended on land to gain and maintain political control. 
Through the years of sovereign kingship, through colonial 
rule and independence and into the post-Khmer Rouge era, 
Cambodians had access to land for their own use, with land 
use governed by ‘acquisition by the plough’ (Thion 1993 ). 
The colonial state made efforts to privatise and register land 
(Guillou 2006), but in the 1970s, the Khmer Rouge regime 
implemented forced collectivisation and destroyed cadas-
tral records. Following a government decree in 1989, local 
authorities issued land according to the policy of 0.2 hec-
tares per person (Guillou 2006). As refugees returned and 
landlessness and poverty rose in the 1990s, people moved to 
upland areas to find new land, and a proliferation of imagi-
naries emerged—land as an open resource available to those 
who use it, as a family home for generations, as a potential 
source of income through logging and cash crops, and as 
a source of territorial power amongst local state officials/
military elite.
During the postwar period, the political ambitions of 
the new politico-business elite and development agencies’ 
visions of prosperity through foreign investment in agricul-
ture enabled an imaginary of land as an asset for the power -
ful to become dominant in upland areas. This marginalised, 
but never fully displaced, other land imaginaries. Since 
the 1990s, the ruling party [the Cambodian People’s Party 
(CPP)] intensified their grip on power through building 
politico-business networks in which officials and business 
305 Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cambodia  
1 3
elite are given access to lucrative contracts and land conces-
sions in exchange for loyalty—what scholars have termed 
a ‘neo-patrimonial’ or ‘shadow state’ system (Le Billon 
2002; Neef et al. 2013). The national Land Law enables the 
state to grant land concessions of up to 99 years on state 
land by simply changing its designation from ‘state public 
land’ to ‘state private land’ required for national develop-
ment purposes. Although the Land Law also enables some 
rural people to claim ownership rights for land in their pos-
session, provided they were on the land before 1996, land 
titling was largely confined to the lowland settled rice areas 
throughout the mid-2000s, while land concessions expanded 
across the uplands (Dwyer 2015). Cambodia’s government 
embraced land concessions as a mode of development, with 
the promise that private sector investment will provide jobs 
and reduce poverty (RGC 2010). But these state-sponsored 
‘land grabs’ have incited fear and widespread social and eco-
logical disruption. People who farm land that is designated 
as a concession can be labelled ‘illegal settlers’, regardless of 
whether their tenure predates the concession, and the state’s 
law enforcement agencies and military forces used to vio-
lently exclude them (Springer 2013).
In this context, the land imaginaries that people articu-
lated when we began fieldwork (prior to the campaign) were 
imbued with fear. Villagers living near concessions said they 
felt that the company ‘has control over whether I live or 
die’, ‘I’m thinking of the future and I do not know where 
to go’, and ‘people cannot do anything because we are so 
deeply affected by worry’ (Group discussion, August 2010). 
Despite this fear, a coalition of community members and 
others resisting land grabs have long worked to open spaces 
to affirm alternative subjectivities through collective organ-
izing (Öjendal 2013 ). Much of this organising focused, how -
ever, on building a sense of collective identity and raising 
people’s confidence to speak back to power, rather than gain-
ing state recognition: ‘We should depend on ourselves, not 
the authorities and not the NGOs that come to the village… 
If we can’t help ourselves, then the Company will take all the 
land in the future (Group discussion, August 2010). No one 
saw a possible future in which the government would offer 
(and fund) the means for smallholders to secure their land 
vis-à-vis the claims of powerful concessionaires.
The socio‑technical imaginaries of the land 
titling campaign
In 2012, as land conflicts were peaking (ADHOC 2014), the 
terrain unexpectedly shifted when Prime Minister Hun Sen 
announced the land titling campaign, formally titled ‘Order 
01-BB on Measures for Strengthening and Increasing the 
Effectiveness of the Management of Economic Land Conces-
sions’, or ‘Order 01’ for short. This was a time of turmoil. Hun Sen faced political pressure from outspoken activists 
and a united political opposition party, as well as internal 
tensions within his own networks (Öjendal 2013). He sought 
to regain his legitimacy. First the Prime Minister announced 
a moratorium on land concessions. Then days later he 
announced the land titling campaign, recruiting more than 
2,500 university student volunteers to survey land that lay 
within land concessions and other state land areas. The sur -
veyed land would be ‘donated’ to rural people who ‘actually 
occupied and cultivated [the land] with annual or perennial 
crops’ (RGC 2012, p. 10). After the announcement, the land 
survey itself was organised and carried out with impressive 
speed and scope. From the start of the campaign in June 
2012, to the posting of Order 01 results in December 2014, 
approximately 610,000 titles were issued, and a total of 1.2 
million hectares of land were reclassified from land conces -
sions and state land to private property (MLMUPC 2014).
The campaign ruptured the dominant imaginary of land 
as a global commodity controlled by violent networks of 
state/corporate elite, and opened the possibilities of different 
futures for rural people. In doing so, it moved the goalposts 
for communities embroiled in protracted conflicts with land 
concessions by introducing a new solution to the remote 
uplands: private land titles to formalize land use and claims. 
In the next section, we analyse how this rupture enabled 
the production and embedding of alternative imaginaries of 
land, propelled by the Prime Minister, the volunteers, and 
rural land claimants.
Origins of the Imaginary: By Khmer, For Khmer
Sociotechnical imaginaries can originate in the visions of 
single individuals or small groups, rising to the status of a 
(collective) imaginary through ‘blatant exercises of power or 
sustained acts of coalition building’ (Jasanoff 2015a, 4). The 
Prime Minister’s land titling campaign was a ‘blatant act of 
power’ that momentarily ruptured the dominant imaginary 
of land as a resource vulnerable to grabbing by the power -
ful and opened space for an alternative imaginary of land 
as a gift from the central state to rural people. This was a 
calculated political response to rising unrest over land con-
cessions, and the very real possibility that the ruling party 
would lose the upcoming national election. In speeches and 
public performances announcing the campaign, the Prime 
Minister deployed a populist imaginary of land as the prop-
erty of Khmer farmers whose productive farms would ena-
ble future prosperity. The Prime Minister nicknamed the 
campaign the ‘leopard skin policy’, signifying that small-
holder farms would be carved out of land concessions like 
animal spots across the landscape. This image touted the 
benefits of the campaign for both smallholder farmers and 
ELC companies: the companies would have a stable local 
labour force and farmers who received land title would gain 
306 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
tenure security, access to credit, and employment at land 
concessions to finance their small farm enterprises. This 
discourse reflects the efforts of development agencies (most 
notably the World Bank and the German agency GIZ) that 
were instrumental in developing Cambodia’s postwar land 
administration scheme, but these actors were explicitly shut 
out of the campaign.
The Order 01 land imaginary was explicitly tied to a 
reinforcing of state authority; by claiming the authority to 
seize land from global companies and ‘donate’ the land to 
smallholders, the Cambodian state used the land titling cam-
paign to shore up political support. The campaign was touted 
as ‘By Khmer, For Khmer’, and the government excluded 
international donors and NGOs from any involvement. This 
is exceptional in a country where donor funds have made 
up half the annual postwar state budget. The campaign was 
also highly personalised as the ‘Prime Minister’s land titling 
campaign’. Performative and discursive elements centred on 
the Prime Minister, and the campaign operated in parallel to 
formal state systems. Its budget was generated from ‘private 
donations’ from the Prime Minister’s family and its imple-
mentation relied on thousands of young volunteers (named 
‘Samdech Techo Volunteering Youth Heroes’, in reference 
to the Prime Minister’s honorific title). Hun Sen empha-
sized his role as the driving force behind the campaign, high -
lighting his financial support, and promoting the image of 
himself as ‘uncle’ to the volunteers in public speeches. In 
a lavish dinner prepared for volunteers, Hun Sen congrat-
ulated them on helping Cambodians ‘secure their land so 
companies could not seize it’ (Hun Sen 2012). The domi-
nant message during training, as one volunteer recalled in an 
interview, was that the volunteers’ job was to help the people 
by getting land back from the companies so they could use 
it and that doing so would develop the country (female vol-
unteer, 20 s, 2.2.15).
In his performative public speeches, Hun Sen also 
focused on the links between land title, rice-based farming 
productivity, and poverty reduction. His discourse connected 
land title to his goals for increased rice exports as a key 
aspect of the national development strategy:
Titles will achieve stability on issues of land pos-
session and occupation, social safety, effective land 
use, poverty reduction and economic growth. We will 
see new houses and new cultivations on our people’s 
land… we no longer have to give them rice but they 
will give us ambok (pounded rice) in return. (Hun Sen 
2012)
In this imaginary, the campaign allows for the creation of 
a productive, prosperous farmer who will help the nation 
by providing rice. Implicit in this imaginary is a farmer 
who farms land as a discrete bounded system held as pri-
vate property, for only private land titles were distributed during the campaign. This further marginalizes indigenous 
people who farm land communally, as well as peasants who 
use private land in conjunction with communal forest land 
and grazing land. It also erases the on-the-ground realities 
that much of the titled land was better suited for cash crop-
ping than rice production, and people put it to use growing 
market-based crops, exploiting the ecological conditions in 
ways similar to the concession companies in their midst. The 
imaginary also explicitly produces a shared ‘us’ against a 
common ‘them’ of foreign companies that draws on strong 
collective memories of civil conflict and aggrieved feelings 
that Cambodia has been besieged by outsiders for centuries 
(Gottesman 2003), belying the fact that most concessions 
are joint-ventures with Cambodian investors and some of the 
most egregious are owned by members of the ruling party. 
The campaign’s claims to peaceful order and prosperity were 
inserted into this ‘imaginary horizon’ of fullness and catas-
trophe, and thus acquired a sense of moral right and urgency 
(Laclau 2005).
Embedding the imaginary of the leopard’s spots
The Prime Minister’s vision became a collective imaginary 
as it spread down from the central state and embedded in 
rural areas through the discourse and practices of local offi -
cials and volunteer land surveyors, as well as recordings of 
Hun Sen’s speeches and karaoke videos depicting the volun-
teers. At showy land titling ceremonies, provincial officials 
repeated the Prime Minister’s messages of nationalist pride 
and smallholder prosperity. At one ceremony we attended, 
a high-ranking official proclaimed:
Look at all these people coming together! The opposi-
tion party says that we can’t rule the country, that the 
different ministries aren’t cooperating. But look at this! 
We have taken land from the companies to donate to 
the people. Land title is important because you can 
take loans to grow your farm, you can sell your land 
for more money, and it means the land is yours.
The provincial official here reproduces the Prime Minister’s 
imaginary of land as a gift from the government and bring-
ing companies to heel. In our interviews, volunteer land sur -
veyors echoed this idea of giving land back to the people, 
saying they signed up because of a genuine desire to help 
their country and to ‘help poor people instead of companies’, 
as well as a desire to have an adventure and to win a coveted 
government job after deployment.
The involvement of the ‘student volunteers’ was key to 
rupturing people’s fear and embedding this new hopeful 
imaginary of land in rural areas. While many rural people 
were sceptical of the Prime Minister’s intentions and dis-
trusted government officials, the presence of the volunteers 
made the campaign much more popular. The volunteers 
307 Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cambodia  
1 3
embodied hope for rural people as they were youthful, 
unconnected to corrupted local institutions, and yet explic-
itly tied to the Prime Minister and his power and therefore 
potentially able to bring about change that local officials and 
collective organising could not. The potential of the volun-
teers was reinforced through ‘material bearers of imaginar -
ies’ (Salazar and Graburn 2016, p. 8), namely the volunteers’ 
clothes, transport, the GPS units, iPads, and mobile phones 
they used in the field, and the documents they issued. From 
the moment the volunteers rolled into villages on the back 
of military trucks (a moment captured in numerous karaoke 
videos1 and poems depicting the campaign in the popular 
imagination), they were markedly different from prior repre-
sentations of the state in rural areas. The volunteers received 
three days of training on spatial mapping and administra-
tion prior to deployment, and were equipped with handheld 
GPS units and iPads, technology that is seldom seen in rural 
Cambodia and is certainly not the norm in local govern-
ment offices. For villagers, the sight of the military fatigue-
clad volunteers brandishing their GPS units accentuated the 
volunteers’ connections to Hun Sen and lent them an aura 
of masculinised techno-political power. Furthermore, the 
leader of each 12-person volunteer team carried a dedicated 
mobile phone to receive phone calls from either the Prime 
Minister or his wife. Volunteers, farmers and local authori-
ties all talked about these phones, and they were a signifier 
through which the volunteers became imbued with the Prime 
Minister’s power.
The performative elements of the volunteers’ embodi-
ment reproduced Hun Sen’s power as a strong military 
leader and also as a benevolent ‘father’ to the Cambodian 
people. Volunteers stayed in villages for weeks, sometimes 
months, lodging at local temples or village meeting spaces 
(sala poum) and slowly making their way around village 
land to meet with land claimants to complete land survey 
request forms, survey the land, and educate people about 
the process (Group discussion 20.7.14). The Prime Min-
ister encouraged volunteers to help villagers in the fields 
and join village celebrations, and in this way, the volunteers 
also embodied the possibility of a caring state. For the most 
part, communities found the students helpful, respectful 
and competent, and appreciated their spirit of volunteerism 
(see Grimsditch and Schoenberger 2015, pp. 257–260). For 
each surveyed plot, the volunteers issued a survey receipt 
to the landholder. The survey receipts carried an uncertain 
potential; in Cambodia’s politically-aligned judicial system, 
there is no certainty that a piece of paper will trump peo -
ple with money and power. But because the survey receipts 
distributed by the volunteers were personally backed by the Prime Minister, the documents held the potential to function 
otherwise (Schoenberger 2017). One NGO worker based in a 
rural province explained that ‘I was told by someone, ‘at our 
village, the student volunteers are like the gods, and are pow -
erful’’ (18.03.14). This sentiment was echoed by a village 
administrator who explained that the volunteers sometimes 
effectively out-ranked commune chiefs or district councils 
who ‘were afraid of the students because of the power of the 
Prime Minister’ (02.07.14).
Shaping imaginaries through encounters 
with the volunteers
Rural people’s sense of hopeful possibility was perhaps most 
intimately articulated in their interactions with volunteers, 
who provided an embodied counterpoint to the shadowy net-
works of land grabbers. These interactions mattered because 
the volunteers had considerable discretionary power on the 
ground. The land titling campaign was remarkably sparse in 
its directives over what forms of land use would be suited 
for title, or what the ideal entitled smallholder would look 
like (Schoenberger 2017; Work and Beban 2016). This lack 
of clarity raised the risk that people could be excluded from 
the land survey. But it also created openings for diversely 
positioned smallholders to convince the volunteers of their 
particular imaginaries of the land and the potential for those 
imaginaries to be codified.
Land claimants articulated imaginaries of what land is 
and could/should be that weaved together past experiences 
with knowledge of the land’s ecological, spiritual and social 
properties. Some land claimants sought to prove their long 
presence on the land (and hence their right to claim a land 
title) by pointing out particular trees they had planted; others 
demonstrated their relationship to the land through their inti -
mate knowledge of the soil and what could be grown where; 
yet others told stories of the land’s spiritual power. Nearby 
land claimants gave testimony of their family relationships 
and friendships with their neighbours. Some land claimants 
said they told the volunteers their stories of hardship, hop-
ing to make the volunteers feel sympathetic toward them. 
One young woman took the volunteers inside her house to 
show them the lack of food rations for her children (woman, 
20 s, 10.8.14). These stories reconstructed relationships with 
land; the voicing of socio-ecological and spiritual knowledge 
embedded the imaginary of land as the domain of rural peo-
ple who know the land intimately, rather than an asset for 
distant powerful concessionaires.
The encounters between volunteers and land claimants 
had real effects on the decisions volunteers made about 
where and in whose name to survey. The emotional inten-
sity of interactions added to the volunteers’ confusion; in our 
interviews, several volunteers recalled people who became 
angry, started crying and screaming, offered monetary and 1 Examples of the karaoke videos can be found on YouTube at https 
://youtu .be/zdrwp lDEbA  w and https ://youtu .be/4SbDA 7h0L-M.
308 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
food bribes, pleaded and recounted stories of poverty and 
desperation. The volunteers were quite unprepared for this 
and one said he ‘didn’t know what to do’. One male vol-
unteer became visibly upset in the interview, shaking his 
head as he recounted, ‘this is so difficult to solve; people get 
upset when they can’t get the land they want. Either way, it 
is difficult – if we measure this [forest] land, this is against 
the law. If we don’t measure the land, the people are angry, 
it’s so hard’. Some volunteers said they went ‘by the law’ 
and only titled ‘peacefully’ cultivated land; some said they 
titled land if they could see that it had been used for agri-
culture in the last four to five years; yet others described 
their decision making as much more holistic, depending on 
their judgement of the individual’s character, particularly 
his or her propensity for using the land in the future. As a 
result, stories imbued with emotional imaginaries of land 
made their way into the survey and the resulting cadastral 
maps and titles.
Rural people sought to hold onto, and widen, this moment 
of rupture by monitoring and courting the volunteers. Some 
land claimants described waiting days at their fields until 
the volunteer teams arrived at the plot. In interviews, rural 
people stressed the need to know where the volunteer teams 
were in order to ensure their land was surveyed, and to avoid 
the volunteers falling prey to possible corrupt machinations 
of local elite. In some villages with well-established com-
munity activist groups, land claimants gathered together to 
collectively monitor the volunteer teams’ movements, as one 
villager explained,
[Community organizers] made a plan for who would 
follow the volunteers and the land ministry people, 
and we had all the documents ready and waited at our 
land. The survey team was happy because the com-
munity activist group knows more about whose land is 
whose than anyone else! We got all our land measured 
(1.4.14).
Communities of land claimants also appealed to the volun-
teers, courting them through food, drinks and gifts to per -
suade the volunteers to survey their land. Across studied 
areas, rural people described to us the ways they catered to 
the volunteers’ bodily needs by giving them soft drinks and 
cooking them meals (Grimsditch and Schoenberger 2015; 
Work and Beban 2016). One woman who had a large plot of 
land near a stream recalled,
We gave them things, like a chicken, like something 
to eat, because they walked all day to measure… It 
was the rainy season when they came here; they had 
to swim to measure our land! (28.9.14)
This woman’s justification emphasises the care shown to 
the volunteers as expressions of gratitude and looking after 
their bodily sustenance in return for the labour the volunteers undertook. Others similarly noted that they gave food and 
gifts as gratitude because they ‘felt sorry’ for the volunteers, 
as well as to ensure that their land was measured quickly. 
This practice frustrated local officials, such as a village chief 
who complained, ‘the volunteer teams often spent their time 
drinking, sometimes drinking so much that they could not 
go to work’ (26.7.14). Some of these local officials, as well 
as land holding elite, also expressed their resentment of the 
volunteers who they perceived as usurping their control. 
One village chief said pointedly, ‘the students get directives 
straight from Hun Sen—like his grandchildren; not report-
ing to village head or district’ (22.5.14).  Many land claim-
ants told us about informal cash payments they gave to the 
volunteers, ranging from small tokens of gratitude to large 
monetary bribes reportedly offered by urban speculators and 
companies who sought to regain their dominant foothold in 
land conflict area, as we describe in the following section.
Resisting new imaginaries, suturing 
the rupture
The rupture of Order 01 was momentary. As hopeful pos-
sibilities were thrown open, those whose power was threat-
ened sought to re-establish their dominance. Certainly, hope, 
as the domain of the uncertain and the ‘not-yet’, contains 
the potential for disappointment and disagreement within 
it (Back 2017). Across rural areas, many people missed out 
on land titles due to political interference, bad weather, and 
mistakes, which meant that the campaign produced disap-
pointments. The exclusion of collective ownership in favour 
of privately-owned plots also led to displacements that have 
lasting effects and produced new inequalities in rural areas. 
One village chief emphasized how dire the situation was by 
saying, ‘some of my people whose land was not measured 
perceived Order 01 as worse than Pol Pot’ (26.07.14).
Powerful local actors also grabbed onto the campaign 
and attempted to bend it to their interests. Concessionaires 
attempted to maintain the size of their holdings, while gov -
ernment officials and local elite sought to secure tenure 
to multiple land plots by clearing land in advance of the 
campaign, or paying community members to claim the land 
as their own (Work and Beban 2016). These strategies to 
manipulate the students had to be done with care, however, 
as Hun Sen made public examples of officials accused of 
bribing the volunteers by convicting the officials and throw -
ing them in jail (Hun Sen 2012). As a result, this was often 
a gradual process as new opportunities to subvert the cam-
paign arose. We turn now to an account from a commu-
nity in a high-conflict area to understand the slow, uneven, 
subversion; the ongoing work by powerful actors to suture 
the rupture. At the outset of the campaign, the community 
309 Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cambodia  
1 3
organized a group of key villagers to assist the survey team 
with identifying land claims. A person involved explained,
at first, the process seemed to follow the plan and the 
schedule for measurement and really focused on local 
residents’ land. Step-by-step, however, the families 
began to provide a meal for the student team, as part 
of the incentive for requesting to measure the land. As 
soon as this practice occurred, the measurement no 
longer followed the plan (27.7.14).
These small practices facilitated the re-establishment of 
village hierarchies into the process of the titling campaign. 
Better-off families and wealthy non-residents with goals of 
securing land were able to convince the volunteers to survey 
their land while the poorer families had to wait longer, as a 
community member noted.
Outsiders who claimed to have bought land in the vil-
lage ordered the students and technical teams to give 
them priority and to ask the local people to wait. We 
then got frustrated as the students now spent more time 
measuring the land for outsiders, rather than working 
on our land… As a result, at the end of the process, 
only half of the families got their land measured and 
the rest are still waiting … (27.7.14).
The community perceived these ‘outsiders’ to be govern-
ment officials from the provincial town. In a few particularly 
egregious cases, people observed that the land owner was 
not physically present at all and simply made a phone call 
to demand measurement, an order the teams then followed. 
Discouraged, the community disbanded their efforts to 
escort the survey teams since ‘the process got too confused 
and no longer followed any agreed schedule… especially 
near the end of measuring’ (27.7.14). The community lead-
ers noted that.
The strong collaboration between the Order 01 teams 
and these powerful individuals that we saw during the 
land measurement in our village, this made us even 
more afraid that they could do anything they wanted 
here (27.7.14).
Although discouraged, and now even more worried, the 
community wished to ‘send their voice to the government’ 
that in the future they should:
first, put top priority on local people, far more than 
outsiders. Second, we want more spaces where we can 
ask questions, express our concerns and negotiate as 
equals. Third, the students should come with civilian 
clothes, not army uniforms (27.7.14).
This community’s account of Order 01 contains several 
notable elements: the care with which they organized 
to engage with the students; the slow ways in which the campaign’s goals were subverted, first by local elites and 
then by powerful outsiders; and the dual effects of the cam-
paign’s outcomes working to reinforce feelings of fear while 
also demonstrating the possibility for things to be otherwise 
in the future, as evidenced by their hopeful suggestions for 
a better approach to land titling.
The ongoing effects of momentary rupture
When the dominant land imaginary is destabilized, it does 
not necessarily re-settle in the same way. Order 01 lingers. 
Land claimants, volunteers and local officials carry these 
encounters, and their affects, with them. The land itself also 
carries these encounters. Land claimants altered the land-
scape to be visible to the survey teams by clearing land, 
planting new crops, and erecting fences, sometimes with 
the effect of gaining legal recognition through a title. The 
national cadastral system for upland areas was transformed 
by making smallholders visible on state documentation for 
the first time. The campaign also showed people that politi-
cal pressure from below could influence the state. This in 
itself provides hope that rural people are seen by the state, 
and may gain state protection. However, exactly what the 
land title means and what it may provide is still an open 
question for many rural people.
When we asked people what the title meant to them, those 
in positions of power in rural areas were often enthusiastic 
about the benefits the land title brought to their commu-
nities, while rural smallholders were unsure. One village 
official, for example, declared, ‘the land titling campaign 
could happen because of the Prime Minister… It brought 
benefits to people. It made people happy, hopeful, and con-
fident [about] their future because they hold titles, they do 
not fear that their land would be grabbed’ (19.07.14).
Rural people and everyday smallholding farmers did not 
view the titles as providing absolute security over their land 
tenure because their distrust in the legal system and the gov -
ernment was too great. Instead, people described the land 
title as important because it provided the possibility of hold-
ing onto their land, ‘it gives us something. So… at least they 
have a chance then’ (community leader 22.12.14). When 
asked why the land title was important, people often simply 
said that the land title meant ‘this is our land’. Some said, 
‘we can use it to get loans’, and many had lodged their titles 
with microfinance institutions as collateral to access loans, 
sometimes with disastrous implications as they fell into debt. 
Others had taken advantage of higher prices for titled land to 
sell their land after Order 01. Often people smiled proudly 
as they showed us their titles, and simply said that ‘the titles 
are important because Hun Sen gave them to us’ (2.2.14). 
The last statement is a recognition that the Order 01 title’s 
association with the Prime Minister, and delivered by his 
volunteers, endows the object with greater potentiality.
310 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
This potentiality persists. A year after the campaign, a 
group of villagers who had received survey receipts but were 
still in conflict with the concessionaire marched to the Prime 
Minister’s residence holding their Order 01 receipts aloft. 
For these villagers, these documents held potential to enact 
justice, and to seek rights as citizens (Schoenberger 2017). 
In 2020, 7 years after Order 01 volunteers were recalled 
from the countryside, villagers who remained caught in a 
protracted land conflict continued to refer in our interviews 
to the time ‘when the students came’. Some people cast 
hopes for a potential resolution to the students’ return, as 
one woman said; ‘we got the title to some land when the 
students came, but not this area… we will ask for this to be 
titled if the student volunteers come back’ (30.1.20). Even 
as the imaginary of the titles as legal instruments has not 
necessarily taken hold, for people still distrust the enactment 
of law, the title represents a relationship with the powerful; a 
claim to citizenship and rights to state protection that opens 
possibilities.
Conclusion
Even as the dust settles on Order 01, and the Cambodian 
government once again steps up surveillance and violent 
repression of land activists, traces of the rupture persist. 
While ruptures might later be sutured and established pat -
terns of power partly re-stabilised, ruptures produce last-
ing shifts in the material and immaterial traces they leave 
behind. The linear organisation of this paper, moving from 
hopelessness, to hopeful rupture, to the partial closing of 
rupture and its lasting effects, recognizes that rupture is 
a process. But this is not a neat linearity; imaginaries are 
a field of contestation and processes of rupture and stabi-
lization are cyclical and messy. This insight has implica -
tions for scholarship on social mobilisation in contexts of 
violence as it suggests the importance of recognising (and 
using) moments of rupture to overcome fear and encourage 
the proliferation of new imaginaries—an epistemological 
re-orientation towards hope.
Our paper also invites scholars of land imaginaries to 
examine their affective dimensions. Much work on land 
imaginaries focuses on the discursive work of assembling 
land as a financialised global commodity; we sought in this 
paper to show how discursive and material assemblages are 
underpinned by affects. This is not a causal relationship 
(where emotional charge creates material changes in the 
landscape); rather, the material, social and affective elements 
of imaginaries are intertwined. A focus on the ‘embedding’ 
of alternative land imaginaries shows how imaginaries are 
not just cognitive ideas about the world; they are carried by 
material objects and embodied encounters. In the Cambo-
dian context where rural people do not trust that the law will be fairly enacted, it was not just the technical objects of land 
survey instruments and paper titles that became objects of 
hope, but the young volunteers who travelled to rural com-
munities to survey land. Rural people sought to interact 
with the volunteers, court them, care for them, and monitor 
their movements. Doing so created affective ties with the 
volunteers that embedded hopeful land imaginaries in rural 
areas and into the national cadastral system. The land title 
in this context is the material bearer of a land imaginary that 
centres on rural people’s connection to the land, and also 
reinforces rural people’s connection to the Cambodian state 
and the potential of the state’s protection.
Epistemologically, our orientation towards hope sought 
to move beyond much current writing on Cambodia that 
leaves the failures and disappointments of the powerful, and 
the hopes of rural people, hidden from view. If the momen-
tary cracks in dominant (ideological and material) struc -
tures remain hidden, then state actors and private companies 
appear to have the ability to shape the world in accordance 
with their own grandiose agendas, leaving others powerless. 
To move beyond this paralysing standpoint, our paper pays 
attention to hopeful ruptures in land imaginaries; moments 
that can make space for things to become otherwise.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the three guest 
editors, Sarah Ruth Sippel, Daniel Münster and Oane Visser for com-
ments on earlier versions of this paper, as well as all participants at the 
Workshop ‘Constructions, Representations, Productions: Exploring 
Historical and Contemporary. Institutions of Land’ for their insights. 
We would also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their 
useful feedback. We extend deep gratitude to all participants who took 
part in the research, the communities we work with in Cambodia, and 
the networks of committed individuals who support their efforts, for 
sharing their experiences with us. Laura Schoenberger received finan-
cial support for this research from the Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada (Joseph Armand Bombardier Doctoral 
Fellowship, Award Number: 767-2011-0280), the International Devel-
opment Research Centre (Doctoral Research Award, Award Number: 
107473-99906075-037) and York University. Alice Beban received 
financial support from US Department of Education (Fulbright-Hays 
Doctoral Dissertation Research Abroad, CFDA Number: 84.022).
References
ADHOC. 2014. Report: Land Situation in Cambodia in 2013. 
ADHOC: Phnom Penh.
Akram-Lodhi, A.H., S.M. Borras, and C. Kay. 2007. Land, Poverty 
and Livelihoods in an Era of Globalization. London: Routledge.
Anderson, B. 2017. Hope and Micropolitics. Environment and Plan-
ning D: Society and Space 35 (4): 593–595.
Back, L. 2017. Blind Pessimism and the Sociology of Hope. Discover 
Society 27(December). https ://disco  verso ciety  .org/2015/12/01/
blind  -pessi mism-and-the-socio  logy-of-hope/ . Accessed 13 Jan 
2019.
Beban, A., and L. Schoenberger. 2019. Fieldwork Undone: Knowing 
Cambodia’s Land Grab through Affective Encounters. Acme  18 
(1): 77–103.
311 Rupturing violent land imaginaries: finding hope through a land titling campaign in Cambodia  
1 3
Bloch, E. 1998. Can Hope Be Disappointed? In Literary Essays, 
339–45. Trans. A. Joron.Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Bouchard, G. 2017. Social Myths and Collective Imaginaries. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Bryant, R. 2014. History’s Reminders: On Time and Objects After 
Conflict in Cyprus. American Ethnologist 41 (4): 681–697.
Daniels, S. 2011. Geographical Imagination. Transactions of the 
Institute of British Geographers 36 (2): 182–187.
Dawney, L. 2011. Social Imaginaries and Therapeutic Self-Work: 
The Ethics of the Embodied Imagination. The Sociological 
Review 59 (3): 535–552.
De Soto, H. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs 
in the West and Fails Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books.
Dwyer, M.B. 2015. The Formalization Fix? Land Titling, Land Con-
cessions and the Politics of Spatial Transparency in Cambodia. 
The Journal of Peasant Studies 42 (5): 903–928.
Gatens, M., and G. Lloyd. 1999. Collective Imaginings: Spinoza, 
Past and PRESENT. London: Routledge.
Gibson-Graham, J.K. 2006. A Postcapitalist Politics . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Gottesman, E. 2003. Cambodia after the Khmer Rouge: Inside the 
Politics of Nation Building. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Grimsditch, M., and L. Schoenberger. 2015. New Actions and Exist-
ing Policies: The Implementation and Impacts of Order 01. 
Phnom Penh: NGO Forum.
Guillou, A.Y. 2006. The Question of Land in Cambodia: Percep-
tions, Access, and Use since De-collectivization. Moussons: 
Recherche en sciences humaines sur lʼ Asie du Sud-Est [Social 
science research on Southeast Asia] 9–10: 299–324.
Hauer, J., J. Østergaard Nielsen, and J. Niewöhner. 2018. Landscapes 
of Hoping—Urban Expansion and Emerging Futures in Ouaga-
dougou, Burkina Faso. Anthropological Theory 18 (1): 59–80.
Hun Sen. 2012. Hun Sen Speech to Volunteers at Koh Pich, 19 May. 
YouTube.https ://www.youtu be.com/watch ?v=6SQ_wSljr  rs.
Jansen, S. 2014. Hope For/Against the State: Gridding in a Besieged 
Sarajevo Suburb. Ethnos 79 (2): 238–260.
Jasanoff, S. 2015a. Future Imperfect: Science, Technology and the 
Imaginations of Modernity. In Dreamscapes of Modernity: 
Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power, ed. 
S. Jasanoff and S. Kim. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Jasanoff, S. 2015b. Imagined and Invented Worlds. In Dreamscapes 
of Modernity: Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication 
of Power, ed. S. Jasanoff and S. Kim. Chicago: Chicago Uni-
versity Press.
Jasanoff, S., and S. Kim. 2015. Dreamscapes of Modernity: Socio-
technical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press.
Kleist, N., and S. Jansen. 2016. Introduction: Hope over Time—Cri-
sis, Immobility and Future-Making. History and Anthropology  
27 (4): 373–392.
Laclau, E. 1990. New Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time. 
London: Verso.
Laclau, E. 2005. On Populist Reason. London: Verso.
Le Billon, P. 2002. Logging in Muddy Waters: The Politics of For -
est Exploitation in Cambodia. Critical Asian Studies 34 (4): 
563–586.
Li, T.M. 2014. What is Land? Assembling a Resource for Global 
Investment. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers  
39 (4): 589–602.
Lund, C. 2016. Rule and Rupture: State Formation Through the Pro-
duction of Property and Citizenship. Development and Change  
47 (6): 1199–1228.
Milne, S. 2014. Under the Leopard’s Skin: Land Commodification 
and the Dilemmas of Indigenous Control in Upland Cambodia. 
Asia Pacific Viewpoint 54 (3): 323–339.MLMUPC. 2014. Notification, 17 December. Phnom Penh: Ministry 
of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction.
Mouffe, C. 2005. The ‘End of Politics’ and the Challenge of Right 
Wing Populism. In Populism and the Mirror of Democracy, ed. 
F. Panizza. London: Verso.
Neef, A., S. Touch, and J. Chiengthong. 2013. The Politics and Eth-
ics of Land Concessions in Rural Cambodia. Journal of Agri-
cultural and Environmental Ethics 26 (6): 1085–1103.
Öjendal, J. 2013. In Search of a Civil Society: Re-negotiating State-
Society Relations in Cambodia. In Southeast Asia and the 
Civil Society Gaze: Scoping a Contested Concept in Cambodia 
and Vietnam, ed. G. Waibel, J. Ehlert, and H. Feuer. London: 
Routledge.
Popke, J. 2009. Geography and Ethics: Non-Representational 
Encounters, Collective Responsibility and Economic Differ -
ence. Progress in Human Geography 33 (1): 81–90.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. Making Time for Soil: Technosci-
entific Futurity and the Pace of Care. Social Studies of Science  
45 (5): 691–716.
RGC (Royal Government of Cambodia). 2010. National Strategic 
Development Plan Update, 2009–2013. Phnom Penh: RGC.
RGC (Royal Government of Cambodia). 2012. Manual on Implemen-
tation of Order 01 dated 07 May, 2012 on Measures Strengthen-
ing and Increasing Effectiveness of ELC Management. Phnom 
Penh: RGC.
Robinson, A., and S. Tormey. 2008. Is Another World Possible? 
Laclau, Mouffe and Social Movements. In The Politics of Radi-
cal Democracy , ed. A. Little and M. Lloyd. Edinburgh: Edin -
burgh University Press.
Said, E. 1978. Orientalism. New York: Pantheon.
Salazar, N., and N. Graburn. 2016. Tourism Imaginaries: Anthropo -
logical Approaches. New York: Berghahn.
Schoenberger, L. 2017. Struggling Against Excuses: Winning Back 
Land in Cambodia. The Journal of Peasant Studies 44 (4): 
870–890.
Schoenberger, L., and A. Beban. 2018. ‘They Turn Us into Crimi-
nals’: Embodiments of Fear in Cambodian Land Grabbing. 
Annals of the American Association of Geographers 108 (5): 
1338–1353.
Scott, J. 1998. Seeing like a state. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Springer, S. 2013. Illegal Evictions? Overwriting Possession and 
Orality with Law’s Violence in Cambodia. Journal of Agrarian 
Change 13 (4): 520–546.
Taylor, C. 2002. Modern Social Imaginaries. Public Culture 14 (1): 
91–124.
Thion, S. 1993. Watching Cambodia: Ten Paths to Enter the Cam-
bodian Tangle. Bangkok: White Lotus.
Tsing, A. 2005. Friction. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Work, C., and A. Beban. 2016. Mapping the Srok: The Mimeses of 
Land Titling in Cambodia. Sojourn: Journal of Social Issues in 
Southeast Asia 31 (1): 37–81.
Zembylas, M. 2014. Affective, Political and Ethical Sensibilities in 
Pedagogies of Critical Hope: Exploring the Notion of ‘Critical 
Emotional Praxis’. In Discerning Critical Hope in Educational 
Practices, ed. V. Bozalek, B. Leibowitz, R. Carolissen, and M. 
Boler, 11–25. New York: Routledge.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Laura Schoenberger is a Banting Postdoctoral Fellow in the School 
of International Development and Global Studies at the University of 
Ottawa in Canada. She holds a PhD in Critical Human Geography from 
York University. Her research interests are in political ecology, agrarian 
312 L. Schoenberger, A. Beban 
1 3
transformations, state power, conflict and land. Her next research pro-
ject extends the insights of land grab studies to examine sand grabbing.
Alice Beban is a Senior Lecturer in Sociology at Massey University 
in New Zealand. She holds a PhD in Development Sociology from 
Cornell University. Her research addresses land rights, agricultural production and gender concerns to understand people’s changing rela-
tionships with land.
