Progress report
Progress in Human Geography
2025, Vol. 0(0) 1 –8
© The Author(s) 2025
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissionsDOI: 10.1177/03091325251357024
journals.sagepub.com/home/phgRural geography I: Why should rural
geographers ‘care ’?
Susanne Stenbacka 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Abstract
This report presents the breadth of themes in current research where rural geography and care intersects.
Relationships and dimensions of interdependence and distribution of power are addressed. Noting an in-creasing interest for caring relations in society and the agency of multiple actors, for public contexts such aslandscape management and workplaces, I suggest that rural geographers pay attention to the opportunity to“spatialize ”care theory development and inform rural policy formulation. Rural geography holds the potential
to highlight spatial factors that invite to caring or uncaring and thereby in ﬂuence rural living conditions in a
broad sense.
Keywords
Care, rural geography, rural infrastructure, mutual caring relationships, public ethics of care
I. Introduction
Care has attracted great interest among geographers,an interest that is persistent and growing ( Power and
Hall, 2018 ). One reason is that, understood from a
feminist geographical perspective, the concepthighlights the unequal relationships between indi-viduals and groups that unfold in the interrelation ofspaces, alliances, and dependencies, including so-
ciety ’s handling of individuals ’basic needs
(Gregoratti et al., 2024 ;Middleton and Samanani,
2021 ;Sevenhuijsen, 2003 ). Following feminist un-
derstandings of care and caring work, spaces of careare not limited to the personal and private, to homesand personal relations. Rather, care infuses a range ofscales and social relationships, includes public en-vironments and situations and becomes political as it
puts responsibilities, distribution, and interpersonal
relations in the spotlight ( Barnes, 2007 ;Fisher and
Tronto, 1991 ;Morgan, 2010 ;Tronto, 1993 ,2013 ).Care needs are unevenly distributed among
people and places, and they can change over time.How and why we care for others are among the mosturgent and intricate questions for contemporary ruralsocieties facing not only climate change ( Morgan,
2010 : 1853) but also increasing inequalities in-
cluding vulnerability and poverty ( Bernard et al.,
2019 ;Schucksmith et al., 2023 ) and frequently oc-
curring stress factors such as population loss, em-ployment instability, and workforce shortages inhealthcare and education (see e.g., Beehle et al.,
2023 ). Recent research in rural geography mirrors
the increased interest for theoretical initiatives wherecare is central and contributes to extended
Corresponding author:
Susanne Stenbacka, Department of Human Geography, UppsalaUniversity, Box 513, 75120 Uppsala, Sweden.Email: susanne.stenbacka@kultgeog.uu.se

understandings of care practices and contexts. Also,
it turns out that rural geography has a natural aptitudefor paying attention to the heterogeneity ofelements —including non-humans —in an analysis of
caring relations.
When Lawson (2007) advocated for care to be
considered a more pressing concern, she based her
argument on two trends: the extension of market
relations into the caring realms of our lives and re-ductions in the public provision of various forms ofsupport or services. These have not become lessrelevant in the almost 20 years that have passed since.These challenges highlight that rural regions andplaces constitute both links and positions charac-terized by interdependent relationships, resulting in
spatial inequalities. An emphasis on care ethics and
unequal relationships might contribute not only tocritical re ﬂections on rural conditions and spatial
justice, but also towards the formulation of newsocial and political orders that enhance mutuality andwell-being ( Lawson, 2007 ) and presupposes soli-
darity ( McDowell 2004 , 156).
This report reviews the contemporary intersection
of rural geography and care and discusses the im-
plications of a public ethics of care perspective inrural geography. The next section is devoted to ex-amples of how care has been applied in rural ge-ography. This is followed by a re ﬂection on a
conceptual framework of care that is argued to be ofrelevance from a rural geography perspective. In theconcluding section, I outline why and how care
further can inform rural geography, in particular
when investigating contemporary rural living con-ditions, rural governance and planning as well asrural practices that manifest care and somehow makea difference.
II. Rural geography and care
Geographers are well equipped to identify andscrutinize the socio-spatial structures that precedeand result from care. Various studies have contrib-uted to broadening ontological perspectives of careand highlight the importance of human and non-human actors. Rural geographers were early inbroadening the approach to where, how and bywhom care is enacted and although this reportfocuses on recent literature, there is reason to point to
the relevance of a few earlier works. In 1998, Kearnshighlighted how care, when analyzed in speci ﬁcally
rural contexts, is found to include more than just “a
medical interaction ”(Kearns, 1998 : 236), that
“health and place are mutually constituted through
the activities of health-care provision ”and that the
reduction of the welfare state impacts such processes
(Kearns and Joseph, 1997 : 29). Also in 1998 ,
Thurston and Berkeley broadened the de ﬁnition of
care in their study of school safety in a rural contextand stressed the importance of being recognized andappreciated as well as owning one ’s own narrative in
order to be able to recognize and understand otherindividuals and groups.
In 2003, Parr and Philo argued that care (health
care services, community care, and care in the formof self-help) in rural places “is con ﬁgured in speci ﬁc
ways as a result of the particular economic, politicaland social geographies of such locations ”(p. 472). In
their work on mental health, they interrogated theterm “community care ”and argued that “geo-
graphical distance, social proximity, stoic cultures
and rural gossip networks all have a part to play in
how caring occurs ”in rural locations ( Parr and Philo,
2003 : 471). Community care thus includes both
formal and informal caring and a wide range ofpractices, and their study includes aspects wherecaring relationships are concealed out of fear of theconsequences it may have for other relationships.
Studies on the provision of care consider those
who are cared for and those who give care ( Lawson,
2007 ;Middleton and Samanani, 2021 ;Power and
Williams, 2020 ). In a study on older adults and their
caregivers, Bygdell (2014) identi ﬁes a rural land-
scape of care characterized by mutual dependencyand carefulness. By applying a broad de ﬁnition of
care, including practical help and emotional support,this work makes visible a diversity of care workers as
well as care practices. Formal and informal contacts
together constitute a basis for care relationships andinvolve the public, the private, and the volunteersector ( Bygdell, 2014 ). With a focus on family carers,
Holland and Skinner (2025) conclude that care work
includes a multitude of activities such as preservingfamily connections and traditions, and a constantcoordination of spaces and relationships. A study2 Progress in Human Geography 0(0)
exploring “landscapes of care ”for rural youth, em-
phasizes the importance of youths ’connectedness
and belonging as well as agency of professionals andcivically engaged youth ( Jonsson et al., 2020 ),
echoing the reasoning by Kearns (1998) on how
health and place are mutually constituted.
Several studies deal with the intersection of care
and farming. Pettersson and Tillmar (2022 : 1446), in
a study on care farming, discuss feminist care ethicsas“an ontology of connections, by working from the
heart. ”The observed relationships are characterized
by mutuality between farmers, participants, andsociety, rather than the participants being dependentservice users. The farms do farming differently,where farms providing care farming more promi-
nently become places of care than places of food
production. Thus, the caring practices contribute tore-con ﬁguring and re-evaluating the landscape. A
desire for caring relations combined with a belief inthe empowering bene ﬁts of direct marketing, was
shown to be drivers for women farmers ’engagement
in short food chains. The women surveyed in thisstudy strongly adhered to social and ecological
values, while they alongside expressed economic
views ( Azima and Mundler 2022 ).
The intersection of human and non-human rela-
tionships are subject to analysis in a study by Barnes
(2020) . This work shows how a residential com-
munity established to support people in vulnerablesituations —due to addiction, mental health prob-
lems, and other kinds of dif ﬁculties —thrives when
care for individuals is mixed with care for the en-
vironment, animals, and community. The relation-ship involves care for people “who might be
considered strangers ”(Barnes, 2020 : 143; see also
Barnes, 2012 ;Langford, 2019 ;Morgan, 2010 ) and is
based on geographical proximity rather than kinshipor friendship, and voluntariness rather than duty.Likewise, Fullagar and O ’Brien (2018) show how
recovery from depression is enacted through place
based relations that invoke human and non-humanrelations in informal care spaces. These studieshighlight practices of care beyond more traditionalhealth-related contexts and contribute to knowledgeon the intersection of public and private care.
Further rural geographies of care, beyond contexts
where care is supposed to be present, are exempli ﬁedby care relations at work. In a study on collaborative
workspaces in a rural context, where people workindependently (as freelancers) alongside others,Gatsinos (2025) introduces the term “worker geog-
raphies of care ”to describe how coworkers navigate
precarity and collectively claim control overhardship. Such co-working practices might also be
identi ﬁed between employer and employees as a
study focusing on farmers ’experiences of recruit-
ment shows. Relationships of care are prevalent inthe employer –employee interrelation, a relation in-
fused with norms and ethical principles. This studyemphasizes a multifaceted understanding of caringpractices, also making visible the caring practices ofmale farmers ( Stenbacka, 2019 ).
Landscape management includes practices of
care, as in a study by Alcaron et al. (2020) where
farmer –non-human relationships in relation to
vineyards and biodiversity is explored. Participationin different environmental programs contributed totransforming farming practices. Likewise, in a studyon forest management decisions, it is shown howdecisions are in ﬂuenced by relations to trees and
infused with caring relations and emotions. The
authority ’s decision-making structure included the
public and local people engaged through volun-teering ( O’Flynn et al., 2021 ). Trees are thus seen as
motivating human actors into mutual caring rela-tionships. Moriggi et al. (2020 : 2), in their study on
green care, including a care farm, a biodynamic farm,and a nature-tourism company, extend the under-
standing of care to encompass “a way for people to
express who they are, and who they wish to be ”.
Jacobs and Wiens (2024) , on the other hand, draw
attention to inequalities related to landscape man-agement (research, maintenance, design) and howcare has become a way of pointing towards a hopefulfuture. Care can be related to hope as well as concernabout relations of power. Jacobs and Wiens em-
phasize the importance of acknowledging power
relations in order not to risk normalizing injusticesthrough paternalistic modes of care.
A commonly cited work that allows the concept of
care to make visible human –non-human interaction
isPuig De la Bellacasa ’s (2015) analysis of humans ’
relationship to the soil. She questions the dominantunderstanding and management of soil, characterizedStenbacka 3
by technoscienti ﬁc intervention to maintain and in-
crease production, what she terms a “productionist
soil care ”(p. 692). A proposed way forward in
breaking the taken-for-granted link between soilscience and productionism is to allow alternativeontologies from within (p. 707), with an orientationto the articulations of temporality and care.
The concept of care is predominantly associated
with hope and opportunity, a better future society andbetter living conditions for all. Care can be upliftingand strengthening, empowering and powerful(Lawson, 2007 ). However, as stated earlier, care can
also be related to concern about relations of power.Care can be suffocating, hindering, and delaying andcan include harmful paternalistic relationships be-
tween places and people ( Murphy, 2015 ). Several
researchers see a danger in the concept offering aconvenient solution, where care is too simple ananswer to complex problems. Critical approachesaddress paternalistic and sti ﬂing modes of care
practices ( Green and Lawson, 2011 ),“carewashing ”
as a strategy ( Chatzidakis et al., 2020 ) and pro-
ductionist management ( Puig De la Bellacasa, 2015 ).
In addition, to express “care”for something may
include neglecting to care for others. For example,caring for the cultural character of a rural area maymanifest itself in a reluctance to plan for housing forvulnerable groups ( Frank et al., 2020 ) and “a caring
community ”might exclude people who are not able
to cope and justify such disengagement and lack ofcare for the “other ”by referring to the absence of
virtues ( Kay, 2011 ).
The limited overview presented here cannot
capture all the work that has been done at the in-tersection of care and rural geography. The empiricalexamples are intended to re ﬂect various dimensions
and inspire further efforts in the ﬁeld. Drawing on the
concept of care and emphasizing a public ethics ofcare, I argue that rural geography has a strong
contribution to make to research on where and how
care is practiced, de ﬁned and facilitated or hindered.
In addition, an emphasizing of care can strengthenthe scienti ﬁc position of rural geography as well as
revitalize rural policy and become a key dimension inplanning ( Davoudi and Ormerod, 2025 ). Care can act
as a guiding principle in the strife for creating re-silient (rural) systems at institutional and local levels(Damgaard et al., 2022 ;Gregoratti et al., 2024 ). To
achieve that, care needs to be researched across allgeographical levels, from the global to the local. Forexample, national and regional policies can guidehow care is designed, manifested and practised at alocal level. In addition, increased insights into ruraland local caring practices make contexts and actors
visible that tend not to be included in traditional
caring realms.
Further research is suggested to incorporate areas
such as access to resources, welfare, and well-being,the role of material and social infrastructures forinviting to modes of care as well as visible and in-visible caring practices. Caring may involve accessto affordable housing, communications, and social
contexts also in places outside metropolitan areas and
growth zones. Geographers ’works on regional eq-
uity, social justice, and the distribution of respon-sibilities aim at transforming and restructuringregional politics and its outcomes, and they are thusincluded in a research context where caring is viewedas enhancing well-being ( Lawson, 2007 ). The im-
portance of infrastructure for the development of care
practices has received some attention, such as en-
vironmental programs for landscape management(Alcaron et al., 2020 ) and there is more to investigate
in regard the potential in “structures inviting to care. ”
Future studies could also be inspired by recent
efforts to promote care to nurture studies in urban
geography. Examples from urban geographicresearch highlight how care can contribute to new
perspectives on infrastructure and its importance in
creating opportunities for care. The presence andorganization of infrastructure impacts how care isprovided and practised. Buser and Boyer (2021)
argue in their work on water infrastructure, main-tenance, and repair that participation of nonhumansis vital. Stratford and Byrne (2024) , investigating
public transports, emphasize that “infrastructures
invite opportunities to care with ”and that this
“implicates how we move or not; where, when, and
with what intentions and effects ”(p. 381). Further
studies on infrastructures in rural areas are needed,including on how these infrastructures both consti-tute care and invite further care practices, for ex-ample, in regard to food networks, energy provision,and common transports.4 Progress in Human Geography 0(0)
Another area for future study is invisible care
practices —those found in professions within
healthcare, education, or public social care whereindividual actors make everyday decisions based ontheir perception of what good care practices are andthose found within civil society engagement. Suchstrategies, which involve caring for individuals in
vulnerable situations, can be interpreted in terms of
resistance to what is perceived as non-caring struc-tures. Of interest are also contextual factors: whatmakes certain places more or less infused by caringpractices, and why do some places receive more carethan others?
III. Care ethics
Environments and places cannot function withoutcare, and there is a need to create a common un-derstanding and shared aspirations towards life-friendly societies. This need applies not least torural areas and to the policies and practices that affectthem and constitute the conditions for rural life andlivelihoods. The understanding of an ethics of care
that could respond to contemporary urgencies and
thus is promoted in this work is multifaceted.
When Kevin Morgan ’s article on the ethical
foodscape and care was published in 2010, he putpoverty and sustainable development in the spotlight.Writing that “food is the ultimate index of our ca-
pacity to care for ourselves and for others ”(p. 1852),
he focused on a public ethics of care as a guiding
light for how we could look at our roles in an in-
creasingly globalized society that involves frequentmeetings and multiple relationships with people whoare more or less like ourselves. He asked, “what and
who do we care about most and, equally important,why do we care at all? ”(p. 1853). Care can thus be
seen as a counterpoint to a contemporary focus onindividualism, an ontology of human interdepen-
dence that is a basis for thinking through a public
ethics of care ( Stens ¨ota, 2015 ). A public ethics of
care points towards how care manifests in practiceand how it permeates policy areas beyond “tradi-
tional ”care. The concept ’s ability to assist in policy
formation and implication includes areas such ashousing, infrastructure, and environmental politics(Stens ¨ota, 2015 ).Ausin ’s (2019) deﬁnition of a public ethics of care
may act as a tool to move towards the position of therural and the power relations in policy and planning:
It is called “Public Ethics ”to refer to applied
ethics relating to the affairs of government and stateorganizations and institutions. It is, therefore, anethics applied to public servants as agents of a
panoply of joint activities with a view to favoring the
common good, that is, the satisfaction of an orderedset of social preferences related to well-being, care,and service to the population in terms of equity.(Ausin, 2019 :9 )
In this de ﬁnition, the agency of bodies responsible
for governance and planning as well as public ser-vants themselves is visualized. This conceptual ap-
proach may be of relevance for further studies that
focus on the spatial consequences of planningdecisions —how rural environments and places are
constituted through the actions of institutions andthrough personal encounters. Public servant em-ployees make a number of decisions that are based onlaws and rules but also contain some measure ofjudgment or discretion. This means that there is room
for to interpret how rules within a speci ﬁc area
should be understood ( Stens ¨ota, 2015 ). Such a
procedure requires a certain presence and contactbetween the public employee and other affectedactors, or with the affected environment. An ev-eryday example of how a public ethics of care mightwork in practice is a bus driver “prioritizing re-
sponsible and safe driving over following the
timetable ”(Stens ¨ota, 2015 : 196), or a civil servant at
the public employment services providing answers toquestions from new arrivals beyond labor marketpossibilities ( Stenbacka, 2018 : 36). Another example
is provided by Morse and Munro (2018) , on museum
professionals ’commitment and responsibility to
local communities in times of austerity and how theycreate strategies of collective resistance. The pro-
motion of care ethics ’incorporation into practice and
into policy areas of urgence for rural localities andregional relations could be further strengthened bythe concept of public ethics of care. Rural geo-graphical studies can be informed by illuminatingpeople and places as both vulnerable and capable bymaking diverse forms of private and public carepractices visible.Stenbacka 5
IV. Conclusion: Why rural
geographers should care
Rural geographical studies increasingly investigate
the provision of and access to care, broaden thedeﬁnition of care and scrutinize interpersonal as well
as human –non-human relationships. Caring practices
in the rural include caring for and about people, but
also caring for the community, the built environment,animals, and “nature ”in its broadest sense. It is a
matter of the public as well as the private, and itconcerns caring as such but also social and physicalstructures that invite caring. Besides paying attentionto caring practices in the rural, caring about the ruralinvolves external relations and forces, formulated in
distant political contexts. The impact of ontological
standpoints is emphasized, and works have increas-ingly questioned care design and management andexposed power relations among people and places.The quest made by Parr and Philo, 2003 for a situ-
ational understanding of care has thus been successful,but there is certainly room for further contributionsfrom rural geographers, on the unequal relationships
between individuals, groups, and also places.
Based on the insights from the works presented
here, focusing on contemporary geographies of care,I want to encourage rural geography to increasinglybe informed by a public ethos of care approach (asoutlined in e.g., Ausin, 2019 ;Morgan, 2010 ;
Stens ¨ota, 2015 ). A public ethos of care does not limit
itself to a theoretical approach in research but would
be of use in national politics, regional governance,
and in the development of markets (see also Power
and Williams, 2020 ).
In public environments, care is, among other
things, welfare. Welfare is more than interpersonalcare; it is about providing infrastructure that con-tributes to living as good a life as possible, for ex-ample, public transport and broadband. This suggests
that the perspective of a public ethics of care can
contribute constructively and critically to investi-gations of such relationships and processes —that is,
unequal relationships and social responsibilities inregard to creating good living conditions. A publicethics of care recognizes and takes into accountspatial inequalities that both give rise to care needsand impact how care is practised, highlighting powerpositions and the role of public bodies and market
actors.
It is of common interest to know how care can be
“more than utopian, ”how care as value and practice
(Held, 2005 ) may be infused into the shaping of places,
communities and relations. Studies on how care canguide the design and governance of public spaces could
assist in a development in this direction. Acts of care
contribute to making places public in the sense that theyare for everyone. Care con stitutes a space where each
individual can be public, in times of comfort or times ofhardship. Being public does not have to mean that yourequire constant interaction; being public can also beparticipating without direc tly facing others. Places for
care entail an elasticity wher e an individual to different
extents can seek commitment of varying intensity
during different parts of a day or different phases in life.
Care can be a concept that can accompany en-
gagement in rural areas among politicians and plan-ners, but not without a reservation. An increasingpresence of “care”could be an expression of genuine
interest in the rural, but it might also be a “brilliant
disguise ”for strategies of neglecting rural needs. A
familiar way of explaining cuts or withdrawal of
funding is to refer to rural places ’own capacity.
Regarding the ability of individuals to both give andreceive care in mutual relationships, the state canobserve the development without contributing theresources. To paraphrase Puig de la Bellacasa (2015:692), what the rural is thought to be affects the ways inwhich we care for it, and vice versa.
There is thus a need to “trouble ”care ( Raghuram,
2016 ) in regard to spatial inequalities, and this
contribution aims to encourage rural geographers toboth critically examine current processes where“care”might involve different outcomes for different
groups of people and identify the possibilities byallowing care to be a lens and a tool, a value andpractice ( Held, 2005 ) when investigating contem-
porary rural structures and how they play out in the
views of rural people and their everyday lives.
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article.6 Progress in Human Geography 0(0)
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iD
Susanne Stenbacka https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7211-
9081
References
Alarcon M, Marty P and Pr ´evot AC (2020) Caring for
vineyards: transforming farmer-vine relations andpractices in viticulture French farms. Journal of Rural
Studies 80: 160 –170.
Aus´ın T (2019) The public dimension of care: towards a
public ethics of care. In: Vallverd ´u J, Puyol A and
Estany A (eds) Philosophical and Methodological
Debates in Public Health . Dordrecht: Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 137 –148.
Azima S and Mundler P (2022) The gendered motives and
experiences of Canadian women farmers in short foodsupply chains: work satisfaction, values of care, andthe potential for empowerment. Journal of Rural
Studies 96: 19 –31.
Barnes M (2007) Participation, citizenship and a feminist ethic
of care. In: Balloch S and Hill M (eds) Care, Community
and Citizenship: Research and Practice in a ChangingPolicy Context . Bristol: Policy Press, 59 –74.
Barnes M (2012) Care in Everyday Life: An Ethic of Care
in Practice . Bristol: The Policy Press.
Barnes M (2020) Community care: the ethics of care in a
residential community. Ethics and Social Welfare
14(2): 140 –155.
Beehle S, Corcoran F and Michaels C (2023) Rural
community stress: a review of the literature. Journal
of Rural and Community Development 18(1): 32 –50.
Bernard J, Contzen S, Decker A, et al. (2019) Poverty and
social exclusion in diversi ﬁed rural contexts. Socio-
logia Ruralis 59(3): 353 –368.
Buser M and Boyer K (2021) Care goes underground:
thinking through relations of care in the maintenanceand repair of urban water infrastructures. Cultural
Geographies 28(1): 73 –90.
Bygdell C (2014) Omsorgsfylld landsbygd: rumsliga
perspektiv p ˚a˚aldrande och omsorg p ˚a den svenska
landsbygden. (Doctoral dissertation, Upplands for-
nminnesf ¨orening och hembygdsf ¨orbund) 56: 216.Chatzidakis A, Hakim J, Littler J, et al. (2020) From care-
washing to radical care: the discursive explosions of careduring Covid-19. Feminist Media Studies 20(6): 889 –895.
Damgaard CS, McCauley D and Reid L (2022) Towards
energy care ethics: exploring ethical implications ofrelationality within energy systems in transition.Energy Research & Social Science 84: 102356.
Davoudi S and Ormerod E (2025) ‘Care-full ’planning:
towards an ethics and politics of care in planning.
Planning Theory 1: 1–20.
Fisher B and Tronto JC (1991) Toward a feminist theory of
care. In: Abel E and Nelson M (eds) Circles of Care:
Work and Identity in Women ’s Lives . Alban, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Frank KI, Hibbard M, Shucksmith M, et al. (2020)
Comparative rural planning cultures. Planning The-
ory & Practice 21(5): 769 –795.
Fullagar S and O ’Brien W (2018) Rethinking women ’s
experiences of depression and recovery as emplace-ment: spatiality, care and gender relations in ruralAustralia. Journal of Rural Studies 58: 12 –19.
Gatsinos N (2025) Blurring the lines: precarious lives and
social reproduction in labour geography. Geogra ﬁska
Annaler - Series B: Human Geography 16: 1 –20.
Green M and Lawson V (2011) Recentring care: interro-
gating the commodi ﬁcation of care. Social & Cultural
Geography 12(6): 639 –654.
Gregoratti C, Linnell M and Caretta MA (2024) Resilience:
why should we think with care? Global Social
Challenges Journal 3(3): 470 –478.
Held V (2005) The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and
Global . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holland MR and Skinner MW (2025) Rural family carer
health work and ageing at home in New Brunswick.
Canada. Journal of Rural Studies 114: 103541.
Jacobs S and Wiens T (2024) Landscapes of care: politics,
practices, and possibilities. Landscape Research
49(3): 428 –444.
Jonsson F, Goicolea I, Christianson M, et al. (2020)
Landscapes of care and despair for rural youth –a
qualitative study in the northern Swedish ’periphery.
International Journal for Equity in Health 19(1):
1–10.
Kay R (2011) (Un) caring communities: processes of
marginalisation and access to formal and informalcare and assistance in rural Russia. Journal of Rural
Studies 27(1): 45 –53.Stenbacka 7
Kearns RA (1998) Going it alone ’: place, identity and
community resistance to healthcare reforms in Ho-kianga, New Zealand. In: Kearns RA and Gesler WM(eds) Putting Health into Place: Landscape, Identity
and Well-Being . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University
Press, 226 –247.
Kearns RA and Joseph AE (1997) Restructuring health and
rural communities in New Zealand. Progress in
Human Geography 21(1): 18 –32.
Langford R (ed) (2019) Theorizing Feminist Ethics of Care
in Early Childhood Practice: Possibilities andDangers . London: Bloomsbury.
Lawson V (2007) Geographies of care and responsibility.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers97(1): 1 –11.
Mcdowell L (2004) Work, workfare, work/life balance and
an ethic of care. Progress in Human Geography 28(2):
145–163.
Middleton J and Samanani F (2021) Accounting for care
within human geography. Transactions of the Institute
of British Geographers 46(1): 29 –43.
Morgan K (2010) Local and green, global and fair: the ethical
foodscape and the politics of care. Environment and
Planning A: Economy and Space 42(8): 1852 –1867.
Moriggi A, Soini K, Bock BB, et al. (2020) Caring in, for,
and with nature: an integrative framework to un-derstand green care practices. Sustainability 12(8):
3361.
Morse N and Munro E (2018) Museums ’community
engagement schemes, austerity and practices of carein two local museum services. Social & Cultural
Geography 19(3): 357 –378.
Murphy M (2015) Unsettling care: troubling transnational
itineraries of care in feminist health practices. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 717 –737.
O’Flynn T, Geoghegan H, Dyke A, et al. (2021) Attending to
nature: understanding care and caring relations in forestmanagement in the UK. Journal of Rural Studies 86:
226–235.
Parr H and Philo C (2003) Rural mental health and social
geographies of caring. Social & Cultural Geography 4(4):
471–488.Pettersson K and Tillmar M (2022) Working from the heart –
cultivating feminist care ethics through care farming inSweden. Gender, Place & Culture 29(10): 1446 –1466.
Power A and Hall E (2018) Placing care in times of austerity.
Social & Cultural Geography 19(3): 303 –313.
Power ER and Williams MJ (2020) Cities of care: a
platform for urban geographical care research. Ge-
ography compass 14(1): e12474.
Puig De La Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil:
technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 691 –716.
Raghuram P (2016) Locating care ethics beyond the global
north. ACME: An International Journal for Critical
Geographies 15(3): 511 –533.
Sevenhuijsen S (2003) The place of care: the relevance of
the feminist ethic of care for social policy. Feminist
Theory 4(2): 179 –197.
Shucksmith M, Glass J, Atterton J, et al. (2023) Rural
Poverty Today: Experiences of Social Exclusion inRural Britain . Bristol, UK: Bristol Policy Press.
Stenbacka S (2018) Refugee migration into rural areas in
Sweden: a breeding ground for cosmopolitanism andhospitality? In: Kordel S, Weidinger T and Jelen I (eds)Processes of Immigration in Rural Europe: The Status
Quo, Implications and D evelopment Strategies .N e w -
castle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 25 –44.
Stenbacka S (2019) Responsibilities, caring practices and ag-
riculture: farmers ’perspectives on recruitment and em-
ployer –employee relationships. Sociologia Ruralis 59(2):
255–274.
Stens ¨ota HO (2015) Public ethics of care —a general public
ethics. Ethics and Social Welfare 9(2): 183 –200.
Stratford E and Byrne J (2024) Im/mobilising bus travel as
an infrastructure of care: student experiences in a mid-size city. Mobilities 19(3): 379 –395.
Thurston LP and Berkeley TR (1998) Morality and the ethic of
care: peaceable rural schools, caring rural communities.Rural Special Education Quarterly 17(3-4): 71 –79.
Tronto J (1993) Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an
Ethic of Care . New York and London: Routledge.
Tronto J (2013) Caring Democracy: Markets, Equality, and
Justice . New York: New York University Press.8 Progress in Human Geography 0(0)
