New Genetics and Society
Critical Studies of Contemporary Biosciences
ISSN: 1463-6778 (Print) 1469-9915 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cngs20
Saving embryos in stem cell science and embryo
adoption
Risa Cromer
To cite this article: Risa Cromer (2018) Saving embryos in stem cell science and embryo
adoption, New Genetics and Society, 37:4, 362-386, DOI: 10.1080/14636778.2018.1546574
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14636778.2018.1546574
Published online: 20 Dec 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3702
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cngs20
Saving embryos in stem cell science and embryo adoption
Risa Cromera,b*
aStanford Center for Biomedical Ethics Fellow, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, USA;bAssistant Professor, Department of Anthropology,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
(Received 31 January 2018; ﬁnal version received 26 September 2018 )
The million frozen human embryos accumulated in IVF clinic freezers across
the United States have become premier targets for saving by groups
committed to repurposing reproductive remainders. Based on twenty-seven
months (2008 –2013) of ethnographic research within a Christian embryo
adoption program and an embryo biobank for stem cell research, this article
examines the motivations and practices involved in transforming leftover
IVF embryos from a remaindered to a repurposed state. A focus on savingilluminates how moral discourses, economic logics, and biomedical issues
conspire in shaping futures as well as modes of care in the present. Embryo
repurposing programs use similar saving practices for different reasons,assume responsibility for repurposing IVF embryos, and strive to transform
them into revalued forms for new futures. Fluctuating factors beyond the
cryopreservation tank multiply rather than stabilize embryo potential. As adynamic, open-ended process, saving requires programs to adjust strategies
over time and wait.
Keywords: embryo disposition; in vitro fertilization; human embryonic stem
cell research; embryo adoption; United States
Over a million human embryos left over from in vitro fertilization (IVF) procedures
have accumulated in fertility clinic freezers across the United States (Lomax andTrounson 2013). At the turn of the twenty- ﬁrst century, the fates of these reproduc-
tive remainders became the subject of bioethical controversy. In 1998, biologists ina University of Wisconsin lab established the ﬁrst human embryonic stem cell line
from a donated leftover embryo (Thomson et al. 1998). That same year, the ﬁrst
child was born through the world ’sﬁrst embryo adoption program –a“pro-life ”
Christian effort to rescue embryos from “frozen orphanages ”by facilitating their
chances to be born (Nightlight Christian Adoptions 2017). These coinciding
events became embroiled in ongoing ethical debate in the U.S. about usingNew Genetics and Society , 2018
Vol. 37, No. 4, 362 –386, https://doi.org/10.1080/14636778.2018.1546574
*Email: risacromer@purdue.edu
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
human embryos and fetuses to advance scienti ﬁc research (Scott 2006; George and
Tollefsen 2008; Maienschein 2014; Thompson 2014; Hurlbut 2017). The events
precipitated the establishing of biobanks to procure donated embryos for research
on curing human diseases as well as advocacy by embryo adoption proponents for
recognizing embryos as persons. Fueling debate about the fates of frozen embryos,
a 2003 report estimating 400,000 embryos in cryostorage across the United Statesrendered more urgent discussions about what should happen with these widely
valued and rapidly accumulating remainders (Hoffman et al. 2003).
During the past two decades, popular and scholarly literatures about embryo
donation for research and adoption have examined their ethical, legal, and politicaldifferences, of which there are many (cf. Mundy 2006; Spar 2006; George and Tol-
lefsen 2008; Thompson 2014 ). Serving as each other ’s opponent on the national
stage has encouraged such analyses. President George W. Bush ’sﬁrst presidential
address in 2001 announced an executive policy that limited federal funding forhuman embryonic stem cell research (hESCR) by expressing concern “about a
culture that devalues life ”(Bush 2001). Bipartisan majorities in both chambers of
the U.S. Congress disagreed with Bush ’s policy, and prepared funding legislation
for hESCR that might bring forth treatments for people debilitated by diseases.
The day the U.S. House of Representatives prepared to pass the Stem Cell ResearchEnhancement Act of 2005, which Bush later vetoed, Bush dramatized his opposition
by staging a press conference with twenty-one children born through the Snow ﬂakes
Embryo Adoption program. Bush commended the Snow ﬂakes program for demon-
strating “there is no such thing as a spare embryo ”and for their effort “to ensure that
our society’ s most vulnerable members are protected and defended at every stage of
life”(Ofﬁce of the Press Secretary 2005 ). Within months of President Obama revok-
ing the Bush-era funding restrictions in order to ﬁnance research on a wider range of
hESC lines (Obama 2009), staff and clients of the Snow ﬂakes program signed onto a
high-pro ﬁle lawsuit against the Obama administration, which resulted in a temporary
suspension of federal granting for hESCR (Wadman 2013). In many respects, the so-
called “embryo wars ”(Crockin 2006) continue to rage.
Yet, to explain broader social forces operating within embryo politics, some fem-
inist social scientists have taken interest in what such opposing groups have in
common. Anthropologist Sarah Franklin analyzed public debates in the United
Kingdom on the use of embryos in research, and speci ﬁcally the testimony of
“pro-life ”Christians and
stem cell scientists. Based on their shared “language of
hope, faith, miracles, and the salvation of humanity, ”Franklin concluded that
IVF embryos function for all sides as a “salvation object ”believed to be capable
of redeeming the nation, economy, species, and future (Franklin 1999, 64). As
Franklin noted, regarding embryos as salvation objects re ﬂects the sacrilization
of life itself (cf. Duden 1993) and the reach of Christian discourses within contem-
porary biopolitics (Haraway 1997; Sunder Rajan 2006; Radin and Kowal 2017).
Anthropologist Elizabeth F.S. Roberts ( 2007), who conducted ethnographic
research on IVF cryopreservation practices in Ecuador, drew a comparison withNew Genetics and Society 363
the United States where she discerned a shared orientation to “life ethics” among
embryo adoption promoters and stem cell research advocates. Within life ethics,
embryos are alienated from their social contexts to allow them to be circulatedand revalued: “It is precisely contemporary discourses of life that contribute to
the transformation of entities like embryos into valuable, and anonymous, rawmaterials ”(Roberts 2007, 181–2). For Roberts, life ethics reveal free-market
logics that render frozen embryos “bioavailable ”not only for stem cell research,
as scholars of bioeconomies have noted (Franklin 2006b; Waldby and Mitchell
2006; Cooper and Waldby 2014), but also for adoption by “pro-life ”Christians.
Life ethics highlight the role of capital in fetishizing embryos among opposing
groups concerned for their futures.
A third example from sociologist Charis Thompson ’s(2014) study on hESCR
ethics in California identi ﬁed biomedical concerns as a common focus for stem
cell proponents and embryo adoption advocates. Thompson argued that bothgroups, while coming from distinct ethical perspectives, embrace a shared ethical
mandate to “save lives ”–to save people from debilitating diseases and to save
frozen “orphans ”from physical harm (Thompson 2014, 45). For Thompson,
saving life bridges medical and moral concerns for preserving the health of vulner-able beings.
Together, these comparative studies highlight the roles that moral discourses,
economic logics, and biomedical issues play in aligning the efforts of groups com-mitted to different fates for frozen embryos. Building on this scholarship, I intro-duce saving as a framework for examining how all three –moralities, markets,
and medicine –conspire to realize the perceived potential of leftover embryos.
Based on twenty-seven months (2008 –2013) of ethnographic research within a
Christian embryo adoption program and a human embryo biobank, this articleexamines the practices involved in transforming leftover IVF embryos from a
remaindered to a repurposed state. I maintain that embryo donation programs
use similar saving practices for different reasons and goals. In what follows, Ianalyze why embryo-saving programs assume responsibility for repurposing IVF
embryos and how they strive to convert embryos into revalued forms. Then, I
show how ﬂuctuating forces beyond the cryopreservation tank multiply rather
than stabilize embryo potentialities. Saving emerges as a dynamic, and sometimes
incomplete, process that requires programs to adjust their strategies and reconsider
their commitments over time.
Saving: A framework
I frequently encountered the word saving in conversations with interlocutors across
myﬁeld sites to explain why and how they repurpose IVF embryos. While gener-
ally understood to mean the preservation of something considered valuable, saving
has a rich etymological history containing multiple de ﬁnitions ( “save, v. ”2018).
The earliest meaning of saving comes from fourth century A.D. notions of364 R. Cromer
heroic healing efforts that delayed death and rescued bodies from disease. In the
tenth century, saving evoked Christian themes of rescuing the soul and delivering
persons from evil into God ’s salvation. By the sixteenth century, saving took on an
economic tone concerning the storing of ﬁnancial resources for future use. Like
saving, frozen embryos are irreducible to a “singular entity” (Franklin and
Roberts 2006)o rd e ﬁnition. The non- ﬁnite form of the verb to save , saving also
signiﬁes grammatical ongoingness that cannot be ﬁxed in time. Thus, I favor
using the multiple and continuous valences of saving to analyze how frozenembryo fates are managed because, as anthropologist Marilyn Strathern reminds,“it matters what ideas one uses to think other ideas (with) ”(1992, 10).
Saving illuminates two main commonalities between embryo donation pro-
grams. First, it reveals a shared obligation to value the perceived potential offrozen embryos. Potentiality is one of those “future tense ”(Selin 2011) concepts
that raises questions about temporality. I show how discourses of saving in stem
cell labs and Christian adoption agencies justify the repurposing of embryos by
articulating relationships between pasts, presents, and futures. Speci ﬁcally,
saving cultivates attitudes of responsibility in the present to redress accumulated
problems from the past and foster conditions for ethical action on behalf of the
future. Moreover, I suggest that saving reproduces technoscienti ﬁc, capitalist,
and Christian notions of time in which linear notions of progress toward a realizable
future are fundamental (Sunder Rajan 2006; Cooper 2008; Adams, Murphy, and
Clarke 2009; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015). Yet I argue that saving embryos also
entails practices of care (Puig de la Bellacasa 2011, 2012) that cannot be
reduced to or subsumed by teleologies of progress. This raises for consideration
what kind of time, and relationship to time, saving practices produce.
Saving also illuminates how frozen embryo potentialities multiply rather than
stabilize over time; their futures, I suggest, are dif ﬁcult to ﬁx. Anthropologist Anne-
marie Mol describes practices, or enactments, as techniques for “mak[ing] things
audible, visible, tangible, knowable ”(2002, 33). Building on Mol’ s theoretical
interest in multiple coexisting realities, I focus my attention on how ﬂuctuating
social factors beyond the cryopreservation tank enact multiple potentialities for
embryos. Bridging this approach with recent scholarship on cryopreservation tech-nologies (Radin 2013; Radin and Kowal 2017), this article challenges the myth that
frozen biological materials remain unchanged or singular over time. According tohistorian Joanna Radin, “While preservation has been idealized as the temporary
suspension of life, in actuality, it mutates life” (2013, 269).
 The multiplicity and
non-ﬁxedness of saving as a conceptual framework helps explain these qualities
in the practice of saving embryos.
Research methods
This ethnographic study utilized three research methods –participant observation,
interviews, and textual analysis –to examine the repurposing of leftover embryosNew Genetics and Society 365
within two embryo donation programs in California: the REDEEM Biobank and
the Blossom Embryo Adoption program.1I conducted ﬁeld research for twenty-
seven non-consecutive months between 2008 –2013.2
Based in Dr. Christine Moto’ s well-resourced research lab at West University, I
traced how the lab ’s REDEEM Biobank converts embryos from excess clinical
wastes into precious resources for research. My desk was located next to the
Biobank in the lab manager ’so fﬁce–a choice spot for observing the management
of donated embryos. I shadowed faculty, student and postdoc researchers, andtissue bank staff during their everyday activities in two large lab spaces in theStem Cell Institute. The team of researchers working most often with donated
human embryos became my closest interlocutors. I spent a week in a laboratory
crash course in deriving stem cells, which provide me as a non-scientist hands-on experience caring for precious research materials. I also assisted the Biobankstaff with addressing storage and database problems with their embryo inventory.
Activity in the Blossom program was intermixed with team meetings, calls with
clients and clinics, and embryo matching sessions, all of which revealed how theystrive to transform IVF embryos into adoptable orphans and clients into parents.
Beyond the program of ﬁce, I joined outreach events, annual picnics, and fundrais-
ing galas hosted by the program to learn how they promoted embryo adoption to
broader publics.
During the period of research, I interviewed two main groups: relevant pro-
fessionals (e.g. doctors, nurses, social workers, counselors, embryologists,lawyers, theologians, bioethicists) and embryo program clients (e.g. donors, adop-
ters). I recruited interviewees in person as well as through an email posting to the
embryo adoption program ’s client listserv. Interviews with people recruited in
person were conducted in person; most of the people recruited by email, whooften lived around the country, were conducted over the phone. I completed 200
formal, semi-structured interviews with: 38 embryo adoption professionals; 65
embryo adopters; 30 embryo donors; 30 fertility clinic professionals; 10 tissuebank staff; 20 pre- and postdoc stem cell scientists; and 7 active fertility patients.
I audio recorded and transcribed all interviews. For analysis, I coded interview
transcripts and ﬁeld notes using modi ﬁed grounded theory, which was a systematic
and iterative approach to de ﬁning and categorizing signi ﬁcant themes emerging
from the data. Themes analyzed in this paper draw primarily from codes on respon-sibility, care, value, transforming, and time.
Study settings
At the end of IVF, fertility patients typically have four disposition options for any
unused frozen embryos: discard, move to long-term storage, donate to scienti ﬁc
research, or donate to a person or couple for procreation. For many fertility patients,
deciding what to do with their leftover embryos is emotionally challenging
(McMahon et al. 2003; de Lacey 2005; Provoost et al. 2009). While some366 R. Cromer
studies indicate moderate levels of interest in donating for research or procreation
(Nachtigall et al. 2005; Lyerly et al. 2006; McMahon and Saunders 2009; Lyerly
et al. 2010 ), actual rates of donation are estimated at less than ten percent (Nachti-
gall et al. 2010). Organizations like the REDEEM Biobank and Blossom Embryo
Adoption program rely upon embryo donations to advance their respective saving
missions.
Embryo donation for research
Although Bush’ s2001 executive order stalled the burgeoning ﬁeld of hESC
research in parts of the United States (Korobkin and Munzer 2007), California
experienced it as a boon. In 2004, California voters passed Proposition 71, entitled
the Stem Cell Research and Cures Initiative, which catapulted California onto theinternational scene as a world leader committed to the promise of research with
human embryos. Voters agreed to invest $3 billion dollars of taxpayer funds into
the promise of hESCR over a decade ’s time. This unprecedented budget quickly
surpassed in dollars the entire National Institute of Health ’s annual funding for
human embryonic stem cell research in the United States, which in 2003 totaled$24.8 million (Benjamin 2013, 13); it also surpassed all public investments
made by other countries committed to this research.
Dr. Moto established the REDEEM Biobank through a grant from these tax
dollars as a resource to provide regional scientists access to human embryos.
3
Her research laboratory was comprised of thirty graduate and postgraduate scien-
tists from numerous countries. She received over $28 million dollars in grants
and an endowed professorship at West University to support her investigations inhuman fertility and degenerative diseases.
The Biobank developed a novel informed consent process that allowed research-
ers more streamlined access to embryos for experiments through a universalconsent. Before the Biobank, West University researchers created informedconsent protocols for each experiment and connected with IVF clinics directly to
recruit embryo donors. With the advent of REDEEM ’s standardized consent
process, researchers whose projects met qualifying criteria liaised with the
Biobank –rather than donors –to request embryos.
4The experience for Biobank
donors differed from typical consenting processes. Instead of giving theirembryos to a speci ﬁc study, donors agreed to a range of possible uses, including
IVF, infertility, human development, and stem cells, as well as speci ﬁed preferences
for two classes of research: early human development (Class 1) and genetic repro-
gramming (Class 2). This procurement approach required a multi-year approval
process that involved the scrutiny of numerous ethics committees to ensure compli-ance with federal, state, and CIRM guidelines concerning the protection of embryo
donors. Following these “ethical accounting procedures” (Thompson 2014),
embryo donations began in June 2008.New Genetics and Society 367
To donate embryos to REDEEM Biobank, fertility patients followed these steps:
Potential donors contacted the Biobank coordinator who followed up inquiries by
mailing an introductory letter, six-page informed consent form, and voluntaryhealth questionnaire. Patients were instructed to review the materials at home; if
they decided to donate, they marked their preferences for how researchers may
use their embryos, signed the donation forms in the presence of a witness, andreturned the paperwork to REDEEM for review and ﬁnal consenting over the
phone. REDEEM considered embryo donations complete for patients when theysubmitted their consent forms free of error to the Biobank of ﬁce. The coordinator
then contacted the patients ’fertility clinics to coordinate shipping arrangements to
the lab.
Embryo adoption
Seven programs in the United States offer embryo adoption services. The two
largest programs, the Snow ﬂakes Embryo Adoption program and the National
Embryo Donation Center, have each facilitated the birth of over 500 children to
recipient families in the U.S. and abroad. Since 2002, the Of ﬁce of Population
Affairs has provided federal grant monies to organizations promoting “awareness ”
of“embryo donations and/or adoption ”(US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices 2017). For many of the programs, the ﬁnancial means to forward their mis-
sions is supported through program fees paid for by receiving clients.
The Blossom Embryo Adoption program served a clientele from an adoption
agency in suburban California. During my period of research, the Blossom team
was comprised of a program manager, social worker, and program assistants.Staff decorated the program of ﬁce with Anne Geddes images of newborns, angel
ﬁgurines, and Christian imagery. A placard stating, “Life is fragile, handle with
prayer, ”rested on a bookshelf beneath the Dr. Seuss Horton Hears a Who movie
poster with the tagline: “A person’ s a person no matter how small.” A faux cryo-
preservation tank –used as a prop for Blossom outreach events –was stored in
the conference room with an accompanying sign that reads: “Frozen Embryo
Nursery: Where Children Wait For Their Dreams To Come True. ”
Five of the seven embryo adoption programs in the U.S., including Blossom, use
adoption as a model for matching embryo donors with recipients.
5Donors entered
the Blossom program by completing an application and family pro ﬁle, and submit-
ting FDA-required health records. Once completed, donors spoke with the pro-gram ’s social worker about their matching preferences for qualities they want in
recipients. Prospective recipients also ﬁlled out an application and pro ﬁle, com-
pleted a home study with an adoption agency, and sent a $500 check to starttheir ﬁle. Blossom recipients ranked matching preferences for the embryos (e.g.
race/ethnicity of gamete donors, openness to embryos created with donor egg orsperm). To proceed with matching, they paid another $500.368 R. Cromer
Clients with completed applications entered the matching pool where Blossom
staff searched for possible ﬁts between families based on program rules, client pre-
ferences, and “a little bit of God. ”When staff identi ﬁed a potential match, they sent
donors the prospective recipient ’s proﬁle for review. If the donors approved, their
proﬁle was shared for review by the recipients; if the donors declined, both parties
reentered the matching pool. Recipients paid $3500 when a mutual match was
made and another $3500 when contracts were signed, at which time Blossom coor-
dinated the shipping of embryos to the new fertility clinic. Depending on the level
of contact desired between clients, the agency facilitated communications by for-warding information, such as birth updates and holiday cards.
Responsible repurposing
The REDEEM Biobank and the Blossom Embryo Adoption program shared an
ethical commitment to valuing the potential of frozen embryos. Guided by different
missions, REDEEM and Blossom resolved to save embryos because they saw them
as containing high levels of potential –as pluripotent cells, scarce research
materials, pre-born children, etcetera. They rejected the idea that excess IVF
embryos are without potential use, and thus assumed responsibility for repurposing
reproductive remainders.
“Every embryo counts”
According to an early Biobank brochure, REDEEM ’s mission is “to optimize the
use of precious resources for an increased knowledge of basic science and the
future treatment of human diseases. ”Researchers needed human embryos in
order to continue the work of deriving stem cell lines, studying disease develop-
ment, and testing therapies on human tissues that may lead to cures. “The situation
was that we needed blastocysts, ”the Biobank director, Dr. Pat Dunn explained,
“but we decided that we’ ll take any unwanted embryos. ”REDEEM ’s other
mission, according to Dr. Dunn, was to support ethical decision-making:
The Biobank provides an ethical disposition option for patients who have a difﬁ cult
decision to make …[and] a way for people to dispose of their embryos in an honor-
able way. It is truly a tremendous savior option for people who spent money and effort
to get to what they achieved.
In her view, donating embryos to REDEEM was a respectable contribution to
scienti ﬁc progress that relieves patients from the emotional stressors involved in
embryo disposition decisions.
Dr. Moto’ s research made headlines around the globe, in response to which she
had become accustomed to answering questions about the ethical nature of exper-iments with human embryos. From her vantage point, it was not the destruction of
embryos as human life that is unethical –as opponents of human embryonic stem
cell research have argued (cf. George and Tollefsen 2008) –but the waste of theirNew Genetics and Society 369
potential. “I believe that it is not good to throw human embryos away, ”she stated in
a newspaper interview, “–without studying them .”
Scientists in Moto ’s lab believed that the REDEEM Biobank contributed to
scienti ﬁc progress by recycling valuable resources destined for the trash. Nearly
all of the lab members I met believed that IVF embryos were unusable for preg-
nancy prior to donation to the Biobank. One researcher ’s reasoning captured a
common refrain I heard: “Leftover embryos would just be discarded or incinerated
anyways, so why not use them for good? ”Simone, a senior postdoctoral fellow,
explained what using embryos for good meant to her by invoking notions of saving:
Instead of throwing them away or discarding them, they are being used for these criti-
cal, insightful scienti ﬁc studies …They are very precious things because we can
address really critical things about human development that we couldn ’t otherwise
address if we didn ’t have access to these discarded samples.
Anna, a doctoral student in Moto ’s lab, discussed her career with Catholic family
members by conveying that stem cell scientists like her make responsible use of
unusable embryos:
I have to tell them that the seven embryos I’ m getting for research aren ’t going to
come to term as babies, that there ’s no possibility of that …They are proud of me
because I ’m using potential life that is not going to become actual life, and that
I’m helping someone have higher a quality life and to save lives.
Responsibilities to save were also apparent in laboratory practices, in which I
regularly observed how “every embryo counts, ”as one postdoc put it. Researchers
felt obligated to obtain maximal data by using minimal materials in their exper-
iments; exercise careful lab techniques to ensure the best environment for the
embryos; and adjust their personal lives to commit to rigid schedules that allow
them to care for their in vitro cells during experiments. “As a scientist, ”Simone
explained, “you try to ask key questions, do good science, do good work, and
not be wasteful. ”She elaborated on how she and her lab-mates did good science
by not wasting the potential of human embryos:
We all treat these things like gold. These are very precious samples. There’ s no way
we’d be throwing things away or wasting. We collaborate, we group up, and we try to
maximize our resources. We take it very seriously.
Saving discourses articulate in many ways among scientists in Dr. Moto’ s lab.
They framed research with embryos in moral terms of not destroying valued entities
but rather as repurposing resources destined for wastage. They deployed medical
notions of saving when describing stem cell research as critical and life-saving,and economic connotations when championing ef ﬁciency and mindfulness about
scarcity. For af ﬁliates of the Biobank, REDEEM served a vital function by posi-
tioning itself as a responsible handler of societal refuse and by providing newpurpose for leftover embryos no longer needed for their original intention.370 R. Cromer
“We want to give them all a chance ”
The Blossom program began from the desire to rescue those left, literally and ﬁg-
uratively, in the cold. Tim Shoener, Blossom ’s founder, felt that there was a
“problem in society of valuing life less ”:
I think one of the symptoms of that is 500,000 embryos frozen that we, as a society,
have commodi ﬁed because it ’s more economical. There ’s an attitude in IVF that as
long as you are doing it, you might as well make it by the dozen. But life isn ’t
cheaper by the dozen. Embryo adoption is a movement to remind people that lifebegins at conception.
Like proponents of traditional adoption, the Blossom program considered itself “a
child-focused organization. ”As Tim explained, “There are innumerable children
available, whether embryos or carried by a birth mother or orphanage, that need
a family. Our focus is on recruiting families for these children. ”On many
occasions, Blossom staff expressed hope that they would “work ourselves out of
a job ”byﬁnding adoptive homes for all “orphaned ”embryos.
Even though each donated frozen embryo averages a 12% chance of successful
thaw and implantation (Keenan et al. 2008), Blossom was dedicated to giving every
embryo an equal opportunity to be born. “We consider that every embryo is a
potential continued life, ”said Kathy, the program ’s social worker. “We want to
give them all a chance. ”For this reason, Blossom accepted all frozen embryos
into its program for place with adoptive clients, regardless of how they were
ranked clinically. “We’re not looking at the embryology report saying, ‘Oh this
one’s not really worth saving. ’That’s just horrible to us, ”Kathy explained.
The Blossom program strategically used language to challenge what they con-
sider to be irresponsible and destructive discourses in American society. “What
we call things matters, ”according to Tim:
It means we ’re trying to give the status of what is happening between these families
and the baby that is involved some meaning and some dignity …I think that by ele-
vating the conversation and the terminology that applies to embryos may have some
aftereffect. Just like the abortion language has had a tendency to devalue life, I hope
the embryo adoption debate helps to revalue life.
Blossom enshrined its belief that embryos are valued persons in the program ’s
adoption contract by de ﬁning them as “pre-born children who are endowed by
God with unique characteristics and are entitled to the rights and protection
accorded to all children, legally and morally. ”It also described donors as
“genetic parents ”who “become responsible for the lives of pre-born children in
the embryonic stage ”and the recipients as “adoptive parents ”who “desire to
accept the full moral and legal responsibility for parenting the embryos adopted
hereunder and the child(ren) born therefrom. ”Actively imbuing donors and recipi-
ents with parental responsibilities serves to “make parents ”(Thompson 2005)o f
clients well before any potential children are born. By enshrining kinship languageNew Genetics and Society 371
within a contract that functions as a legal transfer of property –rather than an of ﬁ-
cial adoption –Blossom strived to revalue embryos commonly described as spare,
leftovers, excess, and property.
Embryo donors and recipients expressed commitments to saving by assuming
responsibilities as parents and as stewards of God ’s gifts. Imagining embryos as
children helped motivate many donors, like Belle, a mother of twins through
IVF, to place their remaining embryos for “adoption. ”
I treated my embryos as if I was a pregnant woman who was going to give birth and I
had to decide who was going to raise them. I thought of them as children, not
embryos, when I was placing them. That ’s a very important distinction for me. I
was picturing children, thinking that these are my children. I wanted to be true to
them from the beginning.
Belle and her husband donated through the Blossom program because it allowed
their embryos the opportunity to be born to another family, a “picture ”they
could tolerate better than donating for research or discarding. Many donors alsodescribed an obligation to be good stewards of gifts received from God. Dave, afather by IVF and domestic adoption, compared the duty he felt toward the
seven frozen embryos “entrusted ”to him by God to the task of caring for babies:
Responsibility is created knowing you have been entrusted with those people, those
souls, and you need to think about it as being given seven babies so that it has the
same burden and weight of a born baby. That ’s how I think of it. If you can ’t phys-
ically take care of seven babies, your job, your responsibility is to ﬁnd them a home.
Blossom recipients expressed similar responsibilities for saving embryos as
parents and obedient Christians. Soon after Tiffany ’sﬁrst child was born through
embryo adoption, she began to think about the four embryos that remained in
storage at her clinic. “I feel a big responsibility to go back to them, like a good
parent, ”she explained. “I probably haven ’t prayed for them speci ﬁcally but for
God’s wisdom. At the moment we are trying to ﬁgure out when the best time to
do another transfer would be, when to give them the best chance. ”Yet as discussed
below, the vast majority of recipients experienced infertility and were thus drawn to
embryo adoption as a means for creating a family. In practice, this meant that their
commitments to “giving embryos a chance ”sometimes con ﬂicted with their desires
to“shop”for embryos to maximize the likelihood of pregnancy.
The Blossom program ’s commitment to saving foregrounds each connotation of
the term: a moral imperative to regard embryos as persons, a challenge to economicdiscourses that cheapen embryos, and recognition that women ’s uteruses are
necessary for “giving embryos a chance. ”Blossom staff and participants sought
to revalue embryos that society had yet to fully recognize as precious. In doingso, they positioned themselves as responsible caretakers of what they perceive tobe America ’s most vulnerable.
The REDEEM Biobank and Blossom program both sought to save IVF embryos
from becoming purposeless. This commitment exempli ﬁes what Joanna Radin and372 R. Cromer
anthropologist Emma Kowal ( 2017) call “cryopolitics, ”which are practices in
tissue preservation that strive to make live andnot let die . Preventing embryos
from “dying ”in useless states involved revaluing their potential.
Transforming remainders
This section examines everyday practices within REDEEM and Blossom that tried
to transform frozen embryos into new valued forms. In both settings, embryosunderwent reclassi ﬁcation through paperwork and institutional protocols. Both pro-
grams also attempted to sever past relational ties forged through embryos, likeclaims of ownership and kinship, so that they may be repurposed for newfutures. These efforts mutated and multiplied, rather than stabilized, whatembryos could become.
Trash to treasure
REDEEM Biobank turned leftover embryos into research materials by preparing
them for reclamation and use by researchers. To transform embryos into unclaimed
resources, the Biobank ’s informed consent (IC) process used the category “waste”
as a temporary passage point for donated embryos. In so doing, REDEEM ’s IC pro-
tocol reinforced the prevalent idea in Dr. Moto ’s lab that excess embryos are a
natural by-product of IVF destined for the waste bin (Hurlbut 2015). The IC docu-
ment started by describing IVF as a process through which “materials ”are made to
assist with pregnancy. Some patients faced decisions about “discarding ”what are
described as “excess ”and“unusable biological materials. ”It characterized IVF
as a technique that can produce “nonviable ”cells “in excess of clinical need …
which may not be further required for your treatment. ”If patients decided to
donate their unused embryos, they were assured that these materials werealready en route to the waste bin: “All cellular materials to be used in this research
would normally be discarded because you, the patient, have chosen to discard the
material. ”
Describing IVF embryos as excess, discardable, nonviable, and unusable in the
donor consent materials reclassi ﬁed IVF leftovers as waste-embryos. Anthropolo-
gist Lynn Morgan ’s(2009) study of early twentieth century embryo-collecting pro-
jects in the U.S. noted that waste has facilitated the donation of precious
reproductive remains to science labs for over a century.
6Ethnographers of
twenty- ﬁrst century IVF have also identi ﬁed enactments of the “spare embryo ”
to justify donation to scienti ﬁc research (Thompson 2005; Franklin 2006a ; Svend-
sen and Koch 2008). In Danish IVF clinics, anthropologist Mette Svendsen argued
that “the bin facilitated a rearrangement of meaning ”(2011, 422) for embryos
slated for research. REDEEM ’s consenting process supports the observation by
scholars of tissue economies that IC protocol does not serve the single function
of protecting research participants but rearranges the meaning of biologicalNew Genetics and Society 373
tissues by converting them into unclaimed wastes (Waldby and Mitchell 2006 ;
Hoeyer 2007; Ikemoto 2009; Cooper and Waldby 2014). IC achieves this by oper-
ating as a quasi-property contract that transfers ownership of biological materials
from donors to biobanks (Cooper and Waldby 2014). REDEEM ’s IC form followed
suit by including language about embryo donors having “no legal or ﬁnancial inter-
est in any commercial development resulting from the research, ”a clause that is
now typical of tissue procurement in the United States. Once donors signed the
form, embryos were allegedly severed from their “reproductive pasts ”(Franklin
2006a ) to become a microscopic res nullius awaiting productive reuse.
Newly designated waste-tissues are more easily objecti ﬁed for scienti ﬁc research
and commercial pro ﬁteering (Landecker 1999; Waldby and Mitchell 2006). In this
light, REDEEM Biobank operated as a “waste-exploiting club, ”to borrow sociol-
ogist Martin O ’Brien’ s(1999) term about life within rubbish societies. Like other
forms of waste within tissue economies, embryos donated to the Biobank become“simply another raw material ”that can be turned into a pro ﬁtable resource with the
help of “modern day alchemists ”(O’Brien 1999, 281) –or stem cell researchers –
who are in a “search to renew, revitalize, refurbish and reaf ﬁrm the value of some-
thing that appears, superﬁcially, to possess no value ”(O’Brien 1999, 282).
The prevailing sentiment in Dr. Moto’ s lab, to use the words of one graduate
student, is that REDEEM coordinates the ultimate “trash to treasure.” While the
ability to disentangle embryos from relational ties is essential to scienti ﬁc research,
it is hard won, if ever fully (Svendsen and Koch 2008). In
 narratives from frozen
embryo and fetal tissue donors, scholars notice “trace effects ”(Svendsen 2011) and
“duties to care ”(Pfeffer 2008) that complicate the clean story of converting repro-
ductive leftovers into laboratory treasures.
Abandoned to adoptable
Like the classi ﬁcatory role of waste in REDEEM Biobank, staff and supporters of
the Blossom program strived to turn leftover embryos into “adoptable orphans ”that
may one day be born. The ﬁrst step of transforming IVF leftovers into parentless
children in need of homes involved making them objects of rescue. Blossom bor-
rowed rescue rhetoric from traditional adoption practices in which promoters stra-
tegically use it, as historian Laura Briggs argues, to “mobilize pity …to position
some as legitimately within a circle of care and deserving of resources ”(Briggs
2003, 181). The Executive Director of the adoption agency housing the Blossomprogram connected its mission to Proverbs 24:11 –12, a Biblical passage about
the perils of not rescuing those in need. “Embryos are orphans until they are
born; they are not being cared for, ”he said. “God has a heart for orphans and there-
fore so should we. ”
Critical adoption scholars argue that transforming other people ’s children –many
of whom have one or both living parents –into rescuable orphans involves “can-
celing ”(Yngvesson 2010) their pre-adoptive histories by erasing ties with families374 R. Cromer
of origin and presenting them as autonomous agents ready for incorporation into a
new family (Yngvesson 2002; Dorow 2006; Dubinsky 2010; Briggs 2012;O h
2012).7Blossom used similar “canceling ”strategies to render frozen embryos par-
entless and in need of “homes, ”or, more accurately, uteruses. A former program
manager of the Blossom program described the state of frozen embryos around
the country as an “orphan crisis ”:
This program is not here to provide a new way for families to get children. It ’s here to
eliminate a problem that currently exists, in that there are children waiting to be born.
It’s no different than an orphanage, an orphanage that has never been really looked at
as a really neat opportunity for somebody to add children to their families. It ’s been
seen as a travesty that these children are not being parented.
She contrasted the image of an orphanage –a temporary place for housing allegedly
parentless children –with the image of a warm uterus and argued that embryos, like
children, do not belong in orphanages. Over the years, Blossom staff developed the
imagery of “frozen orphanages ”in promotional videos and materials. As men-
tioned earlier, they created a faux cryotank prop for use at tabling events to con-
vince those who “have a heart for orphans” of where embryos do and do not
belong.
Framing the cryopreservation tank as a risky place challenged the common clini-
cal view that embryos are safely protected in subzero temperatures for an indeﬁniteduration. It also challenged a guiding premise in the Blossom program that embryo
donors and recipients are parents , which means that their embryos could not also be
parentless “orphans. ”This incongruity was clear to Monica, the Blossom program
manager who spent a lot of time talking with clients on the phone about their feel-ings and concerns. Through these conversations, she learned about the affective
labor entailed for donors making embryo adoption plans. Most of them, sheexplained, actively care for their embryos:
Even if they ’re not being implanted, the [donor] parents are really loving them. They
ﬁll out the application, they cry about who to choose. They mull it over in their heads
about what kind of family [and ask], are these the right ones? And then they talk to
their doctor: what is this going to cost, how are we going to do this, and what are our
steps? They’ re just very concerned with going about things the right way.
For the vast majority of Blossom clients, Monica felt that terms like orphan, rescue,and abandoned failed to acknowledge the care that she saw donors bringing to the
donation process: “The embryos aren’ t abandoned but are the opposite: they are
loved and cared for. ”
Treating frozen embryos as abandoned orphans encouraged their rescue by reci-
pients at the same time it erased the role of Blossom donors, who were oftenactively involved in the placement process and beyond. Like waste, orphanhood
served as a necessary, though not uncontroversial, category in the Blossomprogram for converting IVF embryos into adoptable “preborn children ”to maxi-
mize their chances of being born.New Genetics and Society 375
Caring for potential
Despite REDEEM ’s and Blossom ’s efforts, some donated embryos ended up
having no place to go –yet. Embryo potentialities were contingent upon forces
beyond the cryopreservation tank, including the desires of would-be recipients.
While embryo-saving programs did not always realize particular futures for
remaining embryos, they practiced forms of care by adjusting their strategiesover time and waiting patiently for the future to come.
90% Of the supply, 10% of the value
When portable cryotanks arrived with donated embryos to the Biobank, Wendy, Dr.
Moto ’s lab manager, signed the FedEx forms and ﬂipped through the accompany-
ing clinic papers in search for the embryology reports. Every shipment was greetedby staff with some level of anticipation because they were unaware what types ofembryos they were receiving. Since the Biobank accepted all embryos for donation,
the range of possibility was wide: from Day 1 two pronuclear (2PN) stage embryos
to Day 6 hatching blastocysts, in batches of any number, frozen using any variety ofmethod, and made using the sperm and eggs of the intended parents or gamete
donors.
Some days Wendy responded excitedly that they received materials needed by
researchers. “Those have to go to the bottom of the tank, ”Wendy said one after-
noon, describing the location where a couple dozen 2PN embryos would beimmersed deep in liquid nitrogen. “I want to prioritize them.” Researchers studying
human development (Class 1) were the most common users of donated embryos
during my period of research, for whom 2PNs were the most valuable. Yet blasto-
cysts were most often received –a stage of embryo development consistent with
fertility clinic practices of growing embryos in vitro to Day 5 or 6 before transfer-
ring. “Ninety percent of the embryos in the bank are blastocysts, ”Wendy said in
response to an entire shipment of them. “And they probably represent ten
percent of the value. ”
The need for blastocysts to derive human embryonic stem cell lines was the orig-
inal impetus for establishing the Biobank. Since opening, research agendas withinthe Stem Cell Institute ’s labs shifted in response to technological innovations
within stem cell biology. The emergence of induced pluripotent stem cell technol-
ogy now allows researchers to derive pluripotent stem cells from easily obtained
human skin cells rather than solely relying on the stem cells contained within
human embryos. The Biobank originators did not know that blastocysts wouldbe less useful for researchers than initially imagined, nor did they realize how
receiving all types of embryos through a universal consent disconnected from
speciﬁc research needs would create a surplus of unusable materials.
Wendy became concerned about the Biobank ’s near full capacity. The Biobank
had room to store over 50,000 straws, each of which could contain up to threeembryos. “We can ’t just keep getting blast[ocyst]s from people who want to376 R. Cromer
donate, ”she said. She and Biobank users worried about what to do when the tank
reached capacity: Invest in a new tank? Limit the kinds of donations received?
Close the bank altogether, as many other tissue banks in universities around thecountry have done? For Caitlin, a senior postdoc researcher, blastocysts were not
useful today but might be useful tomorrow. “You never know down the road
what you’ re going to need,” she said. “Blastocysts are not being used as quickly
as they are coming in but I think things go full circle sometimes. I feel likescience is like that. ”Despite the burdens of caretaking embryos with no current
purpose, REDEEM staff and users continued to manage the frozen remainders
for a future day when research needs may be otherwise.
Some questions about the Biobank ’s future were answered soon after I left West
University in the spring of 2013. Later that year, the Biobank launched a soft closeby limiting the kinds of embryos they accepted to 2PNs and diseased embryos fromgenetic testing. Since it was one of the only tissue banks in the United States that
received donated embryos without restriction, word spread quickly among fertility
clinic staff. In Wendy ’s view, closure was necessary: “In reality, if we ever use these
blastocysts up it will be astounding. ”The Biobank coordinator sent noti ﬁcation to
EmbryoMail, a public embryology listserv, explaining the new situation forBiobank donors as depending “on the need and usage of such embryos by the
research teams. ”
The news of REDEEM ’s closure might have been a story already foretold; other
tissue banks at U.S. universities opened, received embryos for research, and even-tually shuttered, like banks at the University of Minnesota and University of Michi-
gan. Coinciding with the whispered news of REDEEM ’s closure was another
announcement: Dr. Moto was leaving West University for another. The closure
of the Biobank and dissolution of Moto’ s lab brought urgency to questions of
what would happen with the thousands of embryos in REDEEM ’s storage.
I visited what was left of Moto ’s lab in April 2014 to inquire about the Biobank ’s
future. I sat down to Wendy ’s familiar desk where we discussed what happened
with capital equipment purchased through grant money, and how factors like the
value of the equipment and wishes of the home department, Dean ’so fﬁce, and uni-
versity determined what happens when labs dissolve. Our conversation turned to
the challenge of applying these logics to the Biobank; while the tank itself could
be claimed as West University property, to whom the contents of the tank belonged
remained murky. Wendy proffered an uncertain guess: “It’s a West University
consent, so I imagine the embryos belong to West? I don ’t know …”
The Biobank was not in its usual spot because Wendy had moved it to a hallway
storage closet in anticipation of relocating it. Dr. Moto did not plan to take theBiobank with her, which left the precious materials soon without a fundingsource or a physical location to be stored. “We’re trying to get the Biobank
adopted, ”Wendy said. “The bank is in need of a home. ”She clari ﬁed:“By
adopted I mean paying to support it. ”Wendy seemed con ﬁdent that the Biobank
would ﬁnda
home:New Genetics and Society 377
I can say that it will be taken care of but I don ’t know for sure and the decision is
above my pay grade. I think they are too valuable of a research asset to dispose of
in that way, but I don ’t know how exactly how it ’s going to be done.
In the meantime, she cared for the less-than-precious embryos by helping process
the already consented donations awaiting shipment, monitoring the bank ’s liquid
nitrogen levels every week, and holding out hope for its “adoption. ”
Before leaving Dr. Moto’ s once vibrant lab, I asked Wendy if she thought all of
the efforts made to collect frozen embryos from around the country was worth the
hassle. She explained that human embryos are vital for “good, valid research ”and
“how things will progress ”for treating human disease. “You have to make it worth
it,”she said. For REDEEM af ﬁliates, saving the least valued embryos was justi ﬁed
despite the burdens and uncertainties doing so entailed. The contentious environ-ment around embryonic stem cell research in the U.S. made all donated embryos
more precious to researchers as seemingly scarce resources. They also gave
embryo potentials value by maintaining faith in the progressive direction of stemcell research that, as Caitlin maintained, will circle back around. This faith requiredstaff and researchers to care for embryos with “ten percent of the value” and wait
for circumstances to change.
Special circumstances embryos
The Blossom program similarly faced dif ﬁculty ﬁnding homes for some frozen
“orphans. ”Blossom started having more recipients than donors since 2008,
which allowed receivers a greater number of match opportunities and a greater
level of “pickiness ”in the matching process. “When you wait four months for
theﬁrst match, you’ re not going to be too picky, ”said Monica, Blossom ’s
program manager. “If when you come in and wait 12 h to get a match in your
[email] inbox, it ’s a lot easier to say ‘No.’ Adoptive clients are much better ‘shop-
pers’now. ”
While recipients endorsed the program ’s mission to rescue embryos, they also
wanted to create a family of their own. The vast majority of clients came to theprogram after struggling with years of infertility, pregnancy failures, and losses.
Thus, they often wanted to be matched with embryos that would help them
achieve birth. Blossom staff were critical of prospective recipients who went“embryo shopping, ”which staff described as selecting matches based on criteria
that they felt cheapened the “adoption ”process. “It feels like people think it ’sa
risk of not achieving pregnancy if they don’ thave more than 4 embryos, or a
certain
stage, ”Monica explained, referencing some of the criteria by which recipi-
ents“shop”for embryos. “Because we’ re a Christian agency, ”said Kathy, the pro-
gram ’s social worker, “we want to believe people adopt to save the embryos. ”
Monica wished receiving clients would “think about it just a bit more ”before
turning down matches with adoptable embryos. Following a disheartening rejectionfrom a potential recipient, she vented to the Blossom team about the con ﬂict378 R. Cromer
between the program ’s mission to save embryos and the client-driven matching
process that enables “embryo shopping. ”“Does she want to be a mom? ”Monica
asked. “Because the embryos still need to be born to some family. It ’s not going
to be easy for those embryos anywhere. ”
In 2011, the Blossom program developed an idea to remedy the problem of
picked over embryos. It ﬁrst debuted a “Special Needs ”webpage featuring six bio-
graphies of “waiting embryos ”that were deemed hard to match with recipients due
to medical considerations (e.g. health issues with the genetic parents or siblings, or
a positive infectious disease test result from a gamete donor). Months later,Blossom retitled the webpage to “Special Circumstances ”to include donors with
a small number of embryos and poor clinical rankings by embryologists. Staffexplained that the goal of the webpage is to “get embryos adopted. ”Drawing
details from the donor applications, they created biographies about how donorscame to have remaining embryos and the qualities they want in a recipient
family. The online features, according to Kathy, “paint an entire picture about
the family and existing children and not just the embryo with a particular disease
or issue.” Monica further explained: “We are trying to pull a bit at people’ s heart-
strings. We want people to be captured by the biography and think, ‘Yes of course I
want to give this embryo a story. ’”
In the fall of 2012, I received an e-mail soliciting interest in one of the special
circumstance embryos: “Dear Risa, Are you ready to take a leap of faith? There
is a single embryo waiting for its chance at life. Here is its story …” After
several years of infertility, Dennis and Jolene Bower turned to IVF in 1998. By
year’s end, they had given birth to one son and were paying storage for seventeen
frozen embryos. Nine years later, the Bowers decided they were done having chil-
dren but wanted to help another couple become parents. In 2007, within months ofcompleting their Blossom donor application, the Bowers chose the Daniels to
receive their entire batch of seventeen embryos. Mirroring common practices in tra-
ditional adoption, Blossom prioritized placing embryos with recipients in complete“sibling batches.” Unlike other embryo adoption programs that divide embryos
among numerous families at once, Blossom preferred to ﬁnd“forever families ”
who commit to using all of the embryos they receive in order to limit thenumber of families parenting genetic siblings.
Yet some recipients cannot ful ﬁll this commitment. The Daniels transferred ﬁve
of the Bowers ’embryos, resulting in the birth of son, and felt their family complete.
The Daniels relinquished their use rights to the remaining twelve embryos byreturning them to the Bowers for re-matching with another family, which
Blossom called a “disruption.” In early 2008, the Bowers selected the Millers as
the next family to receive their remaining twelve embryos. Over a year ’s time,
the Millers thawed and transferred eleven embryos without becoming pregnant,then decided to discontinue trying. After disrupted placements with two families,
the Bowers ’original group
 of seventeen embryos had become a batch of one.New Genetics and Society 379
“Since the embryo was already in the program, ”said Sarah, the Blossom
program assistant, “we assumed responsibility. There were seventeen embryos to
begin with. We don’ t want to give up on one. ”Finding a recipient for the single
Bower embryo proved challenging for the Blossom team. The original batch
matched within months, but as it reduced in number and the freeze date grew
more distant, the single Bower embryo ’s special circumstances became more pro-
nounced. The Bower embryo was rejected numerous times by potential recipients
uninterested in the low-graded Day 1 embryo frozen in 1998 using a slow-freeze
method.
A year after starting the “Special Circumstances ”webpage to help embryos like
the Bowers ’be placed, nearly half (25) of Blossom ’s sixty donors were featured on
it. Kathy disliked the length of the list, suggesting that “most [donor embryos]
aren’t special needs; people [recipients] are just being picky. ”But client pickiness
cannot fully account for the growing list of waiting embryos. Program decisions to
welcome all embryos into the program and place embryos in complete sets with
recipients have consequences that made it dif ﬁcult for the program to ful ﬁll its
mission to give every embryo a chance to be born. For instance, more than half
(14) of the special circumstances cases featured donors with one to three
embryos, many of which resulted from disruptions. At the end of 2013, theBowers ’embryo continued to wait along with the embryos of 22 other families.
A shortlist of the least viable embryos for donation were prayed for each weekduring Blossom ’s team meeting to help facilitate whatever they believed God
had in store for the waiting embryos.
Blossom ’s mission involved working persistently to ﬁnd“homes ”for all
embryos, even for those hardest to place. It believed in the inherent worth ofeach embryo and had faith that “pro-life ”Christians would be more motivated to
“adopt to save the embryos ”than to “shop”for would-be children. Yet the
program found that factors beyond the cryopreservation tank and client desiresshaped how embryos were valued as prospective “adoptees.” Thus, they tried to
resolve the problem of “hard to match ”embryos through maintenance strategies
that they hoped would give “orphaned ”embryos a story. They also wait, like
stem cell researchers, for circumstances to be otherwise.
Saving embryos
In recent science and technology studies scholarship, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa
(2015) identi ﬁes three aligned interpretations of the future in technoscienti ﬁcprac-
tices
within late capitalist societies. Some scholars describe an epoch-de ﬁning para-
digm that “associates the future with progress, with an ethico-political imperative to
‘advance ’that remains solidly the orientation of linear, ‘progressivist ’, timelines ”
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2015, 693). Others examine how the future con ﬁgures,
orients, and paces everyday practices. A third vein traces the affective and embo-died impacts of anticipation given the precarity of acting on uncertain futures.380 R. Cromer
Together, these interpretations create a dominant narrative about an “industrious
speeded-up time ”(700) that “suspends and compresses the present ”(707) and
“subordinate[s it] to the linear achievement of future output ”(706). Puig de la Bel-
lacasa raises critical questions about this narrative: “If we accept the possibility of a
diversity of practices and ontologies, the progressive, productionist and restless
temporal regime, although dominant, cannot be the only one ”(694).
In response, she and other STS scholars offer alternative approaches to this
dominant interpretation of time. Puig de la Bellacasa examines care in soil
science, a temporal practice that is not reducible to teleologies of progress orvalue production. Rather, care “suspends the future and distends the present,
thickening it with a myriad of demanding attachments ”(Puig de la Bellacasa
2015, 707) that are messy and non-innocent. Steven Jackson ’s call for greater atten-
tion to repair andmaintenance offers a similar challenge to a “productivist bias ”in
STS toward innovation and the new ( 2014, 234). Described as “an inescapably
timely phenomenon” that“bridg[es] past and future in distinctive and sometimes
surprising ways ”(223), repair facilitates what Jackson calls “broken world think-
ing”by refocusing our gaze on other “timely or rhythmic phenomen[a] ”(235).
These approaches to the future in STS literature help to frame a key question
raised in this article: What kind of kind of time does saving produce? Inspiredby what embryo adoption and stem cell research advocates have in common,
this article examined saving practices within embryo donation programs in the
United States. The multiple valences of saving provided a lens for analyzing theintersections of medicine, capitalism, and Christianity. Also, as a non- ﬁnite verb,
saving emphasized the unﬁnished aspects of repurposing embryos, which cannotbeﬁxed in time or reduced to a singular form. I have shown that embryo savers
share ethical obligations to advance toward a particular future while caring for pur-poseless embryos, including ones they have failed to revalue –yet.
In a certain light, saving reproduces what Puig de la Bellacasa describes as the
dominant technoscienti ﬁc, capitalist, and –I would add –Christian temporalities
in which linear notions of progress toward a realizable future remain fundamental.
8
REDEEM Biobank and the Blossom Embryo Adoption program were establishedin response to what they perceived to be an urgent problem concerning the future:the need for valuable research materials to advance stem cell science and the need
to rescue precious “pre-born children ”from frozen orphanages, respectively. Both
adhered to linear logics of value production by trying to transform IVF leftovers
into more valuable forms. By striving to make frozen embryos “live”and not
letting them “die,”saving aligns with other cryopolitical practices that cohere
around a future-oriented “instinct” to resist devaluation, decay, and death (Radin
and Kowal 2017). When presented with obstacles to realizing embryos ’potentials,
both programs adjusted their strategies but not their goals; they remained steadfast
in their desire to realize certain futures.
Yet saving practices also reveal thick forms of care that require attentive main-
tenance and patient waiting. Circumstances beyond the cryo-tanks “suspended theNew Genetics and Society 381
future ”by multiplying embryo potentials: as discarded waste, unclaimed waste,
invaluable resource, devalued resource, abandoned orphan, preborn child, special
circumstance embryo, waiting embryo, etcetera. These possibilities “thickened ”
the present with messy relationships and forms of value that disrupted “producti-
vist”trajectories from trash to treasure, and abandoned to adoptable. Af ﬁliates of
both programs actively cared: Wendy maintained nitrogen levels for embryos inthe REDEEM Biobank with “ten percent of the value” while Monica curated
online biographies to promote the placement of “special circumstance ”embryos.
Both organizations also practiced waiting –a passive, rather than progressive,
orientation to time that “bridges ”unpredictable ﬂuctuations of pace rather than sub-
ordinating them to one ’s future goals.
Examining the inconspicuous practices and ontologies that structure the every-
day, as critical STS scholars encourage one to do (Mol, Moser, and Pols 2010;
Jackson 2014 ; Denis and Pontille 2015), reveals how fundamental care, repair,
and maintenance are to future-oriented paradigms like saving. As Puig de la Bella-casa argues, “no output, no growth in the future and, one could say, no innovation
or emergence of newness are possible” (2015, 708) without care and maintenance.
While saving practices reproduce dominant imperatives to manage the future today,they also require care and maintenance upon which embryo repurposing programs–and their respective outputs, growth, and innovations –depend.
Notes
1. Considerable efforts have been made to protect the con ﬁdentiality of individuals and
organizations participating in this study. All names of research subjects and locations in this
article are pseudonyms.
2. All participants completed an oral informed consent process and all study procedures were
approved by the author ’s university Institutional Review Board.
3. Proposition 71 established CIRM as the granting agency that oversees the allocation of funds for
human embryonic stem cell research within California and the Independent Citizens ’Oversight
Committee as CIRM’ s governing body.
4. During my ﬁeld research, researchers in Dr. Moto ’s lab requested the majority of embryos. The
Biobank Director took initial steps to implement a software system for managing broaderrequests.
5. Most embryo adoption programs coordinate embryo adoptions without managing a physical
inventory of embryos. By contrast, the National Embryo Donation Center is based in afertility clinic where they receive and store frozen embryos awaiting placement with anadoptive couple.
6. Before prominent embryologists spearheaded a national embryo-collection network in the U.S.,
women typically discarded miscarried and aborted fetuses in unceremonious ways through burial
in the backyard or by tossing down a privy. In order to secure the ﬂow of precious reproductive
remains to his Baltimore lab, Franklin P. Mall and other embryologists collaborated with state
ofﬁcials to ensure the classi ﬁcation of embryo and fetal remains as “medical waste ”rather
than corpses based on their assurance that the remains would be “put to good use” by
researchers (Morgan 2002 ).382 R. Cromer
7. Yet, as critical adoption scholars also note, real and imagined ties to adoptees ’pasts are rarely
severed fully.
8. Modern Christian teleologies of progress most evident in discourses of salvation, end times, and
resurrection are rife within U.S. biomedical and biotechnological discourses, which entwine
scienti ﬁc knowledge with forms of Christian witnessing (Haraway 1997 ), salvation (Sunder
Rajan 2006 ), quests for the Holy Grail (Kay 2000 ), and actualizations of the “gift of life ”
(Sharp 2006 ). Recent anthropological scholarship began “untucking ”religiosity to show how
“secular ”medicine has long depended on the non-secular (Whitmarsh and Roberts 2016 ).
Christian teleologies have long structured capitalism, including recent iterations of speculativeﬁnance and security in advanced capitalist settings (Cooper 2008 ).
Acknowledgement
I am grateful to many people for their contributions to this article. First and foremost, I want to thank
the embryo donation program staff and participants who generously shared their time and insights
with me. Many readers have provided thoughtful feedback on earlier drafts, and I want to express par-
ticular gratitude to the special issue guest editors, the Stanford STS Workshop, Natali Valdez, Anna
Weichselbraun, and the anonymous reviewers for their support.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
This research was supported by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, theWoodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation, and the CUNY Graduate Center.
ORCID
Risa Cromer http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7647-9500
References
Adams, Vincanne, Michelle Murphy, and Adele Clarke. 2009 .“Anticipation: Technoscience, Life,
Affect, Temporality. ”Subjectivity 28: 246 –265.
Benjamin, Ruha. 2013 .People ’s Science: Bodies and Rights on the Stem Cell Frontier . Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Briggs, Laura. 2003 .“Mother, Child, Race, Nation: The Visual Iconography of Rescue and the Poli-
tics of Transnational and Transracial Adoption. ”Gender & History 15 (2): 179 –200.
Briggs, Laura. 2012 .Somebody ’s Children: The Politics of Transracial and Transnational Adoption .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bush, George W. 2001 .“President Discusses Stem Cell Research, ”August 9. https://georgewbush-
whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2001/08/20010809-2.html .
Cooper, Melinda. 2008 .Life as Surplus: Biotechnology and Capitalism in the Neoliberal Era . Seattle,
WA: University of Washington Press.
Cooper, Melinda, and Cathy Waldby. 2014 .Clinical Labor: Tissue Donors and Research Subjects in
the Global Bioeconomy . Experimental Futures. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Crockin, Susan L. 2006 .“The Embryo Wars: At the Epicenter of Science, Law, Religion, and Poli-
tics.”Family Law Quarterly 39: 599 –632.New Genetics and Society 383
de Lacey, Sheryl. 2005 .“Parent Identity and ‘Virtual ’Children: Why Patients Discard Rather than
Donate Unused Embryos. ”Human Reproduction 20 (6): 1661 –1669.
Denis, Jérôme, and David Pontille. 2015 .“Material Ordering and the Care of Things. ”Science, Tech-
nology, & Human Values 40 (3): 338 –367.
Dorow, Sara K. 2006 .Transnational Adoption: A Cultural Economy of Race, Gender, and Kinship .
Nation of Newcomers. New York: New York University Press.
Dubinsky, Karen. 2010 .Babies without Borders: Adoption and Migration Across the Americas .
New York: New York University Press.
Duden, Barbara. 1993 .Disembodying Women: Perspectives on Pregnancy and the Unborn . Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Franklin, Sarah. 1999 .“Dead Embryos: Feminism in Suspension. ”InFetal Subjects, Feminist Pos-
itions , edited by Lynn M. Morgan, and Meredith W. Michaels, 61 –82. Philadelphia, PA: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press.
Franklin, Sarah. 2006a .“Embryonic Economies: The Double Reproductive Value of Stem Cells. ”
BioSocieties 1 (01): 71 –90.
Franklin, Sarah. 2006b .“Mapping Biocapital: New Frontiers of Bioprospecting. ”Cultural Geogra-
phies 13: 61 –64.
Franklin, Sarah, and Celia Roberts. 2006 .Born and Made: An Ethnography of Preimplantation
Genetic Diagnosis . In-Formation Series. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
George, Robert, and Christopher Tollefsen. 2008 .Embryo: A Defense of Human Life . New York:
Doubleday.
Haraway, Donna. 1997 .Modest Witness@Second Millennium.FemaleMan Meets OncoMouse: Fem-
inism and Technoscience . New York: Routledge.
Hoeyer, Klaus. 2007 .“Person, Patent and Property: A Critique of the Commodi ﬁcation Hypothesis. ”
BioSocieties 2
(03): 327 –348.
Hoffman, David I., Gail L. Zellman, C. Christine Fair, Jacob F. Mayer, Joyce G. Zeitz, William E.
Gibbons, and Thomas G. Turner. 2003 .“Cryopreserved Embryos in the United States and
Their Availability for Research. ”Fertility and Sterility 79 (5): 1063 –1069.
Hurlbut, J. Benjamin. 2015 .“Promising Waste: Biobanking, Embryo Research, and Infrastructures of
Ethical Efﬁ ciency. ”Monash Bioethics Review 33 (4): 301 –324.
Hurlbut, J. Benjamin. 2017 .Experiments in Democracy: Human Embryo Research and the Politics of
Bioethics . New York: Columbia University Press.
Ikemoto, Lisa C. 2009 .“Eggs as Capital: Human Egg Procurement in the Fertility Industry and the
Stem Cell Research Enterprise. ”Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 34 (4): 763 –
781.
Jackson, Steven J. 2014 .“Rethinking Repair. ”InMedia Technologies: Essays on Communication,
Materiality and Society , edited by Gillespie Tarleton, Boczkowski Pablo, and Foot Kirsten,
221–240. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kay, Lily E. 2000 .Who Wrote the Book of Life?: A History of the Genetic Code. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press.
Keenan, Jeffrey, Reginald Finger, Jerome H. Check, Douglas Daly, William Dodds, and Ron Stoddart.
2008 .“Favorable Pregnancy, Delivery, and Implantation Rates Experienced in Embryo Donation
Programs in the United States.” Fertility and Sterility 90 (4): 1077 –1080.
Korobkin, Russell, and Stephen R. Munzer. 2007 .Stem Cell Century: Law and Policy for a Break-
through Technology . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Landecker, Hannah. 1999 .“Between Bene ﬁcence and Chattel: The Human Biological in Law and
Science.” Science in Context 12 (1): 203 –225.
Lomax, Geoffery, and Alan Trounson. 2013 .“Correcting Misperceptions about Cryopreserved
Embryos and Stem Cell Research. ”Nature Biotechnology 31: 288 –290.384 R. Cromer
Lyerly, A. D., K. Steinhauser, E. Namey, J. A. Tulsky, R. Cook-Deegan, J. Sugarman, D. Walmer, R.
Faden, and E. Wallach. 2006 .“Factors That Affect Infertility Patients ’Decisions about Disposi-
tion of Frozen Embryos. ”Fertility and Sterility 85 (6): 1623 –1630.
Lyerly, A. D., K. Steinhauser, C. Voils, E. Namey, C. Alexander, B. Bankowski, R. Cook-Deegan,
et al. 2010 .“Fertility Patients ’Views about Frozen Embryo Disposition: Results of a Multi-Insti-
tutional U.S. Survey. ”Fertility and Sterility 93 (2): 499 –509.
Maienschein, Jane. 2014 .Embryos Under the Microscope: The Diverging Meanings of Life . Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McMahon, C. A., F. L. Gibson, G. I. Leslie, D. M. Saunders, K. A. Porter, and C. C. Tennant. 2003 .
“Embryo Donation for Medical Research: Attitudes and Concerns of Potential Donors. ”Human
Reproduction 18 (4): 871 –877.
McMahon, C. A., and D. M. Saunders. 2009 .“Attitudes of Couples with Stored Frozen Embryos
toward Conditional Embryo Donation. ”Fertility and Sterility 91 (1): 140 –147.
Mol, Annemarie. 2002 .The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice . Science and Cultural
Theory. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Mol, Annemarie, Ingunn Moser, and Jeannette Pols, eds. 2010 .Care in Practice: On Tinkering in
Clinics, Homes and Farms . 1st ed. Bielefeld: Transcript-Verlag.
Morgan, Lynn M. 2002 .“‘Properly Disposed of ’: A History of Embryo Disposal and the Changing
Claims on Fetal Remains. ”Medical Anthropology 21 (3 –4): 247 –274.
Morgan, Lynn M. 2009 .Icons of Life: A Cultural History of Human Embryos . Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Mundy, Liza. 2006 .“Souls on Ice. ”Mother Jones , July. https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2006/
07/souls-ice-americas-embryo-glut-and-wasted-promise-stem-cell-research/ .
Nachtigall, Robert D., Gay Becker, Carrie Friese, Anneliese Butler, and Kirstin MacDougall. 2005 .
“Parents ’Conceptualization of
Their Frozen Embryos Complicates the Disposition Decision. ”
Fertility and Sterility 84 (2): 431 –434.
Nachtigall, Robert D., Kirstin Mac Dougall, Matthew Lee, Jennifer Harrington, and Gay Becker.
2010 .“What Do Patients Want? Expectations and Perceptions of IVF Clinic Information and
Support Regarding Frozen Embryo Disposition.” Fertility and Sterility 94 (6): 2069 –2072.
Nightlight Christian Adoptions. 2017 .“Snow ﬂakes Embryo Adoption Program,” October 14. https://
www.nightlight.org/snow ﬂakes-embryo-adoption-donation/ .
Obama, Barack. 2009 .“Obama ’s Remarks on Stem Cell Research. ”New York Times , March 9. http://
www.nytimes.com/2009/03/09/us/politics/09text-obama.html .
O’Brien, Martin. 1999 .“Rubbish Values: Re ﬂections on the Political Economy of Waste. ”Science as
Culture 8 (3): 269– 295.
Ofﬁce of the Press Secretary. 2005 .“President Discusses Embryo Adoption and Ethical Stem Cell
Research. ”President George W. Bush White House Archives. May 24. https://georgewbush-
whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2005/05/20050524-12.html .
Oh, Arissa. 2012 .“From War Waif to Ideal Immigrant: The Cold Transformation of the Korean
Orphan. ”Journal of American Ethnic History 31 (4): 34 –55.
Pfeffer, Naomi. 2008 .“What British Women Say Matters to Them about Donating an Aborted Fetus
to Stem Cell Research: A Focus Group Study. ”Social Science & Medicine 66 (12): 2544 –2554.
Provoost, V., G. Pennings, P. De Sutter, J. Gerris, A. Van de Velde, E. De Lissnyder, and M. Dhont.
2009 .“Infertility Patients ’Beliefs about Their Embryos and Their Disposition Preferences. ”
Human Reproduction 24 (4): 896 –905. doi:10.1093/humrep/den486 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2011 .“Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assembling Neglected
Things. ”Social Studies of Science 41 (1): 85 –106.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2012 .“‘Nothing Comes without Its World ’: Thinking with Care. ”The
Sociological Review 60 (2): 197 –216.New Genetics and Society 385
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. 2015 .“Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of
Care. ”Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691 –716.
Radin, Joanna. 2013 .“Latent Life: Concepts and Practices of Human Tissue Preservation in the Inter-
national Biological Progream. ”Social Studies of Science 43 (4): 484 –508.
Radin, Joanna, and Emma Kowal. 2017 .Cryopolitics: Frozen Life in a Melting World . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Roberts, Elizabeth F. S. 2007 .“Extra Embryos: The Ethics of Cryopreservation in Ecuador and Else-
where. ”American Ethnologist 34 (1): 181 –199.
“Save, V. ”.2018 .OED Online . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Accessed January 15. http://
www.oed.com.stanford.idm.oclc.org/view/Entry/171456?isAdvanced=false&result=3&rskey=
IkGRbS& .
Scott, Christopher Thomas. 2006 .Stem Cell Now: From the Experiment That Shook the World to the
New Politics of Life . New York: Pi Press.
Selin, Cynthia. 2011 .“Negotiating Plausibility: Intervening in the Future of Nanotechnology. ”
Science and Engineering Ethics 17: 723 –737.
Sharp, Lesley Alexandra. 2006 .Strange Harvest: Organ Transplants, Denatured Bodies, and the
Transformed Self . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Spar, Debora L. 2006 .The Baby Business: How Money, Science, and Politics Drive the Commerce of
Conception. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Strathern, Marilyn. 1992 .Reproducing the Future: Essays on Anthropology, Kinship, and the New
Reproductive Technologies. New York: Routledge.
Sunder Rajan, Kaushik. 2006 .Biocapital: The Constitution of Postgenomic Life . Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Svendsen, Mette N. 2011 .“Articulating Potentiality: Notes on the Delineation of the Blank Figure in
Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research. ”Cultural Anthropology 26 (3): 414 –437.
Svendsen, Mette
N., and Lene Koch. 2008 .“Unpacking the ‘Spare Embryo ’: Facilitating Stem Cell
Research in a Moral Landscape. ”Social Studies of Science 38 (1): 93 –110.
Thompson, Charis. 2005 .Making Parents: The Ontological Choreography of Reproductive Technol-
ogies . Inside Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thompson, Charis. 2014 .Good Science: The Ethical Choreography of Stem Cell Research . Boston,
MA: MIT Press.
Thomson, J. A., J. Itskovitz-Eldor, S. S. Shapiro, M. A. Waknitz, J. J. Swiergiel, V. S. Marshall, and J.
M. Jones. 1998 .“Embryonic Stem Cell Lines Derived from Human Blastocysts.” Science 282:
1145 –1147.
US Department of Health and Human Services. 2017 .“Embryo Adoption. ”August 3. https://www.
hhs.gov/opa/about-opa/embryo-adoption/index.html .
Wadman, Meredith. 2013 .“High Court Ensures Continued US Funding of Human Embryonic-Stem-
Cell Research. ”Nature News, January 7. http://www.nature.com/news/high-court-ensures-
continued-us-funding-of-human-embryonic-stem-cell-research-1.12171 .
Waldby, Cathy, and Robert Mitchell. 2006 .Tissue Economies: Blood, Organs, and Cell Lines in Late
Capitalism . Science and Cultural Theory. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. yng.
Whitmarsh, Ian, and Elizabeth F. S. Roberts. 2016 .“Nonsecular Medical Anthropology. ”Medical
Anthropology 35 (3): 203 –208.
Yngvesson, Barbara. 2002 .“Placing the ‘Gift Child ’in Transnational Adoption. ”Law & Society
Review 36 (2): 227 –256. doi:10.2307/1512176 .
Yngvesson, Barbara. 2010 .Belonging in an Adopted World: Race, Identity, and Transnational Adop-
tion. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.386 R. Cromer
