Journal of Urbanism: International Research on
Placemaking and Urban Sustainability
ISSN: 1754-9175 (Print) 1754-9183 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjou20
Scaﬀolding transitions of possibility: the food
walk as embodied method in Singapore
Huiying Ng
To cite this article: Huiying Ng (2021) Scaﬀolding transitions of possibility: the food walk as
embodied method in Singapore, Journal of Urbanism: International Research on Placemaking
and Urban Sustainability, 14:3, 387-408, DOI: 10.1080/17549175.2021.1941203
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17549175.2021.1941203
View supplementary material 
Published online: 30 Jun 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 363
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjou20
Scaffolding transitions of possibility: the food walk as 
embodied method in Singapore
Huiying Ng
 *
Department of Geography, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
ABSTRACT
Resilient food infrastructures responsive to instability and change 
often form at the urban edge of food systems. As such, they could 
take heed of knowledge practices that occur at the urban edge. This 
paper conceptualizes learning as a co-productive activity that can 
be scaffolded by space, and examines how it applies to the re- 
imagination of food systems. By considering walking as a method 
in the design of desired foodscapes, this paper addresses how “time 
niches” foster embodied knowledges of care and haptic connec -
tion. The two cases that illustrate this – a set of walking workshops 
with Singapore-based participants and a visualising workshop with 
visiting conference participants – consider how so-called lay and 
expert knowledges may come together in knowledge co- 
production in future-making practices. The paper explores how 
civic and decolonial practices occur in the sustainability transition 
of food.KEYWORDS 
Knowledge co-production; 
futures; food; walking; 
decolonial methods
Background: food space as urban edge in Singapore
A lively public sphere requires shared communicative skills, an understanding of dialogi -
cal possibility, empathetic connection, and time. Food holds cultural and spatial memory. 
Its tastes and flavours re-establish emotional and neural connections with a space, 
a rhythm, a time – as when someone reminisces about a particular store selling the 
best Hakka yong tau foo (酿豆腐 )1 in Singapore’s People’s Park Complex. In the years of 
nation-building in Singapore, as functional spaces were constructed to shape a new 
citizen identity, redevelopment policies involved the “displace[ment], destr[uction], 
replace[ment]” (Koolhaas and Mau 1995 , 1035 cited in Tajudeen 2007 ) of people’s sources 
of everyday dignity – values, music and radio, spaces, and collective identities and free -
doms. In these times, the flavor of a specific dish was, for many, the only living artefact to 
hold on to.
This paper reaches beyond the study of food as experienced by the eater, towards the 
study of food as landscape-in-transformation: the governance of life and land. I reach 
towards the way foods, and the infrastructures needed to make food, are dreamt up, 
CONTACT Huiying Ng 
 huiying.n@gmail.com
*Present address : As of 2020, the author is affiliated with the Rachel Carson Center for Environment and Society, Ludwig 
Maximilian University of Munich.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed here .JOURNAL OF URBANISM                                  
2021, VOL. 14, NO. 3, 387–408 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17549175.2021.1941203
© 2021 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
desired, and produced. As such, the paper approaches a transforming food system in 
Singapore through Tajudeen’s (2007 ) historical analysis of the cultural reconstitution of 
everyday spaces in Singapore; in his terms, of the “displace[ment], reinvent[ion] and 
sell[ing]” of cultural space (9). The urban edge in megalopolitan realms offers critical 
insight into how food practices change, subvert, and contest land use (Parham 2015a , 
2015b ).
Within dense Asian cities that modernised quickly, urban space holds compounded 
exclusionary effects on different bodies. As Harms (2016 ) notes, transposing Hall, Hirsch, 
and Li (2011 ) original argument about “exclusion’s double edge” to the Asian city: “[while] 
[o]riginally developed to explain agrarian land conflicts in Southeast Asia, these insights 
also characterize Asian cities, where all uses of space, even those intended to promote 
inclusion, are constrained by urban spatial density.” (46) Space use in Singapore, too, 
involves densely-encoded meanings that arise each time land access is considered. I use 
the term “urban edge” to refer to spaces where forms of inclusion-exclusion become 
perceptible.
In the last decade, a string of cities in Southeast Asia, South Asia, and the Middle East 
have begun transformations of this sort: increasingly piggybacking on an inclination in 
urban planning and policy to invest in infrastructure as a form of resilience to urban 
ecological issues (Rizzo 2019 ). These approaches have been heavily critiqued for their 
emphasis on “solutioning,” that is, creating technological responses that ignore the 
unevenness and complexity with which urban problems impact subsets of the popula -
tion, such as in urban flooding in Jakarta (Padawangi and Douglass 2015 ). To add nuance 
to these approaches, a critical scepticism that welcomes nature back into urban life and 
scholarly study is sorely needed (Rademacher 2015 , 144 cited in Harms 2016 ).
Given the decisions to be made around urban food systems, I put forward a proposal 
for our methodological approaches to do two things. First, that they engage the diverse 
bodies that use urban edges of in-/exclusion, and hold space for the “polyvalent” (Harms 
2016 ) perspectives concentrated around them to become perceptible. Second, that 
(socio)material transformation converses with institutional discourse. As Freidburg 
(2001 ) shows in her study of market gardens in an African urban periphery, it is the 
erosion of specific sets of place-based relations that dissolves gardens from the landscape. 
Studies of urban edges that employ place-based methodologies and emphasise the co- 
existence of polyvalent perspectives, do much to weave embodied knowledge directly 
into the work of practitioners and designers.
Pinpointing the urban edge of in/ex-clusion through food
In Singapore, food has enabled the ongoing exchange and negotiation of identity; as 
service, livelihood, and survival. It is integral to play, the subject of heated debates, a living 
demonstration of desire and care, and a storied archive in art and everyday life (Tan 2013 ; 
Tarulevicz 2013 ; Low 2016 ). Just as Tarulevicz views the cultural history of food as a path 
towards unpacking cultural history through food, I argue that moments in which food is 
sourced, made, eaten, shared, purchased and prepared for others or oneself, offers a way 
to understand larger societal preoccupations.
Food is also an intense archive of “a ‘humanity’ that is memory” (Colebrook 2018 , 509): 
of attachment and creation despite spatial transformation and commodification. The 388
 H. NG
globalisation of food in Singapore is often noted to be two-way: of the import of foreign 
foods to Singapore and the spread of Singapore’s multi-ethnic and hybrid food to other 
parts of the world (Kong 2016 ). Singapore’s foodie culture is also celebrated in its business 
of tourism, embraced by the state and state-owned enterprises; as Kong notes, “a former 
Minister for Trade and Industry even remarked at the amount of time Singaporeans spend 
eating and constantly thinking about food, declaring this fixation with food to be ‘an 
inseparable part of our culture’” (Kong 2016 ).
I trace this fixation with consuming, consumption, and the already-next meal, to what it 
hides. Foodie culture hides a spatiality of loss. Seeking this spatiality has brought me to 
the urban edges of Singapore where knowledge about food is produced – and eventually 
to see these spaces as parts of a cultural foodscape of the urban possible. I see foodscapes 
as a bricolage of small places and spaces, that evolve through time as a continuously 
emergent product of processes that shape how food, producers, eaters, and sellers come 
together (Blake 2018 ). Blake’s formulation understands diverse, minor foodways as being 
made possible within inherently uneven and unjust foodscapes that are inordinately 
produced to serve powerful or dominant groups. As her study of Chinese food in 
Hong Kong shows, this inherent unevenness arises from the ways foodscapes are often 
produced as symbol and material by urban governance of the time to “generate group 
formation . . . in order to suit the purposes of the regime in charge” (Blake 2018 , 1048). 
Processes occurring within foodscapes intersect with sociopolitical processes of justice, 
struggle, and emancipation, and the actions of actors within foodscapes may be directed 
not only towards commerce, eating, identity and image, or specific biological or nutri -
tional aims as Parham (2012 ) notes, but also towards increasing voice and participation in 
co-producing more inclusive food systems. Within sustainability transitions and partici -
patory systems, food systems are a site where the visceral, material, social, and symbolic 
exist as co-constitutive parts of emerging structures (Rut, Davies and Ng 2020 ; Rut and 
Davies 2018 ).
The political ecology of foodscapes in an age of ecological breakdown
The study of urban foodscapes includes an emphasis on place (e.g. Parham 2012 , 
2015b ), and has garnered attention amongst geographers asking how a “political 
ecology of the body” (Hayes-Conroy and Hayes-Conroy 2008 cited in Goodman 
2016 ), shapes food procurement practices and politics. Goodman (2016 ) presses 
scholarship to go beyond “the eater/food interface and the variable a/effects this 
has on bodies” (263), to give equal attention to the practical struggles that come 
with increasing austerity and food injustice. He points to the need for scholarship to 
not only take seriously the “eaters” most active and conscious of food’s agency, but 
also other people who work, live, and eat within other parts of the food system: 
“such as those who labour over, stack, prepare and sell our food” (Goodman 
2016 , 261).
This is also a matter of how something is known. prioritising discourse around feelings, 
emotions, and affect, a political ecology of the body centralises, indeed reifies a specific 
cultural notion of the human body. This precludes the possibility for other perspectives to 
exist. Rākete (2017 ) describes the Maori notion of people as “a function of the land, of the JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 389
whenua” in which “[w]e are not beings who are of the land but the land itself in the act of 
being. We are a function of the ecology, we are ecology foremost” (no page number).
How food studies is done, then, has implications for how it discusses scale: the scale of 
the structural – of the global industrialised agri-food and consumption sectors, of local- 
scale food systems, of institutionally-configured processes (Blake 2018 ) – and the scale of 
attention and responsibility: of which affective narratives and practices by which bodies, is 
worth attending to (Goodman). Thinking with these proposals, this paper probes further: 
it proposes that the in-between scale most directly affects how foodscapes are produced: 
that how different bodies come to see or co-produce a way of knowing a foodscape, has 
material and symbolic effects. This paper shows that it is possible to hold the relational 
perspective of vital materialism while methodologically attending to how place-based 
knowledge co-production arises. Specifically, it illustrates how this may occur when 
groups of usual and “unusual” suspects – the people who are typically considered “expert” 
and others who are not, but has skillsets that speak to other knowledges needing to be 
recognised – cross specific boundaries together, generating place-based, ground-up 
understandings of how food matters.
While I focus on Singapore in this paper, I suggest that this frame extends to other 
cities grappling with the need for resilient food networks as production yield volatility 
grows. As Diehl, Sia, and Chandra (2019 ) argue of Singapore, even the highest bidder may 
lose privileged access to food sources once social, political and environmental circum -
stances change (56). I take seriously how ideas of urban form, spatial perception and the 
imaginative horizon of possibility are affected by the locations, backgrounds, and posi -
tions that individuals speak from, and its impact on how each person can be heard (Peake 
et al. 2018 ; Pratt 2018 ; Leaf 2011 ). I join conversations around the particular and the 
universal, and decolonial methodologies that argue for a focus on how and whom (Wynter 
(2003 ); Mignolo and Walsh 2018 ). The urbanist methodologies I seek are human/e ones 
that understand transcendence as an act of inter-active trust, forged between knowledge 
producers that each see a particular set of horizons and limits, at once material and 
institutional.
In this paper I sketch out a place in the field of urbanism for spaces that scaffold – that 
support and let grow – pathways toward resilient, collectively-sighted socio-technical 
futures. Drawing on psychologist Lev Vygotsky’s work on the zone of proximal develop -
ment (1978 ), scaffolding, or guided learning, is a term used to refer to processes that aid 
a person in reaching novel learning often involving the aid of a more experienced peer 
(Wood, Bruner, and Ross 1976 ; Berk and Winsler 1995 ). It has spatio-temporal dimensions 
as a process that occurs through time, and takes place in space. In Singapore, scaffolding 
has a spatial and infrastructural dimension to it, emerging before planned urban devel -
opment. Art critic Lee Weng Choy (2001 ) has noted how built space and language cohere 
in the way Singapore is continually sited in the eternal present – its skyline is positioned to 
be of global relevance, while construction scaffolding continually reappears, markers of 
ceaseless redevelopment. Lee’s observation of the city’s persistent ahistoricity – as “Sign- 
apore, a society of the spectacle par excellence ” (25) – remains highly astute today. In 
exchange for the practical illusion of becoming a self-made nation, space in Singapore 
loses its ability to support a society’s ingenious growth.
In contrast to the sociospatial engineering that has displaced, reinvented, and sold 
during relative climate and economic stability, scaffolding spaces that let grow may offer 390
 H. NG
footholds to reorient our daily life, in a time of collective global disorientation. It is only in 
space in the particular that our “inner eyes,” as Wynter (2003 ) puts it, of classification and 
linear thinking can undergo a practice of transformation, and through doing something in 
that space, that we can evolve “[a] theory so other it is practice” . . . in continuous 
movement, contention, relation, and formation” (Mignolo and Walsh 2018 , 19).
Spaces, I argue, are repositories for emotional memories, assisting in recall, in imagina -
tion and extrapolation, in curiosity – even from the razed grounds of reconstructed space 
and hollowed time. Extending urban political ecology’s investigative, radical imaginations 
of urbanization (Angelo and Wachsmuth 2015 ), to “reconstitute the possible” within 
critical urban studies (Pinder 2015 ), I ask if future food imaginaries can be made through 
collective study with unusual suspects, and if so, what spaces and times foster them?
Dislocated bodies: people and foodscapes in the deterritorialisation of Singapore
Edible urban spaces in Singapore are more than merely natural tropical lushness, or monu -
ment to technocratic achievement. To analyse them this way would be to doubly obscure 
resident practices which are already invisibilised. Goh (2015 ) demonstrates the depth to 
which state imaginaries reach into society, which is replicated in the image citizens – and 
residents – hold of the state. Paying attention to everyday life in a country versed in folding 
civic narratives into its history, as Goh has argued, means to be aware of the spatial ways in 
which civic participation tilts towards the “knowledge that serves power,” away from “form[s] 
of knowing which refuse to acknowledge power” (Lefebvre [1974] 1991 , 10).
Much as with land deterritorialisations in Southeast Asia, deterritorialisation in 
Singapore has involved the eradication of subsistence food production, physically, cultu -
rally, and in the national narrative. Formerly self-sufficient communities which drew on 
subsistence farms and shared food production practices up till the 1970s (Chou 2015 ) 
were cut into nuclear family units, and communal spaces were replaced by private and 
public space. The first economic minister phased out farming and farmers, observing that 
agriculture had no role in the economy of a modern nation (Chou 2015 ). Simultaneously, 
as language education was formalised in school and the use of dialects was discouraged 
(Chua 1997 ), kampung (village) life’s spatial practices and temporal cycles were rendered 
non-sensical and untranslatable.
The production of the urban in Singapore, as elsewhere, is thus coupled with the 
production of knowledge about a specific spatio-temporal map of the urban. These urban 
foodscapes, produced within a specific place and political economy, are implicated in the 
land deterritorialisations rampant in Southeast Asia, financed by capital managed by 
urban centres increasingly beyond the West (Schoenberger, Hall, and Vandergeest 
2017 ). As land regimes deterritorialise smallholders in the global South, scholarship 
needs to move from disparate foci on urban agriculture or rural food sovereignty move -
ments, to, as Tornaghi and Van Dyck (2015 ) suggest, strengthen the visibility of pathways 
to resilient foodscapes supported by socio-technical systems, through collaborative 
knowledge-making.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 391
Time niches for urban food-growing
If we accept that foodscapes are made of urban edges and rural spaces (Parham 2015b ), 
then producing a sustainable foodshed – a “geographical area from which a population 
derives its food supply” sustainably (Peters et al. 2009 , 2) – rests on the integration of 
cycles of energy circulation within urban and rural food producing, distributing, and 
renewing systems.
This task is much more than operational. (Re)producing arable land requires us to shift 
our attention beyond industro-productionist temporality, the machinery of supply chains, or 
the rhythms of global commodity consumption.Instead, food systems – including people, 
lands, operational and regulatory systems working-in-tandem – need to transition towards 
working within temporalities of care. Drawing on permacultural understandings of temporal 
immersion and “time niches,” Puig de la Bellacasa suggests the import of practicing “care 
time,” as, caring becomes better when done again , as relations are intensified and strength -
ened. These are also the methods we need to notice how the politics of producing a food 
system can change: how we can re-orient – haptically and culturally – within the socio- 
technical system that supports our food system.
This paper returns to Puig de la Bellacasa’s notion of a “time niche” to clarify the 
political ecological relations that might intensify during intentional food walks. I have 
argued elsewhere that edible urban spaces are “active moments” in the city that shock, 
surprise, or introduce people to different relations – both human and more-than-human 
(Ng 2020 ). I now wish to show how spaces scaffold learning and care time .
Walking as future-making methodology
The walk as a political and haptic act
The walk is an activity associated with sense, touch, and perception. I will refer to these as 
hapticity: where the temperature, moisture, texture, tactile quality, density and weight, 
and sharpness of matter – one’s body, other bodies – is experienced. Hapticity has been 
studied as a method of learning from interviewees and as an object of research (Pierce 
and Lawhon 2015 ), but it is also a gate to elusive things of greater interest – “what you 
don’t know you are looking for” (Solnit 2000 , 11) – in social and healthful non-productive 
time. This includes haptic connection beyond the self: as individual bodies’ proprioceptive 
senses expand to be “part of [a] hybrid network” (Bennett 2017 , 5).
Walks thus have the potential to invigorate and re-orient relationships between 
humans and non-humans, creating conditions to get out of one’s mind – to undo the 
“instrumentalization, degradation and evacuation of more-than-human agency” (Puig 
de la Bellacasa 2015 , 701). Amidst the lushness of scent and sight, a garden scaffolds 
a dialogue for humans to bodily enter a different temporality and hapticity.
The task of building more inclusive food systems thus needs both capacity for dialo -
gue, and also the dense temporalities of care that come through haptic connection 
between more-than-human bodies. Plant-soil-person connections may begin to mend 
socio-ecological separation at the “engagement interface” (Doberneck, Miller, and 
Schweitzer 2012 ), where “the dynamic interplay of internal and external forces of change 
leads to emergence” (79).392
 H. NG
Methodology
I employ a mixed methodology of surveys, sketches, interviews, and ethnography, across 
two case studies. These help me to consider multiple perspectives within a food walk.
One layer of analysis responds to the “collaborative associations” that can occur with 
more-than-human agents to “frame . . . shared questions and concerns or recraft existing 
empirical methods” (van Dooren, Kirksey and Münster 2016 , 11). A second layer engages 
with examining the affects, ideas, and recalibrations that are co-produced in these 
moments of the walk. Third, to focus on these walks as particular acts of future-making 
that expand what Appadurai (2004 , 2013 ) calls the “ethics of possibility,” attention is given 
to the “ethnographic moment” of coeval interpretation (Ohm 2013 ), where events and 
interpretations are witnessed as they occur at particular and ephemeral moments in time. 
Vineeta Sinha (2018 ), in her methodological musings on being an ethnographer located 
always in her fieldsite, writes of the “intensification and augmentation of fieldwork 
moments” (268) that she lives within, in which it becomes impossible for conversations 
to not veer towards “‘the future’ in the (ethnographic) present of fieldwork moments” 
(274). Research may be ongoing, but the object of research – if it is to bear witness to, and 
throw its lot in with an ethics of possibility – is not to capture an ethnographic present, 
but to evolve a methodology for collective study with the ethnographic moment.
Shared time and care time matters to coeval relation. Harney and Moten (2013 ) work 
on collective study sits within critical race studies, entangled with an embodied history of 
refusal and disavowal of continuing under conditions of slavery, subjugation, and the 
elevation of one group over others. Collective study refuses the idea that it is possible to 
judge some concerns as being of universal priority over others. Collective study as 
emancipatory praxis offers insight into how lay and seemingly-expert groups can be 
brought together in ways that also, “stay with the trouble” of multi-species encounters 
(Haraway 2016 ).
Case study 1 considers how participants visually engage, and describe, their experience 
of visiting edible gardens, in a set of walking workshops. This research passed the internal 
departmental ethics review board in the Department of Psychology, National University of 
Singapore, and data collection was completed between February to April 2017. With case 
study 2, I reflect inwardly on my own experience as the facilitator of a workshop held in 
September 2017.
The gardens
As spaces to scaffold learning experiences, the gardens serve as a backdrop where the 
visceral (e.g. sensations of heat and humidity, coolness and wind) sits with the emotional 
(e.g. sensations of displacement, distance, or connection). Gardens were selected based 
on their location, land use type, garden layout, and regulatory conditions (see Table 1 for 
more details), which I perceived through my work with a local organising network. All 
gardens selected were community gardens under the National Parks Board’s “Community 
in Bloom” programme.
This case study will focus on just two of the five gardens; I outline the rest in brief (see 
Table 1). Edible growing in public is officially possible only through the National Parks 
Board’s “Community in Bloom” Community Gardens programme. Although edible plants JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 393
occasionally appear on public roadside verges, roadside verges are not legally viable for 
use by residents as there is no direct process to acquiring them for edible planting; plants 
grown without administrative permission on verges are routinely removed or cut down. 
Multiple agencies or bodies hold administrative oversight of different land parcels: for 
waterworks, landholding, green space and trees, public housing, and at times, tourism. 
Roadside verges that do persist often continue to do so under the aegis of a supportive 
grassroots leader, or Member of Parliament.
Clementi gardens, which served as a site of the first and second case study, was made 
of edible growing plots that originally sprawled around a north-bound railway connecting 
Singapore to Malaysia. This land belonged to a Malaysian railway company, KTM Berhad, 
until 2011, when the station was decommissioned. In 2015, the Urban Redevelopment 
Authority invited design submissions for the Rail Corridor to be converted into accessible 
and public space, and planned development began to inch its way down the tracks.
A second set of gardens, in Khatib, sat on rooftops – still a relatively new typology in 
2017. These gardens were constructed on the roof of a multi-storey carpark of a public 
housing estate. During our visit, we were guided by one of the first gardeners, a self- 
taught gardener/farmer who was on the path to food self-sufficiency.
Methods
With the first workshop, 11 interviews were conducted out of 76 participants who signed 
up for the walks and who gave informed consent. Participants were asked to make 
sketches before and after visiting the garden, and sketches were collected after the 
walk ended. A separate process of informed consent for the interview was done prior to 
each interview. The number of spontaneous interactions during the walks were not 
tracked. In total, contact time included 10 hours of interaction with 76 participants 
(2-hour sessions, five sessions).
The second set of workshops was designed without the intention to be brought into 
formal research. I write about it here with an ethnographer’s eye to inflect my description Table 1. Garden characteristics.
Garden, focus, and location on the 
island Topics that arose Themes-in-context
Clementi Avenue 4: allotment and 
park connector, railway 
(West)1: orderliness Value of gardens – for aesthetic, production, 
social, or other benefits?
Joo Chiat Haig Road: square garden 
plots in a single line next to 
a linear park, public residences 
(East)2: leasing of plots, access, 
improving garden 
managementInput and resources (time, cost, effort) of 
setting up a garden, garden 
management, garden allocation 
programme
Aljunied Crescent: placemaking, 
residential and elderly daycare 
centre 
(Southeast)3: fencing of gardens, exclusion 
and propertyGarden in relation to regulatory authority, 
sharing of common space, organisation 
and structure of surrounding spaces
Khatib: composting, HDB public 
housing, rooftop gardens 
(North)4: elements, cycle, sun, gardeners’ 
decision-making, resource 
sharing, different techniquesLinks between social ecology, “ecological 
community” and energy sharing, 
distribution and cycling
National University of Singapore: 
workplace gardening 
(West)5: Institutional regulation, 
growing in institutional spacesUniversity infrastructure partnerships, 
rooftop gardens394
 H. NG
of the first, which was explicitly designed with empirical qualitative methods common in 
evaluation outcome research. Addressing both case studies, I wish to examine how 
a workshop’s convenor may witness and participate with a partial point of view, and 
bear witness to facets that illuminate viewpoints and responses. Since no official informed 
consent process was used, no informant names or identifiers are used, and I follow the 
method of ethnography to theorise scholarship’s role in knowledge production.
Case study 1: walking workshops as scaffolding spaces
Background to the walks
In 2015, several collaborators and I formed an initiative, Foodscape Collective , which began 
holding walks to home and community gardens. The aim was to bring people together, to 
show that common topics could be established with strangers, and to bring people out of 
their homes and private spaces into a low-commitment, public space.
In order to understand what participants on these walks gained, I conducted a study in 
early 2017 to evaluate the outcomes from such walks, following a model of public health 
programme evaluation I was familiar with. I hoped to understand how ecological knowing 
and identity might consolidate despite the diffused, dispersed opportunities they have to 
form in urban, often alienating living conditions. The scope of this paper permits only 
a discussion of hapticity and space, but see Ng (2020 ) for a discussion of motivations, 
learning gains, and ecological identity.
Treatment of data
Fieldnotes and sketches made during the research were read alongside extracts of 
the interview transcripts to address the primary question: how do haptic connections 
in space enable new learnings at the engagement interface? While a thematic 
analysis was conducted as part of the initial evaluation study, I do not present it 
here in full – readers may refer to the supplemental materials for a methodology and 
participants’ sketches of gardens. The sketches were read cognizant of Kevin Lynch’s 
(1960 ) work on mental mapping but eschews a strictly Lynchian approach in order to 
focus on other ways of reading space. In this paper, I instead seek to contextualise 
participants’ responses, extracted from that thematic analysis, alongside my observa -
tions of the walking workshops as a haptic and temporal niche, and an engagement 
interface.
The process of the walk
Each walk lasted two hours. The duration was based off garden walks that had been 
conducted by Foodscape Collective, which was always set at 2 hours – people left or 
stayed as they could. Participants registered via an online form: either in response to 
a publicity poster distributed through a university mailing list comprising students, staff 
and faculty, advertising a “walking workshop,” or on Facebook via the Foodscape 
Collective’s network. Table 2 reflects the process of each walk. I took fieldnotes where I 
could, during and after each session, which I reviewed through the course of the weeks JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 395
(see for example, Table 3).This self-selection process meant we received applications from 
a group of people more inclined to health, wellness, and/or with an educational back -
ground not representative of the larger population.
Individual interviews with participants who agreed to be interviewed (N = 11) after the 
walk focused on two questions: “What brought you to the workshop?” and “What did you 
get out of it?”
Observational data
As I found, the garden as a foodspace gave people concrete examples to think through 
abstract concepts of sustainable, healthy food production, civic space, and the govern -
ance of public and green space (see Supplemental Material Figure 1–2). Inspecting the 
sketches, some visual elements stand out: where some people recall orderly architectural 
lines, others recall the density of relations, plants, and terrain (see Supplemental Material). 
Coupled with the walk as a haptic time niche for seeing and tasting chillies and limes (see 
Supplemental Table 3; Attentive Intimacy, Interviewee 2), participants could visualise the 
contextual needs and fruits of the garden through dialogue and their senses. As 
a participant-walker mentioned,
Before [the workshop], I had just thought about design and people’s use. But now I will also 
consider the organisation, how to implement planning, how to interact with residents, ask 
about their opinions about the planning, provide feedback, make some amendments . . . 
(Interviewee 6)Table 2. Process of each walking workshop.
Session Flow 
Participants asked to draw perceptions of urban nature in advance of workshop 
Meet, brief self-introductions 
Facilitator assesses participants’ comfort levels 
Walk, talk to garden/ers 
We gather 
Participants are asked to sketch new images or add to their current images 
Brief discussion 
Explain research
Table 3. Fieldnote observations.
Looking back over the four weeks, my impressions of topics had its own momentum – for myself at least, as the only 
person connecting across the sessions. . . . In the first session we had students considering these questions [about 
edible gardens] without personal experience or context as a lens. In the second session, we had individuals who had 
waited for a community garden for a long time, so our conversations took a turn towards how we might have 
garden spaces that more people could share. Questions of land, effort, time taken to improve the soil in Singapore, 
and provide space for everyone came in. In the third session, these concerns – and the need for soil rehabilitation – 
came to the fore. The topics were common space, soil and fences. In the 4th session, the cycle of holistic plant life 
and biodiversity entered as [the gardener] had introduced composting, and also walked people through the way the 
garden was set up, his garden’s bee hotel and bees in other plots. Looking at plots also led to considerations about 
how the spaces were spread out and shared. 
Each garden we visited had acted as a prime and stimulus for thought and processing. These gardens prompted 
responses either in agreement of, or in contrast to. The sprawl of the Clementi gardens on the slope prompted 
thinking about orderliness. Students’ questions about productivity (for coursework assignments) prompted 
a consideration of health and social uses of the garden. The allotments prompted questions about the possibility of 
sharing space.396
 H. NG
The concreteness of being in space, walking physically through them and thinking visually 
about them with participants, allowed close observation of spatial imagery. The pattern of 
order in Singapore more closely resembles the rooftop garden (Figure 1). This visual 
pattern clearly stood out to participants, as their post-walk sketches illustrated (see Figure 
2 and Supplemental Material for examples).
This spatial imagery is a visual imprint of civility, cleanliness, civic order, and 
good citizenship. In Lefebvrian terms, such imagery enters the spatial practice of 
the planner, student or apprentice, and constrains representational spaces by 
binding people’s imaginations. As another, female, interviewee’s words suggest, 
Figure 1. Orderly plots on the rooftop garden.
Figure 2. Participant’s sketch of the rooftop garden.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 397
this spatial practice and imagery is viral and quick to inhibit behavior even for 
people new to Singapore:
the other day, across the road—people cross here—there’s a pavement. And there’s a green 
space with some trees, and for the first time (I’ve been here about 8-–9 months), about 10 
days ago. I saw two people sitting on the grass, under a tree. I’ve never seen that before. So, 
even though there’s grass, there’s trees, people will walk on the pavement, not interact with 
the green. They won’t walk on the grass. I don’t know whether it’s not allowed—I didn’t see 
any signs not to walk on the grass. But I don’t know whether it’s something people have just 
assumed—because you see those signs everywhere, or you think “this is Singapore of course 
I should not walk on the grass” you know, where you have these assumptions of order or of 
rules, having to follow them. So I went to Bedok Reservoir and I saw beautiful trees there, and 
I wanted to climb them, but I didn’t because at the back of my mind, I thought ‘I’m sure it’s 
not allowed to climb a tree here” so I didn’t, whereas if I were in India, I would have, because 
there aren’t so many rules. (Interviewee 8)
Other spatial imageries, however, did emerge (e.g. Figures 3, 4 and 5). Against the back -
drop of inattention to foodspaces, time niches can cultivate attention to (re)productive 
labour. Many walkers were motivated to join the walk for the experience and to learn 
something new, motivated by a sense of misalignments in their present state of urban 
living. They longed for connection and community, the experience of trust (see 
Supplemental Figures 3; Enchantment and connection), and talked about things that 
daunted or veered from their efforts to move towards their longing (see Supplemental 
Figures 3; Ecological misalignments).
Figure 3. Participant’s sketch of Clementi gardens.398
 H. NG
Figure 4. Participant’s sketch of Clementi gardens.
Figure 5. Participant’s sketch of Khatib gardens.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 399
As walkers return to the scene of a memory-dense space, memory markers refresh 
opinions and identities that intervening years of work have isolated (see Supplemental 
Figures 3; Governance of and access to space, Interviewee 2). Other walkers pointed out 
how being outside creates connection and concern for the non-human world, and how in 
contrast, “[w]hen you sit in your office, you see it less and less it concerns you less and less, 
you don’t feel like you should do something about it” (Supplemental Figures 3; Attentive 
Intimacy, Interviewee 8).
Case study 2: (Over-)producing the engagement interface, visualising 
foodways with scholars
After the five workshops ended in April 2017, an opportunity came to present a workshop 
at the International Visual Methods Conference 5 (IVMC5) conference, held that year in 
Singapore. I proposed this walking workshop with a slant: to consider how the methodol -
ogy would work with a combination of participants of different types of expertise. Self- 
conscious that this was an academic conference, I over-prepared. This section deals with 
what constitutes scaffolding space for collective study, where power relations, knowledge 
capital, time, and habituated attachments are thought to count for more.
Process
This workshop was attended by 15 conference attendees across professions and disciplines. 
It involved a 1.5-hour walk in the Clementi gardens, (Figures 6), followed by a break, and 
a 1.5-hour session to visualise these gardens as part of broader foodways. Participants were 
to work towards creating an imagined map of future foodways, alongside four invited 
resource persons working in biowaste conversion, food waste consumer perspectives 
research, environmental education, and a sensor-irrigated urban farm in a local public 
university. Maps of the elevation and built infrastructure, including community gardens 
Figure 6. Participants visiting the Clementi garden.400
 H. NG
and cycling paths in the area, were prepared. Figures 7 and 8 show images from the second 
session. As I did not set out with the intention of using the workshop as material for 
research, I do not include details or direct quotes from participants.
Figure 7. Map drawn by two early career scholars during part two.
Figure 8. Early career researchers and resource person making an imagined garden.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 401
“Productive” time and knowledge products
Observations
The walk and workshop fullfiled its aims of a research visit, social time, and mode of 
intimate knowing, but it did not initially seem “productive” to me. It missed a transition 
point between Parts One and Two of the workshop: a collective discusion about the new 
sketches participants had made. This was postponed to after the tea break – from which 
some returned, but not all. Subsequent interaction with the resource persons made for 
a cosy Part Two – rather different from the workshopping I had in mind! As a participant 
observed to me, it took time for ideas to settle; the temporality of the workshop was 
better suited to diffused information acquisition. Participants re-purposed the session into 
one for networking and information-sharing: choosing to stay in the realm of prospecting, 
reviewing resources, interacting with the resource persons, and learning to identify the 
edible and inedible plants that a resource person had brought along. Smelling, tasting, 
chatting, curiosity and excitement, mistake-making, and exchange – are all forms of 
learning at the engagement interface.
Discussion: moving beyond probabilistic imaginations
The workshop defied the probable acts I had planned. Indeed, time was just one of the 
reasons participants actively resisted the “asks” of Part Two. The task of reimagining the 
food system, and of the amount of actual knowledge deemed necessary before an 
imagined food system could be proposed also seemed a challenge. A participant 
observed that the act of imagining departed from the usual analytic approach common 
in academic disciplines. The youngest, “early career” scholars, researchers and resource 
persons eventually set their hands to utilising the resources to attempt something.
Resistance to the structure of the workshop also provokes questions about what the 
ideal conditions for collective study can be. Were participants wary of departing from 
social codes of scholarship? Or were they resisting the directive nature of the space set up 
for “imagining futures”? Just as ordinary people prospecting for better futures explore the 
edges of possibility, while technocrats chart out the map of future probabilities, the 
participants in this workshop defied my map of probable encounters and steered their 
own course of the possible. Taking matters into their own hands, the participants had 
a much more productive session for themselves – truly creating new signs and selves – 
and not for the workshop.
Engagement interfaces that bring people of differently-recognised levels of expertise 
together in one time niche, are underpracticed and undervalued. Writing about myself in 
order to examine this engagement interface brings moments of minor embarrassment 
and humour. My ability to re-read, and re-write text makes me extra circumspect about 
the possibility of their misinterpretation, whereas spontaneous conversation occurs with 
a world also moving, also forgetting.
Yet, long-term embodied pedagogy that embraces the shared attention time of 
different knowledges, rather than single-authored perfection, might do many things to 
expand the “ethics of possibility”: ease the pressure of being asked to perform the role of 
the researcher, and give space to all to explore our multiple roles as experts of some 
things and beginners at others.402
 H. NG
Discussion
I began by asking how transitions towards sustainable food systems might be scaffolded, 
by focusing on how knowledge emerges at the urban edges of foodscapes. A collective 
study at such edges has led me to focus on (i) haptic connection; ii) care time; iii) and 
spatial imagery that speaks to the ethics of possibility, rather than probability: the 
expansion of possibilities without the distraction of pre-determined future time.
While this study does not permit a deeper engagement with participant socio -
demographic factors, gender, age, income, profession and educational background 
shape the dynamics at play in any engagement interface. What is deemed permis -
sible in urban public space is associated with persons’ senses of safety in public, 
which at the minimum involves legal status, appearance and dressing, and ethnic, 
racial or gendered meanings that different bodies hold to others. These factors and 
their relationship to the everyday uses of green edible space deserve more thorough 
investigation in future work.
Walking for futures, food, and possibilities
The notion of the future as a thing to be “made” undergirds environmental futures 
visioning approaches (Davies 2014 ; Davies, Doyle, and Pape 2012 ). The valuable product 
of such sessions are not models so much as the formation of real relationships of humility 
and unknowing, to prospect the future together. And yet, focus tends to be on what is 
produced, rather than the immersive quality of interactions in these time niches. This 
paper adds to a growing repertoire of methods that strengthen the status of unusual 
suspects as experts in their own right, such as design charrettes in codesign and scenario- 
planning, by reflecting on time niches in place-based methodologies (also see Bolleter 
and Hooper 2021 ; Howard and Somerville 2014 ).
“Future-making” as Appadurai (2013 ) defines it is an emancipatory practice 
cutting across social strata. In these walks and workshops, I find engagement 
interfaces of haptic connection, sensation and attention that give rise to moments 
of knowing – as sudden understandings generate symbolic meanings not in the 
service of power, as Lefebvre [1974] 1991 would put it. This is already occuring 
outside of workshop settings, as everyday life bears witness to co-occuring socio- 
technical transitions, in pandemic, disaster, and aftermath temporalities. 
Recognising this as a form of social learning, defined by Castán Broto et al. 
(2014 ) to involve the collapsing of silos, leads us to see that systems of disparate 
social actors are beginning to notice new sets of reference points and symbolic 
worlds. As we have seen with the case studies, engagement interfaces can provide 
opportunities for haptic connection within time niches. While visioning workshops 
seek to create a novel cognitive space by asking participants to adopt a positive 
solutions-focused approach in imagining (Davies, Doyle, and Pape 2012 ), the sur-
prises of collective work may reveal themselves not in productivist imaginings, but 
in non-/re-productive immersing with other beings . Emphasis can be placed on how 
immersion, not production – working in the “generative” space of systems change 
before extending into synthesis or decision-making – is prioritised in “open” or 
“participatory” methods.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 403
Future research: toward regional food assemblages
Alternative storied timelines for the future are blooming. Many of these emphasise building 
long-term collective intelligence through relational capacities and networks (e.g. IPES-Food 
2021). Food is becoming a choice-point for decision-makers: it presents constraints that tie 
urbanization to specific, material principles aligned with the continuing sustainability of 
human life (Parham 2015a ). We may also say that food, as an intense archive of visceral 
humanity, makes what is most elusive to rhetoric – particular bodies’ emotions, fears, needs 
for safety – directly accessible for coeval perception, and re-imagination.
Spaces for the collective study of resilient socio-technical systems rebalance our ethics, 
moving our scholarly and productive time away from the appeals of techno-scientific 
probability (Appadurai 2013 ). Because not all uncertainties are the same, or reducible to 
risk (Fearnley 2018 ), embodied understandings that arise from place are instrumental in 
differentiating between actual risk (to bodies that bear different degrees of risk) and 
calculated levels of uncertainty (which bear assumptions of universality). An urban food 
pedagogy that cultivates spaces and skills to engage these issues would smoothen the 
transition from one socio-technical system to another, as part of systemic transformation.
Conclusion: scaffolding adventurous pedagogies of food
“Adventurous food futures,” as Michael Carolan (2015 ) notes, are “not about making the world 
a better place as much as making a place for better worlds – a messy politics that is more 
interested in what Deleuze (1995 , 169) calls ‘collective creation’ than representation” (150). 
Carolan continues, “it would be more productive, in the sense of adding to the world rather 
than subtracting from it, if conditions were created that invite collaboration, co-experimentation, 
and a coming-together that radically alters how we think and do” (150, my emphasis).
Singapore’s self-conscious status as a foodie city is continually renewed as uniquely 
Singapore . Yet, much of its food is sourced beyond national borders. A global food system-in- 
transition offers exceptional moments of rupture, to create material and institutional structures 
for better foodscapes, where an ethics of possibility (Appadurai 2004 , 2013 ) seeds itself in 
collective study.
Note
1. A fragrant soup served with stewed soybean, stuffed ingredients, and fine handmade egg 
noodles with sweet and spicy sauce.
Acknowledgments
I am most grateful to Professor Tim Bunnell at the Department of Geography, National University of 
Singapore (NUS) for his comments on an early draft of this piece, to Monika Rut for enthusiastic 
discussions and shared work, and to Associate Professor Konstadina Griva at the Lee Kong Chian 
School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University for her early guidance on the psychological 
research referenced here. I would also like to thank friends and gardens known through the 
Foodscape Collective, and Goh Ter Yang at the Office of Environmental Sustainability, NUS—who 
did much more than name the “walking workshops.”404
 H. NG
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Notes on contributor
Huiying Ng is a scholar-practitioner exploring rural-urban agricultural learning networks, agroecol -
ogy, and community resilience. As a doctoral student of anthropology at the Rachel Carson Center 
for Environment and Society, Munich, Germany, she works with the project team Environing 
Infrastructures, supported by the Volkswagen Foundation’s freigeist research grants. She channels 
her energy for knowledge exchange and action research methodologies into the Soil Regeneration 
Project (Singapore). Huiying’s academic work has appeared in Urban Studies, the Journal of 
Environmental Policy and Planning, Psychology & Health, and two edited volumes on Singapore 
(Amsterdam University Press) and Southeast Asia (Routledge). She has a background in psychology, 
English literature, and geography from the National University of Singapore.
ORCID
Huiying Ng 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8214-4144
References
Angelo, Hillary, and David Wachsmuth. 2015 . “Urbanizing Urban Political Ecology: A Critique of 
Methodological Cityism.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 39 (1): 16–27. 
doi:10.1111/1468-2427.12105 .
Appadurai, Arjun. 2004 . “The Capacity to Aspire: Culture and the Terms of Recognition.” In Culture 
and Public Action , edited by Vijayendra Rao and Michael Walton, 59–84. Palo Alto, California: 
Stanford University Press.
Appadurai, Arjun. 2013 . “The Future as Cultural Fact.” Chap. 15 In The Future as Cultural Fact: Essays 
on the Global Condition, 285 –300. New York: Verso.
Bennett, Julia. 2017 . “Walking to the Beat: (Re)producing Locality through Walking Days.” Chap. 4 In 
Senses in Cities: Experiences of Urban Settings , edited by Kelvin Low and Devorah Kalekin-Fishman, 
1st ed. Oxfordshire: Routledge.
Berk, L., and A. Winsler. 1995 . Scaffolding Children’s Learning: Vygotsky and Early Childhood Learning . 
Washington, DC: National Association for Education of Young Children.
Blake, Megan K. 2018 . “Building an Unjust Foodscape: Shifting Governance Regimes, Urban Place 
Making and the Making of Chinese Food as Ordinary in Hong Kong.” Local Environment 23 (11): 
1047–62.
Bolleter, Julian, and Paula Hooper. 2021 . “The Importance of Place-Based Narrative in Suburban 
Forest Planning.” Journal of Urban Design 26 (2): 209–234. doi:10.1080/13574809.2020.1851594 .
Broto, Castán, Stephanie Glendinning Vanesa, Emma Dewberry, Claire Walsh, and Mark Powell. 
2014 . “What Can We Learn about Transitions for Sustainability from Infrastructure Shocks?” 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 84: 186–196. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2013.08.002 .
Carolan, Michael. 2015 . “Adventurous Food Futures: Knowing about Alternatives Is Not Enough, We 
Need to Feel Them.” Agriculture and Human Values 33 (1): 141–152. doi:10.1007/s10460-015- 
9629-4 .
Chou, Cynthia. 2015 . “Agriculture and the End of Farming in Singapore.” In Nature Contained: 
Environmental Histories of Singapore , edited by T. Barnard, 216–240. Singapore: NUS Press.
Chua, Beng Huat. 1997 . “Between Economy and Race: The Asianisation of Singapore.” In Space, 
Culture and Power: New Identities in Globalising Cities , edited by Ayose Oncu and Petra Weyland, 
23–41. London and Atlantic Highlands: Zed Books.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 405
Craps, Stef, Rick Crownshaw, Jennifer Wenzel, Rosanne Kennedy, Claire Colebrook, and Vin Nardizzi. 
2018 . “Memory Studies and the Anthropocene: A Roundtable.” Memory Studies 11 (4): 498–515.
Davies, Anna R. 2014 . “Environmental Futures.” In The International Encyclopedia of Geography: 
People, the Earth, Environment, and Technology, 1–6. Wiley-Blackwell and the Association of 
American Geographers. doi:10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0169 .
Davies, Anna R., Ruth Doyle, and Jessica Pape. 2012 . “Future Visioning for Sustainable Household 
Practices: Spaces for Sustainability Learning?” Area 44 (1): 54–60. doi:10.1111/j.1475- 
4762.2011.01054.x .
Deleuze, Gilles. 1995 . Negotiations 1972–1990 . New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Diehl, Jessica Ann, Ching Sian Sia, and Amanda Jennifer Chandra. 2019 . “Cities Linked through Food 
Trans-Boundaries: The Case of Singapore as an Agri-Pelago.” In Agrourbanism , edited by 
Enrico Gottero, 45–60. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978- 
3-319-95576-6 .
Doberneck, Diane M, Paula K Miller, and John H Schweitzer. 2012 . “Sometimes There are No Notes: 
An Auto Ethnographic Essay of a Collaboration at the Engagement Interface.” Journal of Higher 
Education Outreach and Engagement 16 (3): 57–86.
Dooren, Thom van, Eben Kirksey, and Ursula Munster. 2016 . “Cultivating Arts of Attentiveness.” 
Environmental Humanities 8 (May): 1–23. doi:10.1215/22011919-3527695 .
Fearnley, Lyle. 2018 . “After the Livestock Revolution.” Medicine Anthropology Theory 5 (3): 72–98. 
doi:10.17157/mat.5.3.378 .
Freidberg, Susanne E. 2001 . “Gardening on the Edge: The Social Conditions of Unsustainability on an 
African Urban Periphery.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91 (2): 349–69.
Goh, Daniel P.S. 2015 . “Singapore, the State, and Decolonial Spatiality.” Cultural Dynamics 27 (2): 
215–226. doi:10.1177/0921374015585225 .
Goodman, Michael K. 2016 . “Food Geographies I.” Progress in Human Geography 40 (2): 257–66. 
doi:10.1177/0309132515570192 .
Hall, Derek, Philip Hirsch, and Tania Murray Li. 2011 . Powers of Exclusion: Land Dilemmas in Southeast 
Asia . Singapore: NUS Press.
Haraway, Donna. 2016 . Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Harms, Erik. 2016 . “Urban Space and Exclusion in Asia.” Annual Review of Anthropology 45 (1): 45–61. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-102215-100208 .
Harney, Stefano, and Fred Moten. 2013 . The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black Study . 
New York: Minor Compositions.
Hayes-Conroy, Allison, and Jessica Hayes-Conroy. 2008 . “Taking Back Taste: Feminism, Food and 
Visceral Politics.” Gender, Place and Culture 15 (5): 461–73. doi:10.1080/09663690802300803 .
Howard, Zaana, and Mary M Somerville. 2014 . “A Comparative Study of Two Design Charrettes: 
Implications for Codesign and Participatory Action Research.” CoDesign 10 (1): 46–62. 
doi:10.1080/15710882.2014.881883 .
Kong, Lily. 2016 . “From Sushi in Singapore to Laksa in London: Globalising Foodways and the 
Production of Economy and Identity.” In Food, Foodways and Foodscapes: Culture, Community and 
Consumption in Post-Colonial Singapore , edited by Lily Kong and Vineeta Sinha, 207–241. World 
Scientific.
Koolhaas, R., and B. Mau. 1995 . “Singapore Songlines: Portrait of a Potemkin Metropolis . . . or Thirty 
Years of Tabula Rasa.” In S,M,L,XL , 1035, 1009–1089. Rotterdam: OIO Publishers.
Leaf, Michael. 2011 . “Periurban Asia: A Commentary on ‘Becoming Urban.” Pacific Affairs 84 (3): 
525–534. doi:10.5509/2011843525 .
Lee, Weng Choy. 2001 . “Citing and Re-Siting.” Art Journal 60 (2): 24–26.
Lefebvre, Henri. [1974] 1991 . The Production of Space . Translated by Donald Nicholson-Smith. 
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Low, Kelvin E. Y. 2016 . “Tasting Memories, Cooking Heritage: A Sensuous Invitation to Remember.” 
In Food, Foodways and Foodscapes: Culture, Community and Consumption in Post-Colonial 
Singapore , edited by Lily Kong and Vineeta Sinha, 61–82. World Scientific.
Lynch, Kevin. 1960 . The Image of the City. Massachusetts: MIT Press.406
 H. NG
Mignolo, Walter, and Catherine Walsh. 2018 . On Decoloniality . Durham and London: Duke University 
Press.
Ng, Huiying. 2020 . “Recognising the Edible Urban Commons: Cultivating Latent Capacities for 
Transformative Governance in Singapore.” Urban Studies 57 (7): 1417–1433. doi:10.1177/ 
0042098019834248 .
Ohm, Britta. 2013 . “The Ethnographic Moment: Event and Debate in Mediatized Fieldwork.” 
Westminster Papers in Communication and Culture 9 (3): 71. doi:10.16997/wpcc.174 .
Padawangi, Rita, and Mike Douglass. 2015 . Water, Water Everywhere: Toward Participatory Solutions 
to Chronic Urban Flooding in Jakarta. Pacific Affairs 88 (3): 517–50.
Parham, Susan. 2012 . Market Place: Food Quarters, Design and Urban Renewal in London . Newcastle 
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Parham, Susan. 2015a . Food and Urbanism: The Convivial City and a Sustainable Future . 1st ed. 
London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Parham, Susan. 2015b . “The Productive Periphery: Foodspace and Urbanism on the Edge.” In 
“Localising Urban Food Strategies: Farming Cities and Performing Rurality,” 7th International 
Aesop Sustainable Food Planning Conference Proceedings , edited by Giuseppe Cina and 
Egidio Dansero, 118–130. Torino: Politecnico di Torino.
Peake, Linda, Darren Patrick, Rajyashree N Reddy, Gökbörü Sarp Tanyildiz, Sue Ruddick, and 
Roza Tchoukaleyska. 2018 . “Placing Planetary Urbanization in Other Fields of Vision.” 
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3): 374–386. doi:10.1177/0263775818775198 .
Peters, C. J., N. L. Bills, J. L. Wilkins, and G. W. Fick. 2009 . “Foodshed Analysis and Its Relevance to 
Sustainability.” Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems 24 (1): 1–7. doi:10.1017/ 
S1742170508002433 .
Pierce, Joseph, and Mary Lawhon. 2015 . “Walking as Method: Toward Methodological 
Forthrightness and Comparability in Urban Geographical Research.” Professional Geographer 
67 (4): 655–662. doi:10.1080/00330124.2015.1059401 .
Pinder, David. 2015 . “Reconstituting the Possible: Lefebvre, Utopia and the Urban Question.” 
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 39 (1): 28–45. doi:10.1111/1468-2427.12083 .
Pratt, Geraldine. 2018 . “One Hand Clapping: Notes Towards a Methodology for Debating Planetary 
Urbanization.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 36 (3): 563–569. doi:10.1177/ 
0263775817716555 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015 . “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of 
Care.” Social Studies of Science 45 (5, SI): 691–716. doi:10.1177/0306312715599851 .
Rademacher, Anne. 2015 . “Urban Political Ecology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 44: 137–152. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-102214-014208 .
Rākete, Emilie. 2017 . “In Human: Parasites, Posthumanism, and Papatūānuku.” In The Documenta 14 
Reader , edited by Quinn Latimer and Adam Szymczyk. Munich, London, New York: Prestel Verlag.
Rizzo, Agatino. 2019 . “Megaprojects and the Limits of ‘Green Resilience’ in the Global South: Two 
Cases from Malaysia and Qatar.” Urban Studies 57 (September 2017): 1520–1535. doi:10.1177/ 
0042098018812009 .
Rut, Monika, and Anna R. Davies. 2018 . “Transitioning without Confrontation? Shared Food Growing 
Niches and Sustainable Food Transitions in Singapore.” Geoforum 96 (January): 278–288. 
doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.07.016 .
Schoenberger, Laura, Derek Hall, and Peter Vandergeest. 2017 . “What Happened When the Land 
Grab Came to Southeast Asia?” The Journal of Peasant Studies 44 (4): 697–725. doi:10.1080/ 
03066150.2017.1331433 .
Sinha, Vineeta. 2018 . “Methodological Musings.” In Urban Asias: Essays on Futurity Past and Present . 
Berlin: Jovis.
Solnit, Rebecca. 2000 . Wanderlust: A History of Walking . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tajudeen, Imran bin. 2007 . “State Constructs of Ethnicity in the Reinvention of Malay-Indonesian 
Heritage in Singapore.” Traditional Dwellings and Settlements Review 18 (2): 7–27. doi:10.2307/ 
41758325 .
Tan, Corrie. 2013 . “Theatre Review: Cook A Pot of Curry Is Just Warm but Still Good.” The Straits 
Times , July 8.JOURNAL OF URBANISM
 407
Tarulevicz, Nicole. 2013 . Eating Her Curries and Kway . Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Tornaghi, Chiara, and Barbara Van Dyck. 2015 . “Research-Informed Gardening Activism: Steering the 
Public Food and Land Agenda.” Local Environment 20 (10): 1247–1264. doi:10.1080/ 
13549839.2014.949643 .
Vygotsky, Lev S. 1978 . Mind in Society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wood, David, Jerome S. Bruner, and Gail Ross. 1976 . “The Role of Tutoring in Problem Solving.” 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17 (2): 89–100. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.1976.tb00381.x .
Wynter, Sylvia. 2003 . “Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards the 
Human, after Man, Its Overrepresentation – an Argument.” CR: The New Centennial Review 3 (3): 
257–337. doi:10.1353/ncr.2004.0015 .408
 H. NG
