Studia Socjologiczne 2025
2 (257), 191–216
ISSN 0039−3371, e-ISSN 2545–2770
DOI: 10.24425/sts.2025.154902
Received 28 February 2025 
Accepted 25 May 2025
Louisa Ashley, former Head of Law, Leeds Law School, Leeds Beckett University, louisa.ash-
ley@leedsbeckett.ac.uk, ORCID 0009-0003-0018-6829; Diana María Rodríguez Herrera, Uni-
versity of Pereira, dianarodriguez@utp.edu.co, ORCID 0000-0003-4156-8586; Agata Hummel, 
Uniwersytet Warszawski, a.hummel@uw.edu.pl, ORCID 0000-0002-8979-602X. 
Tekst opublikowany na warunkach licencji Creative Commons Uznanie autorstwa-Użycie 
niekomercyjne-Bez utworów zależnych 3.0 Polska (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0 PL). Louisa Ashley 
Leeds Beckett University
Diana María Rodríguez Herrera 
University of Pereira
Agata Hummel 
Uniwersytet Warszawski
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING  
A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE
This article explores seed-saving and sharing as acts of resistance within a legally 
liminal space, challenging an exclusionary legal framework shaped by anthropocentric 
and capitalocenic perspectives. The Corporate Seed Regime has displaced long-standing 
local seed systems, prioritizing individual ownership over commons, peasant rights, and indigenous ontologies. Drawing on Victor Turner’s concept of liminality, we examine 
this space as one of critique, and with potential of reform and new sociopolitical system. 
Through desk research and fieldwork in the UK and Colombia, we compare resistance 
tactics of local seed organizations. Our findings highlight a growing global movement, 
led by the Global South, that promotes alternative seed discourses and everyday sharing 
practices, now influencing the Global North. This movement underscores the polarization 
between informal, community-driven seed exchange and formalized legal systems, 
illustrating ongoing struggles for seed sovereignty and posthuman legal recognition.
Key words: Corporate Seed Regime; seed sovereignty; legal liminality; resistance tactics
‘Turning the living wealth of the planet into the property of corporations 
through patents is a recipe for deepening poverty and ecological crisis… 
The destructive Anthropocene is not the only future.’ (Shiva, 2014, p. XX)
Introduction
In this article we argue that the seed saving and seed sharing practices of seed 
sovereignty occupy a space of legal liminality and amount to acts of resistance 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL192
to an otherwise exclusionary legal framework. The analysis of the observed 
practices as situated in a liminal legal space provides an ideal methodological 
context for examining the boundaries of capitalism. Our conclusions emanate from desk-based research and preliminary fieldwork in the UK and Colombia. In the modern world, liberalism has prospered as a means of pursuing and pro
-
tecting individual human liberties and freedoms, be they economic, social, or cultural, from state and institutional interference. However, principles of liber
-
alism have supported the emergence of a neoliberal paradigm that has contrib -
uted to producing a global environmental crisis (Artaraz and Calestani, 2015). 
Too often, development policies and practices involving the extractive industries 
and agri-business have presided over the use of, and value attributed to, land and 
ecosystems (Filip, 2020; Glaab and Stuvøy, 2021). In tandem, the Green Revo -
lution and food security (as opposed to food sovereignty) rhetoric has supported the advancement of transnational corporations whereby 40% of the world’s seed 
market share is held by two companies, German company Bayer (23%), and US 
based Corteva Agriscience (17%), amounting to over $18,000 million between 
them (Clapp, 2025). 
Such advancements have materialised in a departure from farming as an 
integral part of culture, territorial autonomy and localised sovereignty, and a loss of knowledge and practices that are experiencing a (re)discovery by those 
following principles of agroecology. Agroecology has been defined as an alterna
-
tive paradigm of agri-food systems that involves applying ecological principes to 
agri-food systems in specific socioecological contexts. This paradigm prioritiz -
es the knowledge and agency of indigenous peoples and peasants, who practice place-based politics (Pimbert et al., 2021). The concept of agroecology encom
-
passes a broad spectrum of approaches to farming, including organic, regenera -
tive, nature based, biodynamic, permaculture and endogenous farming practices, etc. While such approaches are being rediscovered around the world, they 
remain on the margins, as state-funded research and development, along with 
overseas aid, continue to focus on industrial agriculture (Pimbert, 2022).  
The modernisation and industrialisation of farming into large-scale agri-busi
-
ness has included a move away from the farming of traditional landraces to new 
ostensibly high yielding varieties supported by significant investment in and 
reliance upon high input farming and homogenisation aligned with transgenic 
and genetically modified organisms and F1 plant varieties.1 It is primarily driven 
by corporate consolidation, international trade agreements, and intellectual 
1 F1 plant varieties refer to the first-generation offspring of two distinct, stable parent plants. 
These hybrids are bred for desirable traits such as higher yields, disease resistance, and uniform 
growth. However, seeds saved from F1 plants typically do not retain these characteristics in 
subsequent generations.
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE193
property regimes that prioritize profit and ownership over collective, indigenous, 
and peasant rights. The result is that local seed systems developed and practised 
since farming began have been displaced by a largely exclusionary legal regime 
that prioritises individual proprietorship rights over global commons, peasant 
rights, and indigenous ontologies. This approach to seed governance neglects 
‘knowledge embedded in seed-related practices of communities (such as 
practical breeding skills)’ in favour of ‘codified, decontextualized knowledge 
(such as knowledge connected to ex situ collections)’ (Sievers‐Glotzbach et al., 
p. 510). This neglect has been fuelled, among other things, by undervaluing of the nature and importance of farmer seed networks (Coomes et al., 2015). Seed 
networks are dynamic, decentralized systems where farmers exchange seeds, 
knowledge, and practices. These networks are critical for maintaining genetic 
diversity, fostering innovation and perpetuating local knowledge.
Sievers-Glotzbach et al. (2021) warn that such neglect will continue given 
‘current technological developments involving digital sequence information that allows immaterial aspects (genetic codes) to be isolated from their material 
sources (seeds) and cultural backgrounds’ (Sievers-Glotzbach et al., 2021). The result is an ever-yawning gap between human activity and nature, characteristic 
of the Anthropocene – or Capitalocene, to stress the role of capital in shaping 
reality (Moore, 2017) – that has seen the mapping and valuation of land based 
on monocrop yield driven by high input agro-chemicals upsetting biodiversity, 
biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem resilience (Loreau, 2000). Previously bio
-
diverse landscapes have been rendered monocultural (waste)lands, and degraded lands (de la Bellacasa, 2015). Consequently, many farmers see their productive 
capacity and territorial autonomy diminished: their territory – both cultural and 
physical – shrinks (Denzin et al., 2019).
These conditions of global crisis have attracted the attention of a range of 
researchers who critique modern ontologies as the main source of scientific and 
legal certainty (Blaser, 2009; Haraway, 2016; Wynter, 2003). They emphasize 
the importance of moving beyond traditional binaries and challenge the idea 
of humans as isolated entities, proposing instead a more integrated understand
-
ing of the world. This perspective serves as a relevant starting point for works 
that – like this one – recognize the social nature of models and practices in 
plant breeding, and distribution. In contrast to the dominant legal frameworks shaped by anthropocentric and capitalocenic perspectives, these systems have been forced to occupy a legally liminal space.
The presence of a liminal legal space centred on seed is an apt methodolog
-
ical situation in which to observe the limits of capitalism, which take the form of social, ecological, cultural and legal problematics. The social problematic 
arises due to the problem of equity; the ecological – due to the recent trajectory 
towards genetic uniformity and reliance upon high input, high mechanisation, 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL194
and long, complex (and polluting) supply chains; the cultural – because of ho -
mogenisation and dispossession of ways of living and cultural heritage; and the 
legal – as a result of the restrictive global governance of seed and the ensuing 
liminal legal space occupied by seed savers and seed sharers. We focus on the 
cultural and legal problematic. 
The concept of liminality, originating from studies of the ritual in anthropol -
ogy (Turner, 1969a, 1969b) inspires legal studies (Laurie, 2017) as it aims to 
represent a certain culture by exploring its limits or negation. Liminality con -
ceptualizes people and practices in transitional spaces where they defy catego -
rization, bypassing fixed approaches and eluding the typical systems of clas -
sification that define roles and positions in cultural contexts. Liminal entities exist in a state of being neither here nor there; they occupy a space between the 
positions defined by law, tradition, social norms, and rituals. Because liminali
-
ty represents a temporary condition, it is considered a unique space for critique, 
reform, and the development of new political and sociocultural systems. In this 
space, conflict can emerge, along with resistance and social creativity (Turner, 
1969a, 1969b).
Whilst legal scholarship has applied the idea of liminality to uncertainty 
in the context of an individual’s documented or undocumented migrant status (Chacon, 2015; King-Irani, 2006; Menjívar, 2006), and to the regulation and law 
of human health research (Laurie, 2017), we apply the concept to elements of 
the relational practice of seed sovereignty, namely, seed saving and seed sharing. We talk about relational practices from the consideration that seeds do not exist 
in isolation, but rather they originate, develop and are preserved in specific so
-
cio-ecological contexts. Corporate Seed Regimes promote the commodifica -
tion of seeds through genetic engineering and the enforcement of intellectu -
al property rights, and marginalise indigenous and local agricultural practices 
(Escobar, 2016). In this sense, we propose liminality as an epistemic condition, 
to consider the complexity surrounding the phenomenon of seed saving and seed 
sharing. In the liminal spaces, tactics of resistance unfold. We understand them as the everyday, often subtle ways in which individuals subvert and navigate the 
structures imposed by dominant systems of power – such as governments, insti
-
tutions, or capitalist markets (de Certeau, 1996). In Part I, we briefly consider the 
global governance of seed with reference to key international conventions, that 
of the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) 
(and the Convention on Biodiversity), and the International Treaty for the Pro -
tection of Plant and Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA). In Part II, we explain our methodological approach and we present two case studies 
from Colombia and UK in order to show similarity of resistance tactics in such 
diverse contexts. We conclude by reflecting upon what the juxtaposition of the two cases tell us about resistance to dominant legal frameworks. 
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE195
Part I – The global governance of seed
The global governance framework of seeds is well documented and includes 
various institutions, including those that are sui generis and those within the 
scope of the WTO (Batur et al., 2021; Santilli, 2012; Thomas et al., 2011). In 
this part we briefly consider two international treaties at the heart of the global 
governance of seed so that in part II we can present the problems that arise with 
these paradigms in respect of our case studies.2 Firstly, the International Treaty on 
Plant and Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (ITPGRFA) focuses upon 
the safeguarding of crops and seed by farmers and the protection of diversity, 
and brings into effect Article 1 of the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) 
(CBD). Article 1 includes the requirement for ‘the fair and equitable sharing of 
the benefits arising out of the utilization of genetic resource’. A  driving factor 
for the CBD was concern for a significant reduction in biological diversity by 
human activity.3 The ITPGRFA is presented as supporting sustainable and eco -
logical practices, genetic diversity of crops, and the expanded use of local and 
locally adapted crops and varieties (Article 6), promoting in situ conservation of 
wild crop relatives and wild plants for food production. The protection of rights 
holders (local and indigenous communities and farmers) includes their traditional knowledge and farmers’ rights to save, use, exchange and sell farm-saved seed/
propagating material (Article 9).
4 The ITPGRFA has 154 Contracting Parties.
Seemingly in opposition to the emphasis on benefit sharing, genetic diversity 
and biodiversity, sits the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties 
of Plants (UPOV) (Batur et al., 2021). This treaty adopts a restrictive and tightly 
controlled approach to the global governance of seed driven since the 1960s by 
the so-called Green Revolution. It has been revised on a number of occasions 
since its inception, the most recent and restrictive version being UPOV 1991. UPOV and associated domestic laws are premised upon paradigms of ‘pro
-
ductivism, standardization of agricultural products, and fragmentation of the 
many stages involved in agricultural production’ (Santilli, 2011, p. 83). These 
paradigms are based upon concepts of proprietorship in the form of plant 
breeders’ rights to intellectual property and the protection of plant varieties via registration and certification subject to criteria of distinctness, uniformity and 
stability (DUS – Articles 6-9 inclusive). Currently, 80 states are members of 
UPOV , with nearly half joining since the year 2000.
5 This rise is in part due to 
2 There are other instruments both internationally and domestically, but we have confined 
our scope.
3 Preamble CBD. 
4 See the Preamble and Article 1 of the Treaty.
5 Members of the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants, status 27 
February 2025, https://www.upov.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/upov_pub_423.pdf.  
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL196
membership of UPOV being set as a requirement of trade agreements by the 
European Union, Canada and the United States (Santilli, 2011, p. 83). 
Both the ITPGRFA and UPOV have attracted criticism (Golay and Bessa, 
2019). UPOV is constructed to support a linear approach which, according to 
Niels Louwaars is ‘counterproductive in terms of balanced sustainable growth 
and development and should be abandoned’ (2007, p. 5). However, nor has the 
ITPGFRA succeeded in securing meaningful benefits for stakeholders in de -
veloping countries that fall within its remit of traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources (Dutfield and Suthersanen, 2018). On the face of it, the 
ITPGFRA may appear to be expansive with reference to principles of sustain
-
able agriculture, but its scope is reductive presenting benefits as ‘information’, 
‘technology’, ‘capacity-building’ and ‘monetary’ (Article 13) with an emphasis 
on intellectual property rights. Its approach thus sits within, rather than against, 
a framework that ascribes value according to productive capacity and defines 
benefit as a derivative of human endeavour according to principles of rational -
ism. There is no reference to food sovereignty, only to food security. 
Similarly, the claimed benefits of UPOV in respect of new and improved 
plant varieties, improved yield, respect for the environment and food security are contested. UPOV is said to have been negotiated ‘by developed countries, for developed countries’ without consideration of the seed systems common to 
‘developing countries’ and/or to meet the needs of those countries, and that it is 
incompatible with the ITPGRFA (The Reasons Why Indonesia Should Not (Be 
Forced to) Join UPOV , 2022). UPOV’s approach favours and promotes large 
scale agri-business with roots also in the Green Revolution, modelled by genetic uniformity and monocultural farming at scale (Bonneuil et al., 2006), accelerating 
the erosion of seed diversity (Pimbert, 2022). There have been calls for the EU 
to desist from requiring developing countries to adopt UPOV 1991 as part of free 
trade agreements and other activities with the EU to prevent further embedding 
UPOV into the global approach to seed governance (Batur et al., 2021). Advocates for change to seed marketing laws in the UK have described the current legal en
-
vironment as ‘stagnant and poorly placed’ to respond to ‘promising opportunities’ that have emerged involving low input approaches to growing seed, and shorter 
more collaborative food chains ‘[with] important markets for smaller-scale 
producers, in parallel to conservation and breeding efforts to revive landraces and develop diverse and locally adapted plant populations’.
6 
Two United Nations human rights declarations sit in contrast to UPOV and 
the ITPGRFA by promoting a human rights based approach to seed sovereign -
ty for indigenous and farming communities: the Declaration on the Rights 
6 Advocacy Paper: Legislative Support for Heterogeneous Grain and Cereal Seed Produc-
tion, Gaia Foundation Seed Sovereignty UK, and others, 2–3 (on file with the authors). 
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE197
of Indigenous Peoples 2007 (UNDRIP) and the Declaration on the Rights of 
Peasants and others working in rural areas 2018 (UNDROP).7 A human rights 
based approach requires states to respect, protect and fulfil the rights enshrined. Both seek to protect cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and freedoms as
-
sociated with seeds. Article 2 of UNDROP requires states to apply obligations under international agreements they are party to in a manner that is consist
-
ent with human rights obligations towards peasants and others working in rural 
areas. Article 31 of UNDRIP provides that indigenous peoples have the right 
to maintain, control, protect and develop their cultural heritage, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions including seeds. In UNDROP, 
Article 19 is of paramount importance. It refers to the right to seed including 
the protection of traditional knowledge relevant to plant genetic resources for 
food and agriculture, equitable benefit sharing, participation in decision making 
and, importantly, the right ‘to save, use, exchange and sell their farm-saved seed 
or propagating material’ alongside ‘the right to maintain, control, protect and 
develop their own seeds and traditional knowledge’.
Furthermore, Article 19 requires states to ‘take measures to respect, protect 
and fulfil the right to seeds of peasants and other people working in rural areas’; ‘recognize the rights of peasants to rely either on their own seeds or on other 
locally available seeds of their choice, and to decide on the crops and species 
that they wish to grow’. In particular, States ‘shall take appropriate measures to 
support peasant seed systems, and promote the use of peasant seeds and agrobi
-
odiversity’. It goes on to provide that ‘seed policies, plant variety protection and 
other intellectual property laws, certification schemes and seed marketing laws 
respect and take into account the rights, needs and realities of peasants and other 
people working in rural areas’. However, Article 20 arguably qualifies this. It is 
for States take ‘appropriate measures’ in accordance with ‘their relevant interna -
tional obligations’ when it comes to preventing the depletion and ensure the con -
servation and sustainable use of biodiversity in order to promote and protect the full enjoyment of the rights of peasants and other people working in rural areas. 
This could limit the action a State takes. 
If a state is a member of UPOV or has committed to membership as part of 
a trade agreement or other arrangement, those obligations may well preside and 
undermine protections under UNDROP. Further, as declarations, UNDRIP and 
UNDROP are not legally binding, save for where principles of customary law are 
involved. That said, States that voted in favour of one or both declarations can be 
seen to have made voluntary commitments and may be held to account on that 
basis by states members of the United Nations and civil society as part of human 
7 For an assessment of the extent to which other human rights instruments include reference 
to seeds, there is no explicit reference in the relevant texts, but see General Comments of on 
ICESCR and CEDAW (Haugen, 2020).
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL198
rights monitoring mechanisms, such as Universal Periodic Review and human 
rights treaty bodies reporting and recommendation processes (Ashley, 2024). 
Some countries have signed UNDRIP and UNDROP yet paradoxically allow 
the commercial cultivation of GMOs, that threatens indigenous and peasant life (e.g. Argentina, Brazil, China, Colombia, Mexico, South Africa, Spain, United 
States); other countries have signed UNDRIP and have expressed reservations or 
abstained from signing UNDROP, but don’t allow the use of GMOs (e.g. Israel, 
Russia, Switzerland). This can be understood as a sign of protection of indige
-
nous and peasant life, as shown in Table 1 which gives a worldwide overview 
of soft international commitments regarding seeds. Also, it may lead to contra -
dictory legal situations, where the production of GMO is permitted while at the 
same time GMO-free zones, communities or territories are legally recognized 
(e.g. Argentina, Colombia, Spain) (Table 1). Indeed, it is striking that some 
European Union countries have banned the cultivation of GMOs, although they allow the import of genetically modified foods (e.g. Germany, Austria, 
Bulgaria, and Poland). In resistance to this type of policy, some communi
-
ties and regions have declared themselves “GMO-free” (e.g. Austria, Germany, 
Poland) (Table 1).
Table 1. GMO-free zones in major food-producing countries
Country Signed 
ITPGRFA Signed CBD Signed UPOVSigned UNDRIP Signed UNDROPAllows the production of GMOs 
Recognize
GMO-free zones 
Argentina
AustraliaExpressed 
reservations or abstained (eRa)
Austria
BelgiumBolivia
Brazil
Canada eRa
ChileYes, with 
strict restrictions  
China  
Colombia
Cuba   
Czech 
Republic  
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE199
Republic of 
Korea       
Denmark   
Ecuador   
France  
Germany  
Israel eRa   
Italy  
Japan eRa  
Mexico
Netherlands eRa
New 
Zealand eRaYes, with strict restrictions
Peru   
Poland  
Russia
eRa   
Saint Vincent 
and the Grenadines
  
South 
Africa  
Spain
Switzerland eRa  
United 
KingdomAfter Brexit, it has established its own regulations that allow some GMOs  
United States
Uruguay   
Yes
Expressed reservations or abstainedno
Source: Prepared by the authors, based on cited legislation and https://www.gmo-free-regions.org/ 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL200
Based upon their research on seed systems in the global south, Kuhlmann 
and Day have modelled legal and regulatory seed systems along a spectrum 
whereby ‘strict or comprehensive regulation’ sits at one extreme, ‘partially 
flexible registration (exemptions)’ at the other, and ‘differentiated registration’ in the middle (Kuhlmann and Dey, 2021). They place Colombia in the comprehen
-
sive regulation category. Similarly, Pérez Cantero et al. indicate that seeds are produced through two systems, formal and informal, whereby the latter is one in 
which farmers look after the quality of seeds without the surveillance of control 
bodies (Pérez Cantero et al., 2020). In the informal (or local) seed system, there is a process of ‘continuous crop evolution’ whereby farm-based management 
and selection of seed combines with natural processes of genetic mutation and cross breeding (de Boef et al., 2007). The polarisation of informal vs formal 
overlooks the lived experience of small-scale farmers (and those at an industrial 
scale on occasion
8) of transitioning to certified seed, including GM, whilst con -
tinuing traditional seed saving and sharing practise. Further, the authors observe a weakening of trust in the formal institutions – actors do not always comply 
with the rules, they devise tactics explored below—such as collusion, negotia
-
tion and mimicry of the dominant legal system—to subvert and creatively cir -
cumvent the regulatory environment. State institutions are aware of such tactics but not capable or minded to take formal action in response.
Part II – Legal liminality and tactics of resistance: case studies
Seed saving and seed sharing has been practiced freely by peoples and com -
munities since farming began some 10,000 years ago. Paradoxically, in the era of economic liberalism, these practices are potentially illegal. It is therefore no 
surprise that today, age-old practices have been imbued with powerful political 
significance as acts of resistance and liberty. This resistance, spearheaded by civil 
society organisations such as La Vía Campesina with roots in Latin America, has 
emerged as a global counter movement to the commodification and enclosure 
of seeds. Although seed saving and seed sharing has been practiced at a local 
level worldwide for thousands of years, the language of resistance has been adopted more recently to represent their significance and character as part of 
a global seed sovereignty movement, and includes: seed defence, seed recovery, 
seed conservation (García López et al., 2019) and seed activism – which en
-
compasses concepts relating to seed commons, peasant seeds and seed sover -
eignty (Peschard and Randeria, 2020). These terms are used by campesino and 
8 Monsanto Canada Inc v Schmeiser [2004] 1 S.C.R. 902, 2004 SCC 34, before the Supreme 
Court of Canada. 
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE201
indigenous communities and have been adopted by agrarian activists beyond the 
global south to include ‘food rights activists, urban gardeners and consumers, 
plant breeders, public interest lawyers, students and a younger generation of 
consumers, trade unionists, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and 
academic researchers’ (Peschard and Randeria, 2020, p. 614).
The practices we situate within a liminal legal space are not new; they have 
been carefully (re)constructed and (re)positioned as a defensive response to 
straightjacketing and enclosure by a complex restrictive legal framework (Brac 
De La Perrière and Kastler, 2011; Kloppenburg, 2014). This enclosure has forced age-old farming, community, indigenous and cultural practices into the margins. 
Operating in spaces between law and regulation, we observe that approaches 
to protect, grow and distribute native and/or heritage seed involve deploying 
tactics such as collusion, negotiation and mimicry of the dominant legal system. 
Mimicry includes the emergence of alternative regulatory paradigms. Whilst those emergent paradigms are precariously situated in a liminal space there is 
evidence of a move towards a legally plural environment, particularly in respect 
of seed sovereignty practices in Colombia. In this section, we firstly outline our research methods, and then discuss in more detail the two contrasting and yet 
overlapping case studies, situating certain seed sovereignty practices and tactics 
in a space of legal liminality. 
To approximate these (daily) practices, a qualitative methodological strategy 
was followed, based on a unique (rare) case study (Coller, 2000), in Colombia 
and the United Kingdom, which consisted of two phases of fieldwork. The first 
phase, developed following concerns raised with one of the present authors by 
the co-ordinator of a seed house in Colombia regarding problematics of the 
national legal framework, was carried out between 2020 and 2021. This included a review of the legal framework on seeds in Colombia and the UK, and informal 
conversations with key individuals (such as activists, academics and lawyers),
9 
as well as attendance at conferences in the UK.10 As a result, two politically 
important case studies were identified: the collective recovery and custodianship 
of seeds in the Indigenous Reservation of Cañamomo and Lomaprieta located 
in Riosucio municipally (Caldas Department of Colombia), and the recovery of heritage grain by John Letts, an Oxfordshire-based farmer in the UK. The 
second phase, carried out from March to August 2022, consisted of semi-struc
-
tured interviews and participant observation sessions, recorded in a field diary, 
9 First phase report Ashley, L., Rodríguez-Herrera, D.M.Jiménez, D.A, García, A.M. (2021). 
Final Report. “Custodians of Seeds: Native Seeds v Certified Seeds – unpicking the legal bat-
tle”. Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF) – Building International Collaborations. Leeds 
Beckett University & Technological University of Pereira (on file with the authors).
10 Led by Oxford Real Farming (January 2022 and July 2022) and the Gaia Foundation (UK) 
Seed Sovereignty (October 2021).
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL202
in both the UK and Colombia. Between 2022 and 2024, participant observation 
and interviews were carried out in the Escopetera and Pirza Indigenous Reserva -
tion, located also in the municipality of Riosucio. Orchards, seed collections, as well as training, dissemination, seed exchange practices and territorial context, were observed. For the interpretation of results, the procedures of transcription, 
coding and triangulation of qualitative data were followed.
Indigenous Reservations in Riosucio, Colombia
Our first case study takes us to the municipality of Riosucio, Colombia. 
There, the Chamí Indigenous Community has formed a local network of custo
-
dians and guardians of seeds since the 2000s, which has fluctuated between 15 
and 40 members. This process of territorial seed custody is emblematic within 
the National Free Seed Network11 because in 2009 one of the four reserva -
tions of this community –called “Cañamomo y Lomaprieta”– was declared as 
a GMO-Free Territory (Pimbert and Borrini-Feyerabend, 2019). Supported by 
indigenous laws and the National Constitution, they claim collective rights and their own ontologies, as can be seen from the first article of this declaration:
According to our Law of Origin, Major Law and our Uses and Customs, seeds are the 
collective heritage of the peoples, they are integral beings of our mother earth that deserve 
all respect and recognition as a fundamental part of life in our universe. Therefore, they 
are not individual property, they are part of the development of the communities and may 
be used collectively for the well-being of the inhabitants in a sustainable way without 
affecting their existence, nor the very existence of any other being in nature or of mother 
earth.12
According to our data, three combined factors facilitated the emergence of 
activism around the seeds in Riosucio, which had this declaration as a milestone. 
In the first place, a decrease in the traditional use of seeds for medicinal, food 
and ritual purposes within the indigenous reservations. This situation arose 
due to a process of dispossession. Farmers began to normalise the use of com -
mercial seeds based upon a monocultural approach, a dependency that inten -
sified with free market policies in Colombia in the 1990s and led to a change 
in daily practice moving away from seed saving of one’s harvest. Linked to this, a second factor consisted of the risk of transgenic contamination of native 
maize, due to the authorisations for the planting and consumption of GMO from 
Decree 4525/2005, which regulated the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (Law 
470/2002). Since 2006, GM maize has been grown in Colombia – reported 
11 This network defends seeds as a common https://redsemillaslibres.com/ 
12 Article 1, Resolution 018 of 2009, Cabildo of the Indigenous Reservation of Cañamomo 
and Lomaprieta https://resguardolomaprieta.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Colombia-Cana -
momo-y-Lomaprieta.pdf.
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE203
evidence of success based on yield increase due to ‘better pest control’, pro -
duction cost decrease, and reduced need for additional land for farming is to be 
balanced against detrimental impacts at a local level due to varieties perform -
ing poorly in certain local conditions compared to conventional seed, and poor knowledge transfer regarding methods for growth of GM crops (Brookes, 2020; 
Méndez et al., 2011). Concerns harboured by farming and indigenous commu
-
nities in Colombia are amplified given the contamination of native corn experi -
enced in Mexico, the centre of origin of maize (Fitting, 2013).
A third factor, one that emerged from this conjuncture of crisis, is related to 
the call made by the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia to work for 
food sovereignty. A  seed custodian of the El Claret community in the indigenous 
reservation Escoletera Pirza (Riosucio) recalls that at the beginning of the 2000s the reflection of the indigenous movement on dependency deepened: 
[we asked ourselves] how were we going to have that connection with the territory if 
we were cutting the roots of what our ancestors had left? So, those kinds of needs were 
showing us that the seeds had to be worked on, recovered.13 
For the custodian and leader of the Riosucio custodian network, seed conser -
vation became the “centre” and “flag of struggle” for activists and social organ -
izations, who, like her, found support in the indigenous movement, in the agroe -
cological movement and, especially, international cooperation agents such as the 
Swiss Foundation for Development Cooperation (Swissaid).
In its beginnings, the Riosucio seed custodians and guardians network 
undertook processes to recover collective memory on the use of seeds, community seed inventories, permanent spaces for training and internal delib
-
eration. These experiences encouraged in the participants the desire to ‘take responsibility’ for the ‘care’, ‘conservation’ and ‘recovery’ of seeds that were 
‘entrusted’ to them because they were at risk of disappearing. Parallel to this 
work carried out on individual plots, education, outreach and community organ
-
isation processes were activated whose initial goal was ‘to produce the seeds required by the reservation and the municipality, to supply seeds, mainly corn 
and beans, to the different projects that they were executed from the Municipal 
Mayor’s Office and the reservations, or that could come from other projects’. This was all part of implementing and securing the territory as a GMO free zone. 
Furthermore, a Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) has been developed 
that supports seed recovery and custodianship. This is a formalised system with 
elements of both subversion and mimicry of the dominant state-based regulatory framework through. PGSs exist across Latin America and globally with a focus 
13 Interview, Maria Luz Mary Bartolo, indigenous of Escopera Pirza Reservation and seed 
custodian.
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL204
upon knowledge building, trust, democracy and independence (Home et al., 
2017). Hernández Vidal and Gutiérrez Escobar (2019) have studied the PGS of 
the Riosucio seed custodians, arguing it combines local knowledge and modern 
science, to propose quality criteria that partially differ from the formal biosafety protocols required for a seed to be certified. According to these authors, ger
-
mination, purity, stability, yield, safety and production costs are official quality criteria, of which the PGS primarily recognizes safety. The application of these 
criteria will depend on the type of seed and higher principles related to agrodi
-
versity, adaptability (Hernández Vidal and Gutiérrez Escobar, 2019), resistance 
to pests, sovereignty and ‘no alteration of its natural condition’.14 
By adopting audit processes, PGSs ascribe legitimacy to what might 
otherwise be perceived as an intermediate, transitional, ambiguous, and unstable condition. The PGS compensates for the absence of legal certainty. In doing 
so, it might also constitute the precursor to change. However, what is being 
measured and guaranteed reflects the cultural as well as scientific priorities of those engaged in the PGS and so participation in the PGS confirms aspects of 
quality assurance that are not accounted for in the formal approach to regis
-
tration and certification required for commercial growth and exchange by Co -
lombia’s state-based institution, the ICA (Colombian Institute of Agriculture). 
The PSG also provides a means to overcomes prohibitively costly third-party 
organic registration processes, whilst assuring a means to an agroecologically 
driven market. Hernández and Gutiérrez recall Rosa, a seed guardian, challeng -
ing staff at a meeting with the Ministry of Agriculture, stating ‘sorry, but here 
we have our own proposal, our own seeds, and we don’t want certified seeds’ 
(Hernández Vidal and Gutiérrez Escobar, 2019, p. 55). According to testimonies 
collected in 2022, this resistance continues and the seed custodians of Riosucio 
have succeeded in meeting their goal of selling their seed more broadly across 
the reservation and online. Nonetheless, one should be wary of romanticising the success PGSs – many face challenges in achieving their maximum reach 
(Kaufmann and V ogl, 2018), and have not succeeded (Castro, 2014). 
One tactic adopted by La Casa de Las Semillas (the House of Seeds) in 
Riosucio, Colombia is revealed in the wording printed on each seed packet:
This is not a commercial product, the cost is what the custodian is recogni sed for his 
effort and dedication to produce it.
As noted, in Colombia (as in the UK) domestic legislation accords with 
UPOV requirements so that the marketing and sale of seed is regulated, and only 
certified / registered seed can be sold for commercial purposes. By reproducing 
14 Article 2, Resolution 018/2009 declaring the Cañamomo and Lomaprieta Indigenous Res-
ervation a GMO-Free Territory.
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE205
the above wording on each packet of its seeds, La Casa de Las Semillas deploys 
a tactic that subverts and circumvents the dominant legal order, claiming that 
‘the cost’, the money paid for the seed, is not to purchase the seed but rather to compensate the efforts of the custodian in caring for and producing it.
15 This is 
not to say that the seed is without value, but its value cannot be ascribed based 
upon reductive and/or productive principles. This tactic is a very public declara -
tion of the liminal legal space such seed sharing practice occupies.
We see here how this type of space of legal liminality is occupied through 
a series of disparate negotiations in which supposedly imposed categories and 
local ontologies overlap. The experience of the Riosucio Seed Custodians and 
Guardians Network teaches us a policy of place that rejects the proprietorship 
module of UPOV by adopting a model based upon collective interests and 
care for local knowledge and biodiversity. The practice of small-scale farmers 
and custodians is active and not passive, driven by experimentation in situ to 
preserve and build crop resilience and performance in particular localities. This activity sits outside of the realm of UPOV with an important role to play in terms 
of food sovereignty and also food security. Despite the food security rhetoric 
of the World Intellectual Property Organization which promotes UPOV as the 
role-holder overseeing and protecting the domain of innovation and experimen
-
tation in farming (Rivoire and Jewell, 2019),16 it is suggested by civil society 
organisations that small scale farmers feed 70% of the world.17 
Rather than operating within a neoliberal profit-oriented paradigm, small 
scale farmers, peasant farmers and seed custodians determine experimenta -
tion and innovation with a collective driven moral clarity that is embedded in 
cultural and scientific knowledge. Implementing rules on their own terms and using the controlled equivocation are scattered (many times anonymous) tactics 
that manifest form of everyday social creativity, as defined by de Certeau (1996), that are not fixed, finished or complete. Therefore, in our opinion, such tactics 
allow networks (here human – the custodians, and non-human – the seed) and 
15 The full name is The Network of Seed Custodians of Riosucio Caldas. There are seed 
houses across Colombia that are part of the Free Seed Network.
16 The rhetoric deployed is one securitisation, with UPOV citing the new developed of plant 
varieties as ‘an essential response to achieving food security and agricultural sustainability, es-
pecially in a context of climate change and global population growth’ with UPOV as the vehicle 
to encourage the development of new varieties and the means by which to protect innovation and secure a return on investment. 
17 In an open letter to the FAO from eight CSOs, concern is raised regarding the FAO’s quan-
tification of the contribution of peasants to food security that suggests only a third of the world’s 
food is produced by peasants, whereas as other studies indicate 70%, ‘FAO confusion over the 
role of peasants in meeting the food needs of the world’s peoples’, Open Letter to Director-Gen-
eral, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 01 February 2022, https://grain.
org/system/attachments/sources/000/006/698/original/70__FAO_letter.pdf.
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL206
their practice to occupy a legal liminality that, in the case of the Riosucio seed 
activists, has at its centre the problem of quality standards and the very concept 
of ‘invention’:
It is a time when we are opening a market for a seed that does not exist, so we have 
to be very judicious on the issue of quality. Because the norm in theory says that this seed 
cannot be marketed, that it is not allowed, although that has been changing […] that is why 
we are so demanding in terms of quality […] In other words, our seeds are of better quality 
than certified seed. And for that to be [real] we must be very rigorous from the moment it is planted and throughout the storage process.
18
For as long as issues related to quality, rights to sell, exchange and obtain 
seed formally and the high costs of official seed certification are not resolved, 
the Riosucio Seed Custodians and Guardians Network will have limitations 
on their right to fully market their productions. It will continue to adopt such labelling tactics to collect money for the work that custodians do whilst seeking 
to avoid legal liability for a breach of domestic and global legal requirements. 
John Letts – heritage seed in the UK
A second case study of seed activism is found in the figure of John Letts, 
a farmer living in Oxfordshire in the UK. His story both contrasts and overlaps 
with the seed custodians of Riosucio. Whilst John’s journey has not been driven 
by recovery linked to indigenous ontologies and epistemologies, which are at the heart of the community activism and practice in Riosucio, there are simi
-
larities in respect of ethics of care, recovery of cultural assets and farming tra -
ditions, and a focus upon crop resilience and adaptation. Similarly, the narrow 
confines of the UK legal environment have led John to adopt tactics to share 
the seed of the grain populations he has developed. We perceive these tactics 
as occupying a liminal legal space by finding a way to engage in commercial 
activity that defies the exclusionary legal regime.
John’s work over the last two decades has been to develop genetically 
diverse populations of cereal crops to ‘mimic the resilient landraces and variety 
mixtures that were grown by our ancestors’ (What Are Heritage Grains?, 2020). 
This has been achieved by collecting seed from seed banks and farmers across 
the world and over time, slowly developing the crop to build up a genetically 
diverse ‘living gene bank’ population. John is driven by a desire to improve crop 
resilience without the need for an agro-industrial approach as well as improving the nutritional value of the food we eat. His wheat and rye populations, for 
example, boast larger and deeper root systems characteristic of landraces that 
18 Interview, Velma Echavarría, indigenous of Cañamomo y Lomaprieta Reservation and 
leader of Riosucio Seed Custodian Network.
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE207
allowed for moisture and nutrients to be more deeply drawn from beneath the 
land’s surface. The replanting of seed carefully selected from previous harvests 
has created populations well adapted to local conditions (Saladino, 2022; What 
Are Heritage Grains?, 2020).
Letts identifies issues with the way wheat is grown in the UK, in relation to 
‘conventional’ highly industrialised methods involving chemical fertilisers, pes -
ticides and herbicides and also organic farming (Letts, 2020). Farming based 
upon Green Revolution principles of expensive high agro-chemical input, mon -
oculture and yield have created a situation of crop dependency rather than resil -
ience, depleting soil health and biodiversity in the process, with negative con -
sequences for ecology and climate change. Furthermore, ‘[i]ntensive organic grain production requires huge areas of land to accommodate the leys, and ex
-
travagant use of diesel for all its cultivations’ (Letts, 2020). As an alternative, John has developed a third approach, that of ‘restorative continuous cropping 
(RCC)’, adapting the philosophy and farming practices of Masanobu Fukuoka and Marc Bonfils to UK conditions (Letts, 2020). RCC depends neither upon 
the high artificial input of conventional farming, nor the land intensive demands 
of organic farming requiring restorative crop rotation. Instead, Letts’s approach builds organic matter and biodiversity on and below the surface of the ground by 
the use of nitrogen-fixing understorey crops, carefully timed sowing, minimal 
tillage, leaving crop residues in situ after harvesting, and no use of artificial fer
-
tiliser or agro-chemicals (Letts, 2020). As grain is grown every year in the same field, the total output is three times that of a standard 5 year rotational organic 
system. These agroecological approaches are in harmony with those of the in
-
digenous communities of Riosucio and align with the principles advocated by a growing global movement.
However, despite these farming methods supporting biodiversity, the seed 
that Letts farms in this way cannot be ‘marketed’ (transferred to a third party) 
as they do not comply with the ‘distinct, uniform and stable’ (DUS) criteria derived from UPOV , and so cannot be registered on the UK National List. The temporary EU experiment (2014) that allowed the sale and marketing of heter
-
ogeneous crop material was, in the UK, restricted to the composite cross wheat population ‘YQ’ developed by the Organic Research Centre and Prof. Martin 
Wolfe. John has been sharing seed with other growers for over 20 years through 
growers’ clubs and, like the members of free seed networks in Colombia, has deployed tactics to defy the restrictive bureaucracy of the regulated environ
-
ment. 
Growers’ clubs in the UK have also found ways to circumvent legal norms 
by engaging in non-commercial exchanges, operating through member-on -
ly systems, focusing on heritage seeds, labelling seeds for educational use, or hosting informal swaps. Letts has increased production by entering ‘contract to 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL208
grow’ agreements with other farmers whereby Letts retains legal ownership of 
the seed. As a party to such an agreement, the farmer is contractually bound to 
grow the seed in accordance with growing guidelines. However, DEFRA has indicated to Letts that distributing his cereal seed via a growers’ club would be 
in breach of UK legislation.
Whilst Letts has adopted a particular tactic, his concern regarding the limits 
placed upon the sharing of genetically diverse seed is held by others in the 
UK, and Europe. In the UK, this network is populated by organisations and in
-
dividuals with artisan skills and a focus upon collaborative food chains, part 
of a community that engages in knowledge sharing and seed health that goes 
beyond a simple focus on departing from the DUS criteria and seed certifica -
tion.19 Within this network we observe tactics similar to those of the seed cus -
todians of Riosucio being deployed. UK based Real Seeds supplies vegetable 
seeds to home gardeners. In order to market its seeds it too has been forced to 
occupy a space of liminal legality. Real Seeds operates as a seed ‘club’ whereby 
those that purchase seeds automatically become a member of the seed club, so 
that seeds are not being sold to the public in breach of seed marketing regula -
tions. This tactic effectively transforms what might otherwise be a public com -
mercial transaction into a private, community-based sharing network, reducing 
legal scrutiny. However, Real Seeds states in its terms and conditions that due to more strict enforcement of regulations, they now label certain seed packets 
with the words, ‘amateur seed not for commercial exploitation’, reporting they are working with DEFRA (UK Department for Environment, Farming and Rural 
Affairs) to register their unlisted varieties but prohibitive costs mean that some 
varieties will not be available as a result.
20 
Campaigning and advocacy for regulatory change to accommodate genetic 
crop diversity met with some success with the introduction of EU regulations permitting the marketing of organic heterogeneous material without having to 
comply with relevant certification processes.
21 However, whilst the UK was 
involved in the pilot scheme that preceded the introduction of the 2018 regula -
tions,22 the 2018 EU Organic Regulations do not form part of EU retained law 
and so do not apply in the UK.23 This has exacerbated legal uncertainty meaning 
19 Advocacy Paper: Recognising the Importance of Heterogeneous Grain and Cereal Seed 
Production in the UK Seed Legislation, Gaia Foundation Seed Sovereignty UK and others, 4 
(on file with the author). 
20 Real Seeds terms and conditions: https://www.realseeds.co.uk/terms.html  
21 Organic Regulation 2018/848/EU 
22 EU Commission decision 2014/150/EU.
23 However, see ‘Explanatory Memorandum for European Union Legislation Within the 
Scope of the UK/EU Withdrawal Agreement And Northern Ireland Protocol’ DEFRA, dated 17 
March 2022: ‘Organic Regulation 2018/848/EU… now applies in Northern Ireland, while re-
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE209
those engaged with the marketing and production of heterogeneous material in 
the UK have been further ‘pushed to the confines of illegality’.24 That is not to 
say that the EU Organic Regulations are a panacea. In the UK most heteroge -
nous material is grown by organic farmers, but this focus could exclude local varieties, landraces or amateur varieties that are not certified organic. There has 
therefore been a call for derogations to apply to conservation varieties, though 
the success of this would then depend upon whether novel evolutionary pop
-
ulations created from modern hybrid varieties (e.g. YQ wheat) or traditional 
heritage lines (e.g. Letts’s living gene bank populations) are accepted as Conser -
vation Varieties.
By way of conclusion
To conclude, the tactics deployed by seed custodians in Colombia and the 
UK include mimicry, subversion, circumvention and resistance, situating their 
practice (and themselves) in a liminal legal space. We see some overlap in 
relation to labelling of seed products, and some differences – in Latin America 
it being more common to develop PGSs, whereas in the UK, formal advocacy 
focuses upon legislative change and resistance on an individual level, such as that deployed by John Letts. In Colombia, legal changes are primarily driven 
by ancestral knowledge and indigenous rights, while in the UK, they rely more 
on experiential knowledge and material evidence. Which is not the same as 
saying that in Colombia the struggle is only speculative and that in the United 
Kingdom the construction of empirical evidence is easy or sufficient. Home tests to measure GMO contamination are, for example, desirable but expensive tech
-
nologies for Colombian custodians. Whereas, in the UK, buying or renting land to carry out autonomous seed experimentation is something unfeasible for most 
young activists.
Whilst PGSs centre upon postmodern agroecological approaches, the setting 
and disseminating of standards mimics the regulatory environment, replicating a modern logic of ‘audit cultures’ (Strathern, 2003). Here there is a risk that 
suspicion or mistrust is embedded in the framework at the risk of ignoring 
tained Regulation 834/2007 continues to apply in Great Britain, creating divergence. The Trade 
and Cooperation Agreement recognises the EU and UK as equivalent for the purpose of trade in organic products so there is no impact for GB/EU trade.’ https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1065440/220317__EM_EU_Reg-ulation_848_and_NI_Impacts___1_.pdf  
24 Advocacy Paper: Recognising the Importance of Heterogeneous Grain and Cereal Seed 
Production in the UK Seed Legislation, Gaia Foundation Seed Sovereignty UK and others, 4 (on file with the author). 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL210
indigenous and campesino forms of social control and ethical perspectives, 
centred upon social relations including trust and reciprocity (Santilli, 2012). 
Further, market driven indicators such as price, demand, yield uniformity may 
become primary signifiers of value, rather than an emphasis on those inherent values present in everyday spaces and daily practice. This type of micro-inva
-
sion of the market in daily life, in addition to influencing social trust and cooper -
ation, implies new organisational work for farmers, which is added to underpaid productive work. We would be witnessing renewed forms of expropriation of 
farmers’ time (through meetings, workshops, training, fairs, etc.), who now have 
to devise, implement and even simulate new forms of ‘quality’ to defend their agriculture (Rodríguez Herrera, 2020). This form of scaling emphasises market 
principles of productivity rather than encompassing other value-based systems 
such as ways of life and cultural heritage. 
In both the UK and Colombia, seed activists invest their efforts in ensuring the 
‘quality’ of seeds through different means to develop, support and legitimatise the market niche. Through these cases we see how the agricultural experimentation 
and innovation processes, that are the very basis of agriculture, risk being reduced 
and privatised. Even so, a PGS, a bilateral agreement or a local seed system 
subverts the regulatory environment of formal seed system by circumventing it, with this subversion amounting to a form of seed activism and resistance. Taken 
together, the tactics deployed realize and advance local practice in dialogue with 
modern knowledge. They can be described as acts of resistance to the hegemony 
of the dominant legal system driven by ethics of care rooted in circular ecology. 
The occupation of a legally liminal space by farmers in Colombia and the 
UK manifests a conscious act of resistance and, we suggest, is a counter-map 
to a restrictive (global) governance regime complex of seed law and regulation 
(Raustiala and Victor, 2004). Actors within this space are part of a spatial and re
-
lational international activist movement to preserve, recover, and protect practice and ways of being that diametrically oppose a productivist, privatised and pro
-
prietorship based approach to seed such as the UPOV-based legal framework. The commodity-based, standardised agricultural paradigm reliant upon highly 
mechanised industrial approaches to farming has caused devastating conse
-
quences for small scale farmers and rural communities including economic in -
security and migration to urban areas (Barbier, 2000), reduced access to land 
(Vélez-Torres and Varela, 2014), and a threat to agrobiodiversity (Thomas et 
al., 2011), which includes the contamination of native crop varieties, which may well be exacerbated by continued practise of seed saving and sharing following the introduction to small scale farmers of GM crops (Iversen et al., 2014).
The GM and proprietorship approach that characterises agro-industry is 
embedded in a patriarchal system that elevates the ‘rational’ and abstract world 
above and beyond the physical. Nature, as part of the ‘physical’ world is a threat 
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE211
to be fought and subjugated with artificial means, rather than be embraced as 
containing the seeds of the solution / resolution itself. The result is an approach 
that is linear and destructive rather than cyclical and constructive. The discon -
nection of people to the land and to nature in the western world is material and 
immaterial. Those engaged with industrial agriculture are separated from the 
natural processes by the use of heavy machinery, and chemicals working against 
rather than in harmony with ecology. Whilst consumers are similarly disenfran -
chised by a food system that values uniform processed and artificially packaged 
products with little evidence of their origin.
Like Colombian and British examples activist-style seed exchange can be 
observed in Poland. Its objectives are to protect and promote local, heirloom plant 
varieties, contrasting with the focus of large institutional seed banks. These initia -
tives, spearheaded by organic farming associations like Ekoland, and permaculture 
educators like Agro-Perma-Lab, operate through informal networks and events.
Like in the examples presented above, activist-style seed exchange in Poland 
exist in a legal liminality. While emphasizing exchange, tradition, and bi -
odiversity over commercial sales, they operate within a regulatory landscape 
primarily designed for commercial seed markets. This means the line between 
non-commercial exchange and activities that could be interpreted as regulated 
“marketing” can be unclear, creating a space where these conservation and edu -
cational efforts navigate the existing legal framework without necessarily fitting neatly within it. The growing interest in seed sovereignty in Poland also reflects 
a desire to legitimize and support these grassroots practices.
As we have illustrated, seeds are imbued with deep cultural significance 
and link the material and immaterial world. The case studies we have presented reflect a broader global social movement led by the Global South that has been 
gaining traction in the global north. There is a paradigm shift, but this is on the 
fringes. Until the practices of the farmers and communities we have observed 
are supported by an alternative ontology and a legal framework that runs counter 
to the presiding extractive, productivist and linear model there is a risk that ac
-
tivities are unlawful and occupy a precarious position in a liminal legal space. 
However, in the analysed examples synergies with emerging posthuman legality 
jurisprudence can be observed – where the object of protection and the rights 
holder is non-human, thus challenging a (neo)liberal anthropocentric discourse.
Acknowledgments
We extend our gratitude to the indigenous authorities and communities of 
the Cañamomo and Lomaprieta Indigenous Reservation, the Escopetera and Pirza Indigenous Reservation, as well as the Riosucio Seed Custodian Network 
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL212
in Caldas Department, Colombia. In particular, the authors acknowledge the 
knowledge, time and logistical support provided by the farmers of Riosucio: 
Velma Echavarría, Luz Mary Bartolo, Zully Guapacha, Tobías Velasco; as well 
as farmer John Letts, Director of Heritage Harvest Limited (UK), and Marina Chang, Honorary Associate Professor at the Bartlett Development Planning 
Unit, University College London (UCL) (UK). The initial idea of this text arises 
from a project financed by Leeds Beckett University’s ‘Building International 
Collaborations’, from its Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF) allocation, developed in 2021 through a collaboration between Leeds Law School of Leeds 
Beckett University and the Faculty of Environmental Sciences of the Techno
-
logical University of Pereira, further supported by Leeds Law School, Leeds Beckett University, and with resources from the project “Transformation In
-
itiatives in the Andean rural communities. Narratives and strategies of social change from an anthropological perspective”, financed by the National Science 
Centre, Poland (project no. 2017/26/D/HS3/00459).
Bibliography
Artaraz, K., Calestani, M. (2015). Suma Qamaña in Bolivia: Indigenous Understandings 
of Well-being and Their Contribution to a Post-neoliberal Paradigm. Latin Ameri-
can Perspectives , 42(5), 216–233. https://doi.org/10.1177/0094582X14547501
Ashley, L. (2024). UPR Prospects for Promoting Support for the United Nations Dec-
laration on the Rights of Peasants and other People Working in Rural Areas (UN-
DROP). 55th Session of the Human Rights Council, 26 Feb –05 Apr 2024, United 
Nations, Geneva, Switzerland. (Unpublished). https://upr-info.org/en/news/side-event-upr-and-domestic-human-rights-protection
Barbier, E. B. (2000). Links Between Economic Liberalization and Rural Resource 
Degradation in the Developing Regions. Agricultural Economics, 23(3), 299–310. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-0862.2000.tb00281.x
Batur, F., Meienberg, F., Ilge, B. (2021). Plant Variety Protection & UPOV 1991 in the 
European Union’s Trade Policy: Rationale, Effects & State of Play. In APREBES 
and Both ENDS. https://apbrebes.org/sites/default/files/2021-11/Apbrebes_UP-
OV91-EU_EN_11-21_def_0.pdf
Blaser, M. (2009). Political Ontology: Cultural Studies without “Cultures”? Cultural 
Studies, 23(5), 873–896. https://doi.org/10.1080/09502380903208023
Bonneuil, C., Demeulenaere, E., Thomas, F., Joly, P.-B., Allaire, G., Goldringer, I. 
(2006). Innover autrement? La recherche face à l’avènement d’un nouveau régime de production et de régulation des savoirs en génétique végétale. Dossier de l’en-
vironnement de l’INRA , 30, 29–52.
de Boef, W. S., Thijssen, M. H., Ogliari, J. B., Sthapit, B. (2007). Biodiversidade e 
agricultores. Fortalecendo manejo comunitário. L&PM Editores. 
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE213
Brac De La Perrière, R. A., Kastler, G. (Eds.). (2011). Seeds and Farmers’ Rights. 
How International Regulations Affect Farmer Seeds. Peasant Seeds Network and 
BEDE. https://www.farmersrights.org/getfile.php/131758-1661172977/Dokumen-ter/semences_reglementations_EN.pdf
Brookes, G. (2020). Genetically Modified (GM) Crop Use in Colombia: Farm Level 
Economic and Environmental Contributions. GM Crops and Food, 11(3), 140–
153. https://doi.org/10.1080/21645698.2020.1715156
Castro, F. (2014). Overview of Participatory Guarantee Systems in 2012. In H. Will -
er, J. Lernoud (Eds.), The World of Organic Agriculture. Statistics and Emerging Trends 2014 (pp. 159–162). FOAM and FiBL.
Chacón, J. M. (2015). Producing Liminal Legality. Legal Studies Research Paper Se-
ries, 92(4), 709–767. https://ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2697275
Clapp, J. (2025). How a Few Giant Companies Came to Dominate Global Food. How 
do Agricultural Monopolies Create Higher Food Prices? Is Market Concentration at Breaking Point for Seeds, Agrichemicals and Farm Tech? Jennifer Clapp Ex-plains. Land and Climate Review . https://www.landclimate.org/how-a-few-giant-
companies-came-to-dominate-global-food/
Coller, X. (2000). Estudio de casos. Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas.
Coomes, O. T., McGuire, S. J., Garine, E., Caillon, S., McKey, D., Demeulenaere, E., 
Jarvis, D., Aistara, G., Barnaud, A., Clouvel, P., Emperaire, L., Louafi, S., Martin, P., Massol, F., Pautasso, M., Violon, C., Wencélius, J. (2015). Farmer Seed Net-works Make a Limited Contribution to Agriculture? Four Common Misconcep-
tions. Food Policy , 56, 41–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2015.07.008
de Certeau, M. (1996). La invención de lo cotidiano . Instituto Tecnológico y de Estu-
dios Superiores de Occidente, Universidad Iberoamericana.
Denzin, C., Cálix, Á., Martner, G. (Eds.). (2019). Esto no da para más: hacia la 
transformación social-ecológica en América Latina. Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.  
Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.
Dutfield, G., Suthersanen, U. (2018). Traditional Knowledge and Genetic Resources: 
Observing Legal Protection through the Lens of Historical Geography and Human Rights. Legal Studies Research Paper, Queen Mary University of London, School 
of Law, 286. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3282818
Escobar, L. M. (2016). The Political Ontology of Seeds: Seed Sovereignty Struggles in 
an Indigenous Resguardo in Colombia. https://doi.org/10.17615/4k8s-t747
Filip, B. (2020). The Rise of Neo-Liberalism and the Environment: Mining, Electronic 
Waste, Agri-business, Livestock Farming and the Clothing Industry. In F. Girard, C. Frison (Eds.), The Rise of Neo-liberalism and the Decline of Freedom. Palgrave 
Insights into Apocalypse Economics (pp. 135–187). Palgrave Macmillan. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-61623-6_7
Fitting, L. (2013). Maize as Sovereignty: Anti-GM Activism in Mexico and Colombia. 
Food Sovereignty: A  Critical Dialogue Maize as Sovereignty: Anti-GM Activism 
in Mexico and Colombia, International Conference Yale University, September 14-15, 2013. Conference Paper #18. www.tni.org
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL214
García López, V ., Giraldo, O. F., Morales, H., Rosset, P. M., Duarte, J. M. (2019). 
Seed Sovereignty and Agroecological Scaling: Two Cases of Seed Recovery, Con-
servation, and Defense in Colombia. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 
43(7–8), 827–847. https://doi.org/10.1080/21683565.2019.1578720
Glaab, K., Stuvøy, K. (2021). The Politics of Violence in Extractivism: Space, Time, 
and Normativity . In J. McNeish, J.-A. McNeish (Eds.), Our Extractive Age: Ex-
pressions of Violence and Resistance . Routledge.
Golay, C., Bessa, A. (2019). The Right to Seeds in Europe. The United Nations Dec-
laration on the Rights of Peasants and Other People Working in Rural Areas and the Protection of the Right to Seeds in Europe. Academy Briefing, 15. https://www.
geneva-academy.ch/joomlatools-files/docman-files/The%20Right%20to%20Seeds%20in%20Europe.pdf
Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the Trouble. Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Duke 
University Press.
Haugen, H. M. (2020). The UN Declaration on Peasants’ Rights (UNDROP): Is Arti-
cle 19 on Seed Rights Adequately Balancing Intellectual Property Rights and the Right to Food? Journal of World Intellectual Property, 23(3–4), 288–309. https://
doi.org/10.1111/jwip.12152
Hernández Vidal, N., Gutiérrez Escobar, L. (2019). Epistemic and Political Struggles 
Against the Privatization of Seeds and Collective Knowledges. Revista Colombia-na de Antropologia, 55(2), 39–63. https://doi.org/10.22380/2539472X.798
Home, R., Bouagnimbeck, H., Ugas, R., Arbenz, M., Stolze, M. (2017). Participa -
tory Guarantee Systems: Organic Certification to Empower Farmers and Strength-en Communities. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 41(5), 526–545. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21683565.2017.1279702
Iversen, M., Grønsberg, I. M., van den Berg, J., Fischer, K., Aheto, D. W., Bøhn, T. 
(2014). Detection of Transgenes in Local Maize Varieties of Small-Scale Farmers in Eastern Cape, South Africa. PLoS ONE, 9(12). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0116147
Kaufmann, S., V ogl, C. R. (2018). Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGS) in Mexico: 
A Theoretic Ideal or Everyday Practice? Agriculture and Human Values, 35(2), 
457–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-017-9844-2
King-Irani, L. (2006). Exiled to a Liminal Legal Zone: Are we All Palestinians Now? Third 
World Quarterly, 27(5), 923–936. https://doi.org/10.1080/01436590600780375
Kloppenburg, J. (2014). Re-purposing the Master’s Tools: The Open Source Seed In-
itiative and the Struggle for Seed Sovereignty. Journal of Peasant Studies, 41(6), 
1225–1246. https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2013.875897
Kuhlmann, K., Dey, B. (2021). Using Regulatory Flexibility to Address Market Infor -
mality in Seed Systems: A  Global Study. Agronomy, 11. https://doi.org/10.3390/
agronomy11020377
Laurie, G. (2017). Liminality and theLimits of Law in Health Research Regulation: 
What Are We Missing in the Spaces In-between? Medical Law Review , 25(1), 
47–72. https://doi.org/10.1093/medlaw/fww029
SEED SA VING AND SEED SHARING: OCCUPYING A LIMINAL LEGAL SPACE215
Letts, J. (2020). Continuous Grain Cropping, The Land 27, https://www.thelandmag -
azine.org.uk/articles/continuous-grain-cropping. 
Loreau, M. (2000). MINI-REVIEW Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning: Recent 
Theoretical Advances .
Louwaars, N. P. (2007). Seeds of Confusion: The Impact of Policies on Seed Systems. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/40104521
Méndez, K. A., Chaparro Giraldo, A., Moreno, G. R., Castro, C. S. (2011). Produc-
tion Cost Analysis and Use of Pesticides in the Transgenic and Conventional Corn 
Xrop [Zea mays (L.)] in the Valley of San Juan, Tolima. GM Crops, 2(3), 163–168. 
https://doi.org/10.4161/gmcr.2.3.17591
Menjívar, C. (2006). Liminal Legality: Salvadoran and Guatemalan Immigrants’ Lives 
in the United States 1. American Journal of Sociology , 111(4), 999–1037.
Moore, J. W. (2017). The Capitalocene, Part I: On the Nature and Origins of Our Eco-
logical Crisis. Journal of Peasant Studies, 44(3), 594–630. https://doi.org/10.1080
/03066150.2016.1235036
Pérez Cantero, S. P., Villota Caicedo, C. P., Castaño Galvis, A. L., Romero Ferrer, J. 
l. (2020). Producción de semilla de arroz regional en manos de pequeños produc-
tores. Experiencias y lecciones aprendidas con la Asociación de Pequeños Produc-
tores Agropecuarios de la vereda Lana (Asoprolana), del municipio de Majagual (Sucre). Agrosavia.
Peschard, K., Randeria, S. (2020). ‘Keeping Seeds in Our Hands’: The Rise of Seed 
Activism. Journal of Peasant Studies, 47(4), 613–647. https://doi.org/10.1080/03
066150.2020.1753705
Pimbert, M. P., Borrini-Feyerabend, G. (2019). Nourishing Life – Territories of Life 
and Food Sovereignty. Policy Brief of the ICCA Consortium, 6. http://www.agter.
org/bdf/_docs/icca_consortium_policy_brief_6_--territories_of_life_and_food_sovereignty.pdf
Pimbert, M.P. (2022). Introduction: Thinking about Seeds. In Y . Nishikawa, M. Pim-
bert (Eds.), Seeds for Diversity and Inclusion (pp. 1–19). Palgrave Macmillan. 
Pimbert, M.P., Moeller N.I., Singh J., Anderson C.R. (2021). Agroecology. In Ox-
ford Research Encyclopedias . Anthropology. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/97 
80190854584.013.298 
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futuri-
ty and the Pace of Care. Social Studies of Science , 45(5), 691–716. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851
Raustiala, K., Victor, D. G. (2004). The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources. 
International Organization, 58(02). https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818304582036
Rivoire, B., Jewell, C. (2019). UPOV: Supporting Food Security with Plant Variety 
Protection. https://www.wipo.int/web/wipo-magazine/articles/upov-supporting-food- security-with-plant-variety-protection-40674
Rodríguez-Herrera, D. M. (2020). Asociacionismo y cambio social en comunidades 
rurales andinas. Aproximación al caso de los cafeteros colombianos.  Revista del 
CESLA: International Latin American Studies Review , 25, 57–79. https://www.
revistadelcesla.com/index.php/revistadelcesla/article/view/645
Louisa ashLey , Diana María roDríguez herrera, agata huMMeL216
Saladino, D. (2022). Eating to Extinction: The World’ s Rarest Foods and Why We Need 
to Save Them. Jonathon Cape.
Santilli, J. (2011). Agrobiodiversity and the Law. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/ 
9780203155257
Shiva, V . (2014). Preface. In V . Shiva, M. Mies, Ecofeminism  (pp. XIII–XXI). With 
a foreword by A. Salleh. Zed Books, 2014.
Sievers-Glotzbach, S., Euler, J., Frison, C., Gmeiner, N., Kliem, L., Mazé, A., Tscher -
sich, J. (2021). Beyond the Material: Knowledge Aspects in Seed Commoning. 
Agriculture and Human Values, 38(2), 509–524. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-
020-10167-w
Strathern, M. (2003). Audit Cultures. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203449721
The Reasons Why Indonesia Should Not (Be Forced to) Join UPOV (Briefing Paper). 
(2022). https://www.bothends.org/uploaded_files/document/BriefingPaper_EN_The_reasons_why_Indonesia_should_n.pdf
Thomas, M., Dawson, J. C., Goldringer, I., Bonneuil, C. (2011). Seed Exchanges, 
a Key to Analyze Crop Diversity Dynamics in Farmer-led on-farm conservation. 
Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution , 58(3), 321–338. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10722-011-9662-0
Turner, V . (1969a). The Forest of Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual . Cornell Uni-
versity Press. 
Turner, V . (1969b). The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Aldine Trans-
action.
Vélez-Torres, I., Varela, D. (2014). Between the Paternalistic and the Neoliberal State. Lat-
in American Perspectives , 41(6), 9–26. https://doi.org/10.1177/0094582X14547515
What are Heritage Grains? (2020). https://www.heritagegraintrust.org/what-are-her -
itage-grains
Wynter, S. (2003). Unsettling the Coloniality of Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards 
the Human, After Man, Its Overrepresentation–An Argument. The New Centennial 
Review , 3(3), 257–337.
 Anna Kwak
Mariola Bieńko
Nieustająco pełny dom
Perspektywa rodziców 
mieszkających z dorosłym gniazdującym dzieckiem
Warszawa 2024
W przeszłości, gdy dorosłe, niezamężne/nieżonate i nieposiadające potomstwa 
dzieci mieszkały razem z rodzicami, nie nazywano ich „gniazdownikami”, były 
częścią rodziny zgodnie z uznanymi normami życia rodzinnego. W czasach współcze-snych zjawisko gniazdowania rozwija się w innych warunkach społecznych, ekonomicz-nych, demograﬁ  cznych. Kontekstem zmian są procesy przejść demograﬁ  cznych przyno-
szących płynność, zmienność, niepewność, niestabilność. […]
Na początku XXI wieku wybuchła dyskusja dotycząca gniazdowania dorosłych dzieci. 
W mediach zarzuca się młodym dorosłym pozostającym w domu rodzicielskim brak odpowiedzialności, wygodnictwo, egoizm, niechęć do podejmowania zobowiązań zwią-
zanych z małżeństwem i posiadaniem dzieci, wykorzystywanie rodziców, korzystanie z dóbr rodzinnych bez własnego wkładu, niedojrzałość, uzależnienie od matek. […]
Analiza tego zjawiska opiera się przede wszystkim na danych otrzymywanych od jed-
nej ze stron układu rodzinnego, czyli od dorosłych dzieci. Stosunkowo rzadko badacze 
próbują dotrzeć do strony drugiej – czyli samych rodziców. A przecież to oni są istotną 
częścią budowanej przez lata rodziny, to oni stają przed nową sytuacją w jej rozwoju.
ze wstępuWydawnictwo IFiS PAN poleca
reklama 1_2025.indd   1 30.06.2025   12:19:05
Anna Kwak
Mariola Bieńko
Nieustająco pełny dom
Perspektywa rodziców 
mieszkających z dorosłym gniazdującym dzieckiem
Warszawa 2024
W przeszłości, gdy dorosłe, niezamężne/nieżonate i nieposiadające potomstwa 
dzieci mieszkały razem z rodzicami, nie nazywano ich „gniazdownikami”, były 
częścią rodziny zgodnie z uznanymi normami życia rodzinnego. W czasach współcze-snych zjawisko gniazdowania rozwija się w innych warunkach społecznych, ekonomicz-nych, demograﬁ  cznych. Kontekstem zmian są procesy przejść demograﬁ  cznych przyno-
szących płynność, zmienność, niepewność, niestabilność. […]
Na początku XXI wieku wybuchła dyskusja dotycząca gniazdowania dorosłych dzieci. 
W mediach zarzuca się młodym dorosłym pozostającym w domu rodzicielskim brak odpowiedzialności, wygodnictwo, egoizm, niechęć do podejmowania zobowiązań zwią-
zanych z małżeństwem i posiadaniem dzieci, wykorzystywanie rodziców, korzystanie z dóbr rodzinnych bez własnego wkładu, niedojrzałość, uzależnienie od matek. […]
Analiza tego zjawiska opiera się przede wszystkim na danych otrzymywanych od jed-
nej ze stron układu rodzinnego, czyli od dorosłych dzieci. Stosunkowo rzadko badacze 
próbują dotrzeć do strony drugiej – czyli samych rodziców. A przecież to oni są istotną 
częścią budowanej przez lata rodziny, to oni stają przed nową sytuacją w jej rozwoju.
ze wstępuWydawnictwo IFiS PAN poleca
reklama 1_2025.indd   1 30.06.2025   12:19:05
Doświadczenie czasu […] jest […] naznaczone nierównościami społecznymi. 
Im niżej ktoś znajduje się w hierarchiach czasowych, im bardziej jego czas jest 
zawłaszczany przez inne prowadzące do czasowego niewolnictwa formy reżimów cza-su, im bardziej doświadcza ubóstwa czasu, tym mniejszą ma możliwość zarządzania sobą w czasie. Hierarchie czasowe nie pokrywają się jednak w pełni z hierarchią ma-jątkową. Oﬁ  arą nowych, wysoce rozwiniętych technik wyzysku nie są wcale klasy naj-
uboższe, ale klasa średnia i wyższa klasa średnia podatne na presję wywieraną przez neoliberalne technologie zarządzania, które rozbudzają aspiracje pełniejszego życia. Zarządzanie sobą w czasie staje się więc elementem logiki neoliberalizmu, narzędziem wyzysku czasu człowieka prowadzącym do pełnej internalizacji wyzysku przez wyzy-skiwanych […].
Potrzebujemy nowej wizji czasu. […] Dominująca obecnie wizja czasu przestała się 
sprawdzać, prowadzi bowiem do coraz większego skomplikowania świata, globalnych kryzysów, zmian klimatycznych i długu entropijnego. Nowa wizja czasu jest niezbędna, aby wymyślić nowe struktury i systemy społeczne, które nadejdą po neoliberalizmie.
fragmenty książkiCelina Strzelecka
Aranżowanie 
temporalności 
Kulturowe praktyki 
zarządzania czasem
Warszawa 2025
Wydawnictwo IFiS PAN poleca
reklama 1_2025.indd   2 30.06.2025   12:20:05Andrzej Waśkiewicz
Otium cum dignitae, 
czyli o godziwym spędzaniu czasu wolnego. Szkice z historii idei
Universitas 2025
Zainspirowany koncepcją Simmla de-
ﬁ niuję czas wolny jako taki, z którego 
wykorzystania jednostka nie ma obowiązku rozliczania się przed społeczeństwem. Zacho-wuję dla niego łaciński termin otium, by od-
różnić go od czasu wolnego, który w tej czy innej formie podlega jednak kontroli społecz-nej. […] Można je przyrównać do tradycyjnego kieszonkowego, jakie dzieci dostają od rodzi-ców: mogą je wydać na wszystko, byle nie na 
alkohol, papierosy, narkotyki i inne zastrzeżone prawem w ich wieku używki. Nie muszą się tłumaczyć, dlaczego regularnie wydają je na „głupoty”. Cycerońska dignitas jest 
jednak czymś więcej niż nawet najbardziej zajmującym hobby, o czym czytelnicy prze-
konają się przy lekturze kolejnych esejów. Zupełnie zmienia charakter otium […]. Nie 
jest to już czas wolny od aktywności publicznej i zawodowej, ale czas wykorzystany na 
inną aktywność, nie mniej ważną dla tożsamości jednostki niż tamte. Dla wielu to wła-śnie ona i tylko ona – trzeba to ująć patetyczną, choć nadużywaną formułą – nadaje sens życiu. Jeśli cieszy się jeszcze społecznym uznaniem, daje im powody do „słusznej dumy” z etyki Arystotelesa, jeśli nie – wpisuje się przynajmniej w ich „ﬁ  lozoﬁ  e życio-
we”. Inaczej niż negotium – o ile nie jest ono „powołaniem”, ale normalnym wykony-
waniem swoich powinności – otium tego rodzaju wyróżnia się reﬂ  eksyjnym podejściem 
do samego czasu, przekonaniem, że jest on rzeczą cenną. Rzec można, że idea otium 
cum  dignitate tworzy jedną z elit społeczeństwa, ale elitę szczególną, bo niemal niewi-
doczną. […] Z braku obiektywnych wskaźników i deklarowanej neutralności aksjologicz-nej akademicka socjologia może jedynie stwierdzić, że niektóre sposoby zagospodaro-wania czasu wolnego są „poważne” – bo niektórzy się w nie „na poważnie” angażują 
– a inne po prostu nie. Jedynie z perspektywy krytyki społecznej albo zaangażowanej 
socjologii dopuszczalne będzie stwierdzenie, że czas wolny niewypełniony żadnym sen-sownym zajęciem jest najzwyczajniej zmarnotrawiony.Wydział Socjologii UW poleca
 
OTIUM CUM DIGNITATEAndrzej Waśkiewicz
universitasCZYLI O GODZIWYM SPĘDZANIU CZASU WOLNEGO. 
SZKICE Z HISTORII IDEI
reklama 1_2025.indd   3 30.06.2025   12:20:05
Doświadczenie czasu […] jest […] naznaczone nierównościami społecznymi. 
Im niżej ktoś znajduje się w hierarchiach czasowych, im bardziej jego czas jest 
zawłaszczany przez inne prowadzące do czasowego niewolnictwa formy reżimów cza-su, im bardziej doświadcza ubóstwa czasu, tym mniejszą ma możliwość zarządzania sobą w czasie. Hierarchie czasowe nie pokrywają się jednak w pełni z hierarchią ma-jątkową. Oﬁ  arą nowych, wysoce rozwiniętych technik wyzysku nie są wcale klasy naj-
uboższe, ale klasa średnia i wyższa klasa średnia podatne na presję wywieraną przez neoliberalne technologie zarządzania, które rozbudzają aspiracje pełniejszego życia. Zarządzanie sobą w czasie staje się więc elementem logiki neoliberalizmu, narzędziem wyzysku czasu człowieka prowadzącym do pełnej internalizacji wyzysku przez wyzy-skiwanych […].
Potrzebujemy nowej wizji czasu. […] Dominująca obecnie wizja czasu przestała się 
sprawdzać, prowadzi bowiem do coraz większego skomplikowania świata, globalnych kryzysów, zmian klimatycznych i długu entropijnego. Nowa wizja czasu jest niezbędna, aby wymyślić nowe struktury i systemy społeczne, które nadejdą po neoliberalizmie.
fragmenty książkiCelina Strzelecka
Aranżowanie 
temporalności 
Kulturowe praktyki 
zarządzania czasem
Warszawa 2025
Wydawnictwo IFiS PAN poleca
reklama 1_2025.indd   2 30.06.2025   12:20:05Andrzej Waśkiewicz
Otium cum dignitae, 
czyli o godziwym spędzaniu czasu wolnego. Szkice z historii idei
Universitas 2025
Zainspirowany koncepcją Simmla de-
ﬁ niuję czas wolny jako taki, z którego 
wykorzystania jednostka nie ma obowiązku rozliczania się przed społeczeństwem. Zacho-wuję dla niego łaciński termin otium, by od-
różnić go od czasu wolnego, który w tej czy innej formie podlega jednak kontroli społecz-nej. […] Można je przyrównać do tradycyjnego kieszonkowego, jakie dzieci dostają od rodzi-ców: mogą je wydać na wszystko, byle nie na 
alkohol, papierosy, narkotyki i inne zastrzeżone prawem w ich wieku używki. Nie muszą się tłumaczyć, dlaczego regularnie wydają je na „głupoty”. Cycerońska dignitas jest 
jednak czymś więcej niż nawet najbardziej zajmującym hobby, o czym czytelnicy prze-
konają się przy lekturze kolejnych esejów. Zupełnie zmienia charakter otium […]. Nie 
jest to już czas wolny od aktywności publicznej i zawodowej, ale czas wykorzystany na 
inną aktywność, nie mniej ważną dla tożsamości jednostki niż tamte. Dla wielu to wła-śnie ona i tylko ona – trzeba to ująć patetyczną, choć nadużywaną formułą – nadaje sens życiu. Jeśli cieszy się jeszcze społecznym uznaniem, daje im powody do „słusznej dumy” z etyki Arystotelesa, jeśli nie – wpisuje się przynajmniej w ich „ﬁ  lozoﬁ  e życio-
we”. Inaczej niż negotium – o ile nie jest ono „powołaniem”, ale normalnym wykony-
waniem swoich powinności – otium tego rodzaju wyróżnia się reﬂ  eksyjnym podejściem 
do samego czasu, przekonaniem, że jest on rzeczą cenną. Rzec można, że idea otium 
cum  dignitate tworzy jedną z elit społeczeństwa, ale elitę szczególną, bo niemal niewi-
doczną. […] Z braku obiektywnych wskaźników i deklarowanej neutralności aksjologicz-nej akademicka socjologia może jedynie stwierdzić, że niektóre sposoby zagospodaro-wania czasu wolnego są „poważne” – bo niektórzy się w nie „na poważnie” angażują 
– a inne po prostu nie. Jedynie z perspektywy krytyki społecznej albo zaangażowanej 
socjologii dopuszczalne będzie stwierdzenie, że czas wolny niewypełniony żadnym sen-sownym zajęciem jest najzwyczajniej zmarnotrawiony.Wydział Socjologii UW poleca
 
OTIUM CUM DIGNITATEAndrzej Waśkiewicz
universitasCZYLI O GODZIWYM SPĘDZANIU CZASU WOLNEGO. 
SZKICE Z HISTORII IDEI
reklama 1_2025.indd   3 30.06.2025   12:20:05
Elżbieta Hałas
Reintroducing 
Florian Znaniecki 
Routledge 2025Wydział Socjologii UW poleca
This book reintroduces the work of Florian Znaniecki (1882–1958) as an inno-
vative constructor of modern sociology who viewed the processes of modernity 
through the prism of culture, and rediscovers his relational thought on the emergence and transformation of cultural and social systems. Exploring the contribution of Zna-niecki’s philosophy of culturalism to the cultural approach in sociology, it shows the 
importance of Znaniecki’s work for the foundation of sociology as one of the cultural 
sciences. Through an examination of his work on the world society from a cultural perspective, the author reveals Znaniecki to have been a pioneer of global sociology, and shows that sociology has much to gain from a fuller appreciation of his legacy in 
its understanding of processes of social and cultural change. Aimed at students and 
researchers of sociology, Reintroducing Florian Znaniecki will appeal to those with in-terests in the dynamics of culture, the cultural sciences, theoretical sociology and so-ciological methods. It presents stimulating analytical concepts and oﬀ  ers inspiration 
for research in many areas, including knowledge, science, education, creative leader-ship, the emergence of modern nations and the world society.
reklama 1_2025.indd   4 30.06.2025   12:20:06
