Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector
SOPHIE CHAO
Department of Anthropology, Macquarie University, Australia
Abstract The palm oil sector is widely associated w ith the destruction of the environment
in the pursuit of pro ﬁt. Drawing from ﬁeldwork in an oil palm concession in Riau, Sumatra,
I highlight a heretofore unexplored dimension of the agribusiness nexus —the affective
attachments of corporate actors to oil palm seeds. I begin by describing how nursery workersin their everyday practices adopt the role of motherly caregivers to seeds as their cherished
“babies. ”I then explore how scientists conceive experimental breeding as a way of caring
for the future of plants and the planet. This lov ing care contrasts with the violence entailed
in seed selection, controlled breeding, and regular culling. Furthermore, tensions arise be-
tween breeders and workers on the one hand and corporate “money makers ”on the other
over seeds as objects of care and sources of value. I demonstrate how seeds recon ﬁgure the
relations among human corporate practitioner s as they align with or run against each other
over matters of care. These internal tensions, however, remain framed by a shared depen-
dence on the well-being of oil palm. Divided as they may be over care, “caregivers ”and “money
makers ”alike ultimately live off the same seed. I highlight that care for seeds enacted by cor-
porate actors troubles the issue of how, and who, we should love, when it comes to a plant
whose proliferation produces and depends on the extinction of other species, and which isitself subjected to coercive violence. I argue that the inarguably destructive external effects
of the oil palm industry obscure the internal and con ﬂicting affective attachments of corpo-
rate actors to seeds. I assess the ethical implications of attending to lively yet lethal capitalas it emerges from situated practices of care with corporate assemblages.
Keywords care, corporations, oil palm, violence, seeds, capitalism, lively capital
“Love Your Darlings, Kill Your Darlings ”
Iwas sitting in a conference room on the thirty- ﬁfthﬂoor of the Harapan Baru head-
quarters, one of Indonesia ’s largest oil palm conglomerates.1Over the course of a
four-hour-long meeting, company representatives described the various stages of palm
oil production in the plantation, mill, re ﬁnery, and kernel crushing plant. The present-
ers referred to PowerPoint slides packed with formulas, ﬂowcharts, tables, and technical
jargon to explain how palm oil yield and pro ﬁt could be maximized. Finally, the meeting
1. All names of persons, places, and entities used in this article are pseudonyms.
Environmental Humanities 10:2 (November 2018)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-7156816 © 2018 Sophie Chao
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

facilitator introduced the last speaker, Guthrie, Head of Breeding and Nurseries, a lean,
bespectacled gentleman of some forty years of age. Guthrie gathered his notes in a
hurry and strode over to the podium, mumbling under his breath with excitement,
“Ah, seeds, seeds . . . ﬁnally, seeds! ”
Unlike the other presenters who limited their speeches to forty- ﬁve minutes, Gu-
thrie spoke for over two hours. His slides consisted entirely of photographs of seeds
rather than text and calculations. Guthrie referred throughout to seeds as “babies ”who
needed great attention because they were precious, young, and vulnerable. Gesturing
animatedly as he scrolled through his 136 slides, he explained each photograph in de-
tail: the morphology of seeds at different phases of growth, their movements from bio-
technology lab to plantation, and the various ways they were arti ﬁcially bred. Passion
and excitement were manifest in the way he talked about and sometimes tothe seeds:
“Look at you, growing beautifully! You would make any parent proud! ”
Whereas previous speakers presented their “data ”in a functional manner, Guthrie
spiced up scienti ﬁc facts with humorous anecdotes, sprinkled descriptions of complex
genomic sequences with personal experiences, and compared some seeds to his own
children: “This one is just like my eldest: it costs me so much in fertilizer to keep it
happy! ”Every so often, Guthrie chided his colleagues for forgetting that “oil palm is a
living being, not just money. We are not businessmen. We are nannies. We are caregiv-ers.”Agus, the head of mill operations, whispered in my ear, “That ’s a breeder for you.
They ’re all like that. They just can ’t stay away from their babies. ”
Guthrie ’s presentation conveyed a sense of deep concern for and cherishing of
seeds —in a word, a sense of care. At the same time, however, he talked about seeds in
terms of control, conditioning, and culling. “Babies ”who failed to achieve the standards
of an “elite ”he referred to as “runts ”and “rogues. ”Guthrie described arti ﬁcial breeding
in almost eugenic terms as “making the best children for the best future. ”Strict param-
eters of “normal ”growth determined which seeds lived or were discarded. Various abnor-
malities condemned the “inferior stock ”
to destruction —crinkled leaves, twisted shoots,
fungal rots, and more. No deviation was tolerated. Regular culling, for Guthrie, had a
simple rationale: “If in doubt, kill it. ”On the one hand, Guthrie talked with affection
about seeds as living beings rather than sources of pro ﬁt. Yet violence mingled with
love in Guthrie ’s stories. After the meeting, I asked him how he felt about culling, given
how much he cared about his “babies. ”Guthrie drew a long puff from his cigarette and
responded, “Caring is tough. No one said it ’s easy. You love your darlings. You kill your
darlings. It ’s tough love, I guess. ”
Monocrop plantations are a prime example of the mass commodi ﬁcation of other-
than-human life within global techno-capitalist regimes, or what Kaushik Sunder Rajan
and others describe as “lively capital. ”2Among these industries, the palm oil sector is
notorious for its destructive environmental impacts. Oil palm plantations reduce bio-
diversity and destroy the habitat of endangered species. They undermine ecosystem
2. See Rajan, Lively Capital.422 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

services such as nutrient cycling, water puri ﬁcation, and soil formation and stability,
and are major contributors to greenhouse gas emissions.3These effects are particularly
pronounced in Indonesia, the world ’s largest palm oil producer, with an estimated
8.9 million hectares of plantations. Despite widespread controversy over its social and
environmental impacts, the palm oil sector continues to expand across the tropical belt,
driven by national economic-development imperatives, renewable energy directives,
and a growing global population.4
Scholars across a range of disciplines have condemned the monocrop plantation
model for subjecting plants to human/techno-scienti ﬁc control to the detriment of pre-
existing multispecies worlds and the commodi ﬁed plant ’s own lifeway. For instance,
anthropologist Anna Tsing describes plantation science as a “hegemonic, extinction-
oriented creed ”rooted in the absolute domination of crops by humans.5Philosopher
Michael Marder decries the plantation model for violently homogenizing plant growth
and reproduction.6Plant explorer and geneticist Jack Harlan criticizes the uncompro-
mising “pure-line mentality ”of monocropping for eliminating variation in favor of uni-
formity from seed to plantation.7Political scientist and anthropologist James Scott con-
demns agronomic science for radically simplifying nature and excluding knowledge and
ecologies outside its productionist paradigm.8
In this article, I demonstrate that techno-capitalist violence enacted toward cash
crops and the environment, while indubitably signi ﬁcant, is only part of the story.
Drawing from ﬁeldwork carried out in an oil palm concession in the province of Riau,
Sumatra,9I highlight a heretofore unexplored dimension of the agribusiness nexus —
the affective attachments of corporate actors to oil palm seeds. I begin by describing
how nursery workers in their everyday practices adopt the role of motherly caregiversto seeds as their cherished “babies. ”
10I then explore how scientists conceive experimen-
tal breeding as a way of caring for the future of plants and the planet. This loving care
contrasts with the violence entailed in seed selection, controlled breeding, and regular
culling. Affect and care sit awkwardly alongside value and pro ﬁt in the situated prac-
tices of nursery workers and scientists.
In their analysis of “rice worlds ”in the Philippines, Glenn Stone and Dominic
Glover highlight how seeds lie at the heart of distinctive institutional and ideological
3. For a review, see Petrenko, Paltseva, and Searle, Ecological Impacts of Palm Oil Expansion .
4. See Pye and Bhattacharya, The Palm Oil Controversy.
5. Tsing, “Arts of Inclusion, ”19.
6. Marder, “Vegetal Anti-Metaphysics, ”469 –70; Marder, “The Sense of Seeds. ”
7. Harlan, “Genetics of Disaster, ”212.
8. Scott, Seeing Like a State , 262 –306, 342 –58.
9. Harapan Baru facilitated my visits to the plantation where I carried out interviews with employees over a
three-week period from November 1 –21, 2016. I also participated in meetings in Jakarta and Riau with company
staff from across the palm oil supply chain. This research was independently funded.
10. Interviews with nursery workers and scientists were carried out in Bahasa Indonesian and English
respectively. Bahasa Indonesia terms have been translated to English and set in quotation marks, followed by
the original in parentheses.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 423Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

bundles shaped by divergent and often con ﬂicting concepts of what rice should be and
how it should be produced.11In a similar vein, I explore internal contestations over care
within “palm oil worlds ”as their actors respond to the material agency of seeds in differ-
ent ways.12In the Harapan Baru concession, tensions over whether, how, and why seeds
should be cared for, arise between those intimately invested in seeds as living entities
(“caregivers ”) and those who perceive seeds solely as investments (“money makers ”).
These internal tensions, however, remain framed by a shared dependence on the well-being of oil palm. Divided as they may be over care, caregivers and money makers alike
ultimately live off the same seed.
Following the lead of Rajan ’s seminal edited volume, Lively Capital , I seek to open
new modes of inquiry into the entanglements of life and capital by exploring how seed
vitality materializes within the contested affective economy of the palm oil sector. I re-veal how vegetal “lively capital ”is simultaneously subject to human violence and care, a
perpetrator of environmental degradation, and an active participant in the “success ”of
capitalist endeavor. Situated care gives rise to the ontology of the seed as a vegetal
“body multiple ”produced by manifold practices and knowledges that “hang together ”
in more or less cohesive ways within the institutional assemblage of the plantation.
13
At the same time, seeds also recon ﬁgure the relations among human corporate practi-
tioners who align with or against each other over matters of care. Exploring care —both
loving and violent —as“an alignment of interests and practices, ”14I reveal how seeds,
genes, technologies, knowledges, affects, and power animate the palm oil sector as an
assemblage where, as Donna J. Haraway notes, “commerce and consciousness, evolu-
tion and bioengineering, and ethics and utilities are all in play. ”15I argue that care for
seeds in capitalist natures emerges as a situated interspecies process whose affectivevalence gives rise to internal tensions heretofore obscured by the industry ’s destructive
external effects.
My approach is inspired by the methods and concerns of multispecies ethnogra-
phy, an interdisciplinary current that explores the historical, political, and biological
life-worlds of diverse organisms that humans “become-with. ”Science and technology
studies, anthropology, the natural sciences, and other ﬁelds converge in this ethically
driven approach, which calls for care, curiosity, and respect in the cultivation of rela-tions with other-than-human species increasingly threatened in the late capitalist
era.
16These questions, multispecies scholars argue, are of immediate and practical
11. Stone and Glover, “Disembedding Grain. ”See also Glover, “A System Designed for Rice? ”
12. Brooks, “Living with Materiality. ”
13. Mol, The Body Multiple.
14. Hartigan, Care of the Species , xiii.
15. Haraway, When Species Meet ,4 6 .
16. van Dooren, Kirksey, and Münster, “Multispecies Studies ”; Kirksey and Helmreich, “The Emergence of
Multispecies Ethnography. ”424 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

consequence for all lifeforms, and converge around a shared concern, aptly phrased by
Matthew Chrulew: “How should we love in a time of extinction? ”17
This article contributes more speci ﬁcally to the budding “plant turn ”in multispe-
cies ethnography by exploring plant-people relations within a corporate setting.18I
argue that the practices of nursery workers and scientists in the Harapan Baru planta-
tion complicate notions of care so far developed primarily in the context of extinction
and conservation, and which tend to encourage greater concern and accountability to-ward lifeforms jeopardized by the violence of human actions.
19Oil palm is aggressively
exploited to feed and fuel human communities. At the same time, oil palm plantations
are a form of “lethal capital ”that threaten biodiversity by destroying forest ecologies.
Both these aspects highlight the ambivalent violence often enacted in the name of care,
or what Aryn Martin, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu describe as “care ’s darker side. ”20
And yet, deep-seated (if always coercive) human love for seeds lies at the very
heart of an industry that seemingly “doesn ’t care ”about anything other than pro ﬁt.
The “affective ecologies ”of the palm oil nexus highlight the ambivalent moral valence
of interspecies co-becomings in contemporary capitalist natures.21This ambivalence
has important ethical implications, given the ongoing expansion of palm oil production
across the tropical belt and its concomitantly growing community of global consumers.
In this light, I suggest that Chrulew ’s question merits the awkward complement of an-
other: how, and who, should we love in a time of destructive proliferation ?
Seed “Babies ”and Motherly Care
According to the majority of employees at Harapan Baru, the ﬁrst year or so of seedling
growth is “the most important time in the life of oil palm. ”Those responsible for the
well-being of seedlings in this critical period are the nursery workers, a group of approx-
imately thirty men originating from various parts of Indonesia and ranging between
twenty- ﬁve and forty- ﬁve years of age. Like Guthrie during his presentation in Jakarta,
the nursery workers of Harapan Baru refer to seeds and seedlings with the English
term “baby, ”a word borrowed in Bahasa Indonesia to refer primarily to human children
and romantic partners. My informants explained that seeds are “babies ”because they
are young and weak and require sustained care to grow well.22Flown in from the bio-
technology lab in Bogor (Java) or germinated in situ, seedlings and their environment
17. Chrulew, “Managing Love and Death, ”139.
18. On the “plant turn, ”see Sheridan, “Boundary Plants, ”39; and Myers, “Conversations. ”
19. For example, see Nabhan, Enduring Seed ; Parreñas, Decolonizing Extinction ; van Dooren, Flight Ways ;
Rose, Wild Dog Dreaming ; van Dooren and Rose, “Introduction. ”
20. Martin, Myers, and Viseu, “The Politics of Care, ”627.
21. On “affective ecologies, ”see Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum. ”
22. The anthropomorphization of seeds as vulnerable babies by nursery workers resonates with the
description of stem cells as fragile babies among placental laboratorians in Korea as described by Lee ( “Placen-
tal Economies, ”467 –68).Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 425Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

are the object of assiduous care during the period of “incubation, ”when they “adapt to
their new home. ”The nursery purchases soil from reputable suppliers to ensure that
it is nutrient-rich and disease-free. Each seedling is grown in an individual polybag
to avoid fungal cross-contamination. The distance between seedlings is carefully mea-
sured to ensure each receives suf ﬁcient water and sunlight. No cost, time, or detail is
spared in promoting their growth.
When the seedlings ’roots begin to perforate the polybags, they are ready to be
transplanted. This delicate process demands utmost caution to avoid causing trans-
plant shock to the plant ( ﬁg. 1). The small polybags containing the earth and seedling
are carefully placed inside a larger polybag, followed by copious amounts of fertilizer
and water. Just as a nimble and gentle touch is required to transfer the full root system
of the plant and avoid stunting its growth, so too only the best drivers are trusted totransport seedlings to the concession. In the nursery, Budi guided me through the rows
of plants and explained:
The babies are still weak, so we water them with mist twice a day. To help the seedlings
retain moisture, we scatter wood chippings, lemongrass stalks, and palm kernel shellson the soil surface. That also keeps the weeds from growing and stunting their growth.We spread palm kernel shells because it ’sn i c ef o rt h eb a b i e st og r o wc l o s et ot h e i rf a m i -
lies. That way, they feel they are at home, you know? It ’s like me —I’mf r o mM a n a d os o
I need my spicy Manado food to keep me going!
Agus, a nursery worker from Flores, pulled out a pair of cutters and crouched beside the
ﬁrst seedling in the row, caressing its soft downy stem. He cut off some dry leaves at the
crown of the plant and disposed of them in a plastic bag. Picking up a clump of soil and
sifting it carefully, he commented: “We make sure the soil is rich for the babies —like a
mother ’s milk. We mix it with Trichoderma, which is a fungus that makes the seedlings ’
roots stronger and more numerous. We always keep the babies in the shade, especially
the clones, because they need to rest and concentrate on growing. Hey, Budi, do I sound
like my mom or what?! Don ’t tell my wife; she ’ll think I ’ve gone soft! ”
Much like the phenomenology of plant-human interactions described by Natasha
Myers and others, close observation and tactile engagement feature prominently in the
practices of seed management that nursery workers perform on seeds.23These include,
for instance, the way workers stroke the plants, regularly water them, heal them by
removing parasitic abnormalities, nourish their soil environment with fertilizer, and
notice seedlings ’morphological particularities. Knowledge-as-vision interlaces with
knowledge-as-touch in the material relations of workers to seeds.24To take care of the
“babies, ”Agung, another nursery worker, told me, “You cannot have rough hands. You
23. See, for example, Myers, “Conversations ”;G l o v e r , “A System Designed for Rice? ”; Hartigan, Care of
the Species ; and Kortright, “On Labor. ”
24. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Touching Technologies. ”426 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

must have soft hands and a soft heart. Like a mother. ”This care requires technical
experience and knowledge, but more importantly, it calls for parental love on the part
of workers, which many workers like Agus compared to that of “mothers ”(ibu) toward
their babies.
Workers also joke about their relations to seeds in gender-in ﬂected ways. Like
Agus, they talk of becoming overly motherly or “sweet ”(manis ) because they care so
Figure 1. Improper
handling of seeding roots
can result in transplant
shock. Credit: Sophie ChaoChao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 427Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

much about their “babies. ”Workers ask each other how their “children ”are doing, the
joke being which “children ”are being referred to —plant or human. Workers who spend
excessive amounts of time fertilizing or watering the seedlings are teased: “You ’ll run
out of breastmilk at this rate! ”“How are you going to wean that baby if you keep feeding
it like that? ”Childless married workers are warned good-humoredly that their wives
will get angry when they ﬁnd out about all the “babies ”they have on the plantation.
Rian, who had not returned to his village or seen his children for over two years, jokedthat “[workers] look after the babies better than our own children. ”
Like proud parents, nursery workers express great personal satisfaction when the
seeds they attend to grow well. As we walked through the nursery, they pointed out
the seeds they oversaw, describing with fondness the intricate details of their growth,
diseases, morphology, origin, and so forth. The greatest pride is expressed by nurseryworkers in charge of the oil palm ramets, or clones, sprouted from a single parent
plant. The clone nursery, tellingly, is the only place in the entire twenty-thousand-
hectare concession where smoking is not permitted —and more importantly, where
that rule is respected. Here, 130-pound former police Rottweilers are unleashed every
night, their ﬁerce canine teeth and great speed a deterrent to anyone planning to steal
the precious “babies. ”
In clonal breeding, palms of optimal yield and resilience called ortets are re-
created through tissue cultures to produce ramets. It takes around ten years to select
an ortet, and its growth is subject to minute and regular monitoring throughout this pe-
riod to ensure the clone quali ﬁes as an “elite ”performer. While sexual reproduction
takes six months, clonal breeding requires around three years. Workers described the
delicate processes involved in ramet production as an “art”that requires immense pa-
tience, time, and attention. Ramets are sent from the biotechnology lab to the nursery
once genetic differentiation of the calli takes place and the ramet specializes as either a
shoot or a root. At this stage, the ramets are weak and vulnerable. Unlike sexually re-
produced seeds, ramets grow roots only after the stem has developed. Conditioned to
the 100 percent relative humidity of test tubes and humidity domes in the aseptic envi-
ronment of the laboratory, clones have little surface wax and have never been exposed
to sunlight. They are soft and fragile, “like a premature baby, ”said nursery worker Rudi.
The clones spend several weeks in an enclosed acclimatization room, where they
are soaked and rinsed in cocopeat to increase their pH. They also receive frequent fun-
gicide treatment and misting before being transplanted to the prenursery, where they
are housed in a separate unit to avoid contamination from normal seedlings. The entire
process is costly, resource-intensive, and frequently fails. But those ramets that succeedare the “children of the elite ”(anak elit ), said nursery worker Putri, because they produce
high yields and are resistant to drought and disease.
In her research on plant love in Mozambique, Julie Archambault highlights how
plant-human relations both constitute and symbolize broader socioeconomic orders.
25
25. Archambault, “Taking Love Seriously. ”428 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Many workers in the Harapan Baru concession relocated to Riau from other parts of
the archipelago to work on the plantation. Workers face inde ﬁnite separation from
their kin and relative con ﬁnement in the plantation. They live in an environment over-
whelmingly dominated by men across all levels and types of professions, yet heteroge-
neous in its ethnic and religious composition, which includes individuals from Java,
Sulawesi, Kalimantan, Nusa Tenggara, and Bali, of alternately Muslim, Catholic, or
Hindu denominations.
In this context, seedlings to some extent become symbolic children to whom nurs-
ery workers direct care in the absence of their own human families. Care enacted to
seeds, which Agung and others associate with the care of mothers to their infants,
might be conceived as emotional displacements of the loving attention workers cannot
give to or receive from their human relatives. For instance, by surrounding seedlingswith a “family ”(keluarga ) of palm kernels, Budi sought to make seeds “feel at home ”in
ways he himself could only imagine because of the distance between his native Manado
and his Riau workplace. Seeds thus appear to offer a surrogate form of intimacy in the
absence of laborers ’own family members. The distinctively gendered ways in which
workers conceive themselves as “mothers ”and seeds as “babies ”also suggest that the
nursery offers a social space in which workers might legitimately foreground their long-
ing to be both objects and subjects of maternal and paternal care in ways that mightnot otherwise be condoned —including by their human family, as Agus ’s joke suggests.
Furthermore, deep-seated yearnings for children, wives, and mothers are expressed
through the veiled medium of seed love in ways that transcend differences in culture
and creed. As Budi put it, “Agus may be Catholic and I may be Muslim, but we are the
same. We are all far from home, and our only family for now are the seeds. ”
Seed Identities and Futures
Seed scientists at the Harapan Baru research center are hired by the company to pro-
duce seeds of optimal yield and maximum pro ﬁt. However, the breeders I interviewed
rarely talk about seeds in these business terms. Instead, they describe seeds through
the places, events, and scientists that have shaped their genetic makeup, and ﬁnd
great professional and personal satisfaction from sharing seeds ’histories and trans-
national movements. These stories, breeder Lien af ﬁrmed, remind us that “the seed
has a past. ”Rolling out before me the pedigree diagram of Jaya Mas DxP (Deli x Pisifera),
the seed variety grown in the Harapan Baru nursery, Lien explained: “To know a palm
tree, you must know its seed. You must know who its mother and its father were, its
grandmothers, and its grandfathers. You must understand its past —not just the money
you can make off it. The businessman sees only dollar bills and rupiahs, but to care you
must see families in seeds —brothers, sisters, cousins, in-laws even! ”
Jaya Mas DxP is the genetic product of over a century of cross-fertilization trials
carried out by scientists around the world ( ﬁg. 2). Like all other oil palms in Indonesia,
it descends from the ﬁrst four palms introduced to the Bogor Botanic Gardens in 1848.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 429Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

The source of the germplasm of these four palms is subject to debate between present-
day Democratic Republic of Congo, Cameroon, Angola, and La Réunion. Lien described to
me how numerous cycles of progeny selection had been undertaken in Sumatra, Malay-
sia, Papua New Guinea, and Colombia. Eventually, these led to the development of “elite
dura ”and “elite pisifera ”varieties, whose cross-pollination produced the heterozygous
gamete, tenera (ﬁg. 3). Jaya Mas DxP is the offspring of female Deli dura and male AVROS
(Algemeene Vereeniging van Rubberplanters ter Oostkust van Sumatra) pisifera. “Deli re-
fers to the place where oil palm was ﬁrst planted in monocrop form in Indonesia.
“AVROS ”refers to the Dutch General Association of Rubber Planters on the East Coast
of Sumatra, the ﬁrst regional institute to research commodities including rubber and
oil palm. Different geographies and colonial histories coalesce in the body of the Jaya
Mas DxP seed.
If nursery workers practice care toward seeds through “intimate interactions ”that
are at once physical, affective, and gender-in ﬂected, in the laboratory, scientists prac-
tice “care of the species ”by cultivating “intimate knowledge ”about seeds ’distinctive
histories and biographies.26Scientists af ﬁrm that knowing the descent and relations of
seeds is central to recognizing their unique identity. At the same time, ascertaining thepast of the seed is necessary to determine its progeny. For instance, palm parents of ar-
tiﬁcially bred seeds must be of proven pedigree and are selected based on family and
individual performance tests to encourage the stacking of desirable traits in their
Figure 2. Jaya Mas DxP seedlings. Credit: Sophie Chao
26. On “intimate interactions, ”see Glover, “A System Designed for Rice, ”235. For “care of the species, ”
see Hartigan, Care of the Species ,8–11, 113.430 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

offspring. Bar coding, seed labeling, clone identity codes, and seed accreditation further
preserve the genetic purity of Jaya Mas DxP.
Knowing the genetic identity of seeds allows breeders to enhance the resilience of
their progeny through selective breeding. This is a form of care for seeds because, in
phyto-pathologist Rachman ’s words, “It makes seeds stronger and gives them a better
life.”In this regard, breeders position themselves within a broader community of scien-
tists who have shaped the future of seeds through breeding trials across time andspace, in what might be described as a form of “distributed care. ”As Rachman ex-
plained: “Each seed has an identity and an origin, and seeds travel to all kinds of places,
growing on different soils. Each seed makes a journey. By breeding them, we participate
in that journey, as many other scientists like us did in the past, and many others are
doing today across the world. We all want seeds to have a better life. Seeds make their
story with us. ”
While clonal reproduction takes place in the Harapan Baru biotechnology labora-
tory in Java, conventional and marker-assisted breeding take place on the plantation.
In conventional breeding, pollen from a dura ﬂower, isolated in a plastic case to avoid
natural pollination, is manually crossed over to fertilize an isolated pisifera ﬂower ( ﬁg.
4). With utmost care, human pollinators transfer the pollen to the base of the ﬂower
from a test tube with a quick blow, adding talcum and silica to the tube as desiccantsto avoid contamination from the blower ’s breath. Once fertilized, the seed bunch is
chopped, fermented, depericarped (the removal of the outer layer of the fruit), scraped,
sorted, printed with the Jaya Mas DxP yellow label, then rinsed and placed in cold stor-
age. When space is available in the prenursery, the seeds are soaked in vats of water
Figure 3. “The model offspring ”: tenera variety oil palm fruit. Credit: Sophie ChaoChao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 431Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

and germinate for forty- ﬁve days in a hot room. Dozens of workers, including a few
women volunteers from nearby communities, busy themselves at these activities in si-
lence, checking on germination rates, removing abortive seeds, and carefully counting
seed stock with checkerboards. As we walked through the hot room, Lien exclaimed:“It’s a maternity ward here. All the babies are taken care of and kept warm, like babies
in the womb. It ’s magical to see them sleep, then wake up, spreading their plumule
[the future stem and leaves], then their radicle [the future roots], discovering the
world, slowly, one after the other. It ’s a miracle, watching the seed grow. ”
Breeders talk of seed germination in affectively charged rather than scienti ﬁc lan-
guage, with the English terms “magical, ”“amazing, ”or“incredible. ”
27Like Lien, many
take pride in successful seed germination as the fruit of their technical labor and emo-
tional investment. At the same time, scientists acknowledge that human control is not
the only factor determining seeds ’development.28They also attribute seed growth
to the agency of the seed itself as an autonomous living being, “waking up ”to the world.
The seed responds to human acts of care through the “miracle ”of its growth, fascinat-
ing breeders with its capacity to “discover the world, ”slowly, in its own time. Resonat-
ing with Glover ’s analysis of the evolution of the System of Rice Intensi ﬁcation,29breed-
ers recognize that invention, discovery, and experimentation together participate in the
making of optimal seeds. Plants develop through the actions of the humans invested in
Figure 4. Controlled-pollination equipment and samples of tenera, pisifera, and dura fruit. Credit: Sophie Chao
27. For similar descriptions among rice researchers, see Kortright, “On Labor, ”572.
28. Rajan, Lively Capital ,1 7 .
29. Glover, “A System Designed for Rice? ”See also Brooks, “Living with Materiality, ”185–186; and Kort-
right, “On Labor, ”558.432 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

their growth, but plants are also endowed with the capacity to engage with the world
around them,30in what Marder describes as “vegetal non-conscious intentionality. ”31
The “selﬁng”of seeds, in John Hartigan ’s terms,32is an interspecies collaboration for
seeds, which, as Rachman put it, “make their story ”with humans.
The third form of breeding at the Harapan Baru research center is marker-assisted
breeding, which relies on molecular markers (fragments of DNA at certain locations
within the genome) to identify the plant ’s genetic sequence. The Shell gene of the seed
determines the thickness of the fruit kernel shell, or endocarp, and therefore the amount
of oily mesocarp and endosperm within it. Knowing the Shell gene variant thus allows
breeders to genetically screen seeds at the nursery stage and select only those that pro-
duce optimal yield for planting. As he ran through various genotype tests, Lien re-
marked: “Scientists invest so much to understand the genetics of seeds, and how they
might grow. It ’s like trying to predict the future. We are magicians, in a way, but the
magic lies in the DNA of the seed. It ’s wonderful to discover the seed ’s secrets, if only
you take the time to explore. Every seed is an adventure. ”Genetic sequencing is also
being used in crop architecture modeling to develop an oil palm “ideotype. ”Soil scien-
tist Budianto talked about the ideotype with excitement, rattling through the traits that
this “perfect seed ”would possess: high bunch number; high photosynthesis ef ﬁciency;
high density planting potential; high yield of quality oil; resistance to diseases, para-sites, drought, and water stress; a slow height increment (which allows a longer span of
productivity); strong nutrient uptake ef ﬁciency; and low free fatty acid content. This
seed, Budianto anticipated, would be “stronger than any other seed. It will be the oil
palm superhero! ”Producing the ideotype is a long-term project, particularly since oil
palm ’s genetic code was only sequenced in 2013.
33However, the idealized plant is the
object of eager anticipation among scientists like agronomist Rian, who noted: “The
ideotype is a futuristic scenario. Maybe in some thirty or forty years we will get there.
Until then, all we can do is make the seed stronger and healthier, plant by plant. Even-
tually there will be no more improvements needed. The seed will be perfect. No more
diseases, no more pests, no more basal stem rot. Seeds will have a better future. God,
I hope I am alive to see that day! ”
As with breeding in general, scientists conceive the perfection of seeds through ge-
netic sequencing as bene ﬁting seeds by making them immune to disease and adverse
climactic conditions. They describe marker-assisted breeding as the new frontier of ge-
netic research, an exhilarating journey to discover the “secrets ”of oil palm. The magic
of plants and the magic of scienti ﬁc endeavor come together in the shared “adventure ”
of making futures for seeds. In the context of widespread controversy over the
30. Myers, “Conversations, ”34.
31. Marder, Plant-Thinking , 153 –62.
32. Hartigan, Care of the Species ,9 4–97, 136 –39.
33. Bryce, “Sequenced Palm Oil Genome. ”Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 433Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

environmental impacts of oil palm expansion, breeding is also explained by scientists as
a way of caring for the future of the planet. More productive seeds will theoretically
limit the area of land converted to plantations. Alwi, a breeder trained at the renowned
Bogor Institute of Agriculture, explained: “Sustainability is the buzzword these days. You
hear it everywhere. Stop cutting the forest. Stop killing the orangutans. Stop grabbing
land off indigenous peoples. I couldn ’t agree more. But what people don ’t see is that
the most important change lies in the seed. If we improve the seed, it produces more.Therefore, we need less land to achieve the same yield. Sustainability starts in the
seed. Seeds are the future. ”Scientists like Alwi are distanced from the public advocacy
campaigns that condemn the palm oil sector for its adverse ecological effects. Yet they
conceive their breeding practices as an expression of altruistic care for the “sustainabil-
ity”of the planet, even as their contribution is not publicly acknowledged. Working be-
hind the scenes yet at the very heart of the industry, scientists see themselves as sup-
porting global futures through the professional and personal care they invest in seeds.
The seed becomes the promise and premise not only of its own future but also that of
humans. “Caring for the seed, ”as Lien put it, “is caring for the whole world. ”
Violent Care
María Puig de la Bellacasa describes care as inseparably “a vital affective state, an ethi-
cal obligation, and a practical labor. ”
34These facets coalesce in the practices of Harapan
Baru nursery workers and scientists toward seeds. For nursery workers, the phenome-
nology of seed care takes the form of motherly love, performed with a “soft heart ”and
“soft hands ”in the everyday, practical labors of seed observation, protection, and main-
tenance. Meanwhile, in the laboratory scientists conceive breeding in ethical terms as away of improving the future of seeds and the sustainability of the industry and planet.
Fragile yet lucrative organisms, seeds give rise to pride, fondness, curiosity, and fascina-
tion among their human “caregivers. ”Like the placental tissue economies described by
Jieun Lee, the biological vitality, or “biovalue ”of seeds arises from ﬂows of care involv-
ing different practices, relations, actors, and motivations.
35Seed economies in the palm
oil sector are also “economies of care ”in which the liveliness of plants is nourished and
enhanced by human bodily, affective, and ethical investments.36
At the same time, the life of seeds is governed by “regimes of violent care, ”a term
developed by Thom van Dooren to describe the entanglement of care with coercion in
interspecies relationships.37Subjected to the brutal logic of utilitarian pragmatism and
experimental optimization, every step in the seed ’s journey from the laboratory or
nursery to the plantation is determined by stringent parameters of growth and health,
34. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Nothing Comes without its World, ”197.
35. Lee, “Placental Economies. ”
36. Ibid., 459.37. van Dooren, Flight Ways.434 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

set by the company to achieve high yield and pro ﬁt. Plants that fail to meet these stan-
dards are immediately culled. In this violent care, the touch that enables affective rela-
tions between humans and seeds transforms into a violent invasion that determines
which plants get to live well or die young.38
For instance, to enter the prenursery, seeds must reach a set length and width of
plumule and radicle, both of which must grow in directly opposite directions. The plu-
mule must be an ivory yellow and thinner than the radicle, which should be no morethan two centimeters long. Seeds that are white, small, split, affected by fungi, with
undeveloped or overextended plumules and radicles, are trashed or incinerated. The
draconian selection process continues in the nursery. Seedlings destroyed include
those with overly short, narrow, blunt, or broad pinnae, overly short or wide internodes,
compressed fronds, ﬂaccid anatomies, and/or overly rigid (and therefore sterile) mor-
phologies. They include seedlings whose leaves and rachis are yellowing, dull, ﬁshbone
shaped, crinkled, atrophic, or desiccated. They also include seedlings with hooked or
corrugated lea ﬂets, chlorotic stripes, necrotic lesions, orange frond discoloration, and
signs of disease including ganoderma ,helminthosporium ,a n d curvularia . These and others
are the many criteria that distinguish the treasured from the trashed.
Three cullings take place during the ﬁrst nine months of seedling life, before their
leaves begin to overlap and mask diseased or stunted plants. Seedlings are clustered ac-cording to age group so that individuals demonstrating signs of poor growth are easily
identi ﬁed (ﬁg. 5). A ﬁnal culling is undertaken before the seedlings are transplanted to
the concession. In between, further culling takes place on an ad hoc basis. Every day,
nursery workers tick off plants to be disposed of from the nursery population chart
in the head of ﬁce. Up to 40 percent of seedlings may be discarded over this three-year
period.
As the seedling grows into a mature palm, the culling continues based on yield cri-
teria. For instance, Jaya Mas DxP “strong performers ”must bear fruit within twenty-four
months, at a yield of eight to ten tons of fresh fruit bunches per hectare. Between three
and eight years, their yield must increase to a minimum twenty-six tons per hectare.
Palm oil extraction rates must be over 24 percent and kernel oil extraction rates over
6 percent. Plants that fail to achieve these targets undergo a radical dismembering.Felled, deboled, defronded, chipped, and stacked by the voracious mandibles of trunk
shredders, faulty palms are pulverized in under four minutes.
The violence of culling is compounded with the violence of arti ﬁcial breeding. In
controlled pollination, plants are isolated from their natural environment in tightly fas-
tened plastic bags. Pesticides sprayed in abundance cut off birds and insects from theirsymbiotic relations with oil palm. In clonal reproduction, abnormalities frequently arise,
and defective samples are immediately destroyed. These include ramets to whom the
elite characteristics of the ortet are not passed on because they turn out to be
38. On the violence of touch, see Puig de la Bellacasa, “Touching Technologies, ”300.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 435Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

phenotypic rather than genotypic. They also include infertile ramets that produce no
fruit bunches, or produce them prematurely, leading to small and poor-yield fruit ( ﬁg.
6). In marker-assisted experimentation, thousands of plants are sacri ﬁced in the pursuit
of the perfected ideotype.
As with Guthrie ’s presentation at the Harapan Baru headquarters, the way scien-
tists describe seeds changes when seeds fail to grow well. Once-cherished “babies ”are
demoted to the categories of “runts, ”“rogues, ”and “renegades, ”English terms used by
breeders to describe faulty seeds. “Elite seeds ”are contrasted to the “inferior stock. ”Pho-
tos of seed morphology in the nursery show the difference between “normal ”(biasa ) and
“worthless ”(apkir ) seeds. Just as the growth of seeds depends in part on the seed ’s own
agentive vitality, so too the responsibility for failed development is distributed across
species lines. Indeed, workers and scientists overwhelmingly attribute abnormalities
to factors outside human control, notably the “will”(niat) of the plant itself, which man-
ifests in the form of poor nutrient uptake, limited capacity for moisture retention, or
genetic inferiority. As “babies ”turn into “rogues, ”workers and scientists dissociate
themselves from their role as caregivers and absolve themselves of responsibility byplacing the onus to grow well on the plant itself. “After all, ”noted Budi, “we can only
do so much. After that, it ’s up to the seed. ”
Nursery workers and scientists af ﬁrm that love and violence are necessary to en-
sure healthy seed growth. Both constitute forms of care.
39For instance, Lien described
Figure 5. Planting seedlings according to age facilitates the identi ﬁcation of “runts ”and “rogues. ”
Credit: Sophie Chao
39. van Dooren, Flight Ways ,8 7–124.436 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

culling as a “compassionate ”act that spares weak plants a lifetime of disease and inevi-
table death. Selection is also altruistic in that it prevents the contamination of healthy
seedlings and allows strong plants to obtain nutrients, water, and fertilizers otherwisewasted on weak plants. Lien explained:
If we don ’t get rid of the diseased seedlings, they contaminate the others, and more
must be culled. By culling the weak, we help the strong live. Otherwise, the fertilizersare wasted on the runts. Ganoderma , for instance: it ’s a fungus that spreads so damn
fast, like cancer. Because oil palm ’s roots grow laterally, the rot spreads quickly to other
plants, and then we not only have to destroy the plants, but also replace all the soil.Sometimes, culling is the kindest thing to do.
The violence of culling, selection, and breeding demonstrates that love for seeds is con-
ditional on the seed ’s ability to respond to human care by thriving, albeit along narrowly
prescribed lines. This loving is valued so long as caregivers can detach themselves emo-
tionally when violence is called for. Violent care itself is selective in terms of which
plants survive. Indirectly, culling helps healthy plants survive by eradicating the“rogues, ”reserving more resources for those beloved seeds that achieve growth targets.
For the “rogues ”—as the direct objects of culling —“violent care ”means immediate
death. Yet culling also spares “rogues ”the cruelty of disease and poor growth. These
acts of killing are also part of caring for things other than individual seeds and plants.
Much as van Dooren describes the care for species in the violence directed toward indi-vidual cranes and other avian critters,
40culling the weak enables oil palm scientists and
workers to focus their attention and resources on nurturing and developing more ef ﬁ-
cient and sustainable plant varieties, including, eventually, the ideotype. In this sense,
sacriﬁcing individual organisms, too, constitutes a form of care for the broader and
longer-term well-being of the palm oil sector and the planet. As caregivers sway
Figure 6. Premature
inﬂorescence in a
clone seedling.
Credit: Sophie Chao
40. Ibid., 87.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 437Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

affectively between the enchantment of good growth and the disenchantment of failed
thriving in the (necro)biopolitics of seed care, affective attachments, scienti ﬁc knowl-
edge, and economic rationale all contribute to sealing the fate of seeds as darlings or
disposables.41
Caregivers and Money Makers
When describing their practices of seed care, breeders and nursery workers in the Hara-pan Baru plantation frequently contrast themselves with the ﬁnance, marketing, and
investment employees of the company, whom they refer to with the English term, money
makers . Money makers, breeders and nursery workers say, “do not understand seeds ”
(tidak mengerti biji )a n d “do not care about seeds ”(tidak peduli sama biji ). For money makers,
seeds are just “dollars and rupiah, ”as Lien put it. Money makers might be good at sweet-
talking investors and marketing palm oil products. But they lack the “soft hands and soft
heart, ”in Agung ’s words, required for seeds to grow well.
On one level, the contrast between money makers and caregivers arises from the
divergent forms and sites of their labor within the corporation. Money makers tend to
be based in of ﬁces in Pekanbaru, the capital of Riau province, or in Jakarta. Physically re-
moved from the materiality of the plantation, they lack affective involvement with and
knowledge of seeds and reduce them to percentages, charts, and statistics.
42Yet money
makers fail to recognize that, without care for seeds, no amount of calculation alone can
produce pro ﬁt. As Guthrie noted in his presentation, successful seed growth requires
that humans take on the role of loving “nannies ”rather than disengaged businessmen.
On this basis, scientists often felt they shared more in common with workers than with
money makers, even though scientists ’levels of education and salaries are closer to
those of the money makers. Indeed, whenever we visited the nursery, Lien made a
point of asking workers not to address him by his title of Doctor because “We are all the
same. Doctor or not, it doesn ’t matter. What matters is that we care about the seeds. We
are not money makers. ”
Furthermore, caregivers and money makers differ in terms of how and why they
value seeds —the former as living beings with potential to grow, the latter as generators
of pro ﬁt. The competing authority of caregivers and money makers is most evident
when it comes to deciding which plants should be culled and when. Caregivers tend to
want to give plants “a chance to heal ”and are curious to see how they might adapt to
disease or degradation. In contrast, money makers encourage culling as soon as signs
of deterioration surface. Caregivers are frustrated when money makers interfere in
these matters. “They don ’t see the plant, they only see pro ﬁt,”nursery worker Carlos
complained.
41. Myers, “Conversations on Plant Sensing, ”43; Hardt “Foreword, ”ix–x.
42. See Kortright, “On Labor, ”575–76.438 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Caregivers criticize money makers for neglecting seeds as living organisms. Con-
versely, money makers dismiss the affective attachments of caregivers to seeds because
these fall outside the utilitarian paradigm of pro ﬁt maximization. Whereas nursery
workers describe seed care in parental terms, money makers talk about seeds in the
functional language of standard operational procedures and corporate policies. Money
makers also deride caregivers for being “softies ”who, as Agus joked during the meeting
in Jakarta, “simply can ’t stay away from their babies. ”During nursery visits, ﬁnance and
marketing representatives made fun of parental terms used by workers to describe
seeds, calling them “lame ”and “embarrassing. ”Whereas workers enjoyed joking among
themselves about “becoming mothers, ”similar jokes coming from money makers fell
ﬂat, causing vexation and irritation.
In her work on iron-bioforti ﬁed rice in the Philippines, Sally Brooks demonstrates
the pressures placed on researchers by a funding environment demanding “impact at
scale ”within ever shorter time frames.43Similarly, in the Harapan Baru breeding center,
scientists complained about the exacting demands placed on them by money makers to
develop the ideotype as quickly and cheaply as possible. The money makers, breeders
said, do not understand the patience, rigor, and commitment required of scienti ﬁc
experimentation. They fail to appreciate the “magic ”of seeds as living beings who play
a part in scienti ﬁc discovery, a process never solely determined by the human re-
searcher. Refusing to “make time for care, ”44money makers see everything in terms of
immediate cost and revenue. These contrasting perceptions epitomize Chris Kortright ’s
distinction between “working on”and “working with ”seeds.45While money makers posi-
tion the human as producer and the plant as passive raw material, caregivers position
humans and plants as “working together ”in a situated relationship.
Some scientists also note with concern how they are often asked by money mak-
ers to exaggerate potential seed yields and resistance in meetings with clients. Breeders
who refuse to massage their ﬁndings to attract investors are criticized for being overly
fastidious “intellectuals ”or overly emotional “softies. ”Many money makers complain
about scientists ’frustrating ignorance of the strategic embellishments and convenient
gloss-overs required to close big deals. “Softies ”tend to be diplomatically steered away
from corporate meetings, including one I attended between Harapan Baru and potentialinvestors from the United States and Australia. When I asked if Lien, head of breeding,
would attend, the head of ﬁnance shook his head and responded: “No way, Lien never
talks with the investors! He talks to them like a professor giving a conference —way too
much detail! All investors want to know is how much money they can make with us.
Lien, he gets carried away, you know. No, Lien isn ’t good with this kind of thing. He ’s
too emotional about his seeds. ”As Stone and Glover note, the rhetoric surrounding
43. Brooks, “Living with Materiality, ”186.
44. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil. ”
45. Kortright, “On Labor. ”Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 439Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

biotechnology and its predicted impacts can often cause discomfort to those practition-
ers directly involved in scienti ﬁc experimentation.46At Harapan Baru, the capacity of
researchers to be transparent about the unknowns of seed technology is further com-
promised by their status as company employees. Tensions with money makers give
rise to re ﬂections among scientists about the risks of corporate endorsement that, as
Lien expressed, “puts science at the service of salesmen. ”For instance, some noted
that their employment by the oil palm industry undermined their credibility in theeyes of independent scienti ﬁc institutions. Others questioned the potential of breeding
to make palm oil production more sustainable, given the corporate logic of always pur-
suing greater pro ﬁts. On my last night in Riau, Lien shared his reservations with me:
I’ve been at this research center for over forty years now, but I do wonder about all the
stuff we do to oil palm —the culling, the breeding. The millions of plants we destroy, the
waste of life. Scientists and businessmen, they don ’t really mix. For the money makers,
you can ’t care about something that doesn ’t have ﬁnancial value. For me, it ’s the other
way around. Value comes from caring. But maybe I ’ve become a softie. Maybe it ’s time
for me to retire! Then, I could grow my own garden. I ’ve always wanted to grow my own
garden.
Martin, Myers, and Viseu describe care as a “selective mode of attention ”that privileges
some lives while excluding others. They remind us that asymmetrical power dynamics
inevitably determine who has the power to care, what care means in practice, and to-ward what objects care is either exercised or withheld.
47In the Harapan Baru conces-
sion, caregivers and money makers selectively privilege divergent yet coexistent aspects
of seeds —their magic as plants versus their potential as pro ﬁt. Scientists, like nursery
workers, form intimate personal attachments to seeds as living objects of intimate care.
Yet as they engage in the necessary labor of killing seeds that fail to produce expectedyields, they face dif ﬁcult decisions over how, from whom, and why, to care.
48These
decisions are complicated by the interference of money makers, whose resources scien-
tists depend on to practice seed care in the ﬁrst place.
Science and technology studies scholars have noted how science practitioners can
become affectively transformed by their subjects of inquiry.49Brian Massumi ’sd eﬁni-
tion of affect as “the power to affect and be affected ”helps elucidate the tension be-
tween caregivers and money makers in the Harapan Baru concession.50Seeds as “lively
46. Stone and Glover, “Disembedding Grain, ”86, 94 –96.
47. Martin, Myers, and Viseu, “The Politics of Care, ”627.
48. On “the necessity and labor of killing, ”see Haraway, When Species Meet ,8 0 .
49. See, for example, Despret, “The Body We Care For ”; Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum ”;
Latimer and Puig de la Bellacasa, “Re-thinking the Ethical ”; and Myers, “Conversations. ”
50. Massumi, Politics of Affect ,i x .440 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

capital ”generate “lively affects ”among their human counterparts51—wonder, tender-
ness, and curiosity, among others. Seeds also enlist humans in contested regimes of
care, prompting contextual alignments and divisions among corporate actors as they
side with or against each other over matters of care. Scientists and workers align in
their capacity to exert positive transformations in seeds and become themselves emo-
tionally invested in seed life. In contrast, money makers are concerned solely with “the
power to affect ”seeds by optimizing them as commodities. While for scientists like Lien
the practice of caring endows seeds (and seed-human relations) with affective and ethi-
cal value; for the money makers, market value prevails over affective care. Value, as a
material and ethical concept,52is imbricated with care for both groups of actors, but
these concepts diverge in their attributed precedence. For scientists like Lien, the value
of seeds —affective and material —arises from practices of care, whereas for money mak-
ers like Budi, ﬁnancial value alone justiﬁessustained care.
The dilemma faced by caregivers can be understood as a struggle over “response-
ability, ”Haraway ’s term for the ethical responsibilities of researchers toward their
worlds and their capacity to be affected by their objects of inquiry.53Scientists and nurs-
ery workers af ﬁrm that love for seeds is imperative to successful seed growth. Yet
“tough love, ”in Guthrie ’s words, is needed when seeds fail to deliver expected yields
and pro ﬁt. Scientists must also temper their love for seeds to avoid being discredited as
“softies ”by the money makers. The worlds scientists inhabit are plural yet enmeshed —
corporate and scienti ﬁc, human and vegetal. Each demands a different yet mutually
dependent modality of ethical response. Being response-able to all parties is a compli-
cated endeavor, not least because scientists recognize that money makers, too, care in
their own way. After all, pushing for the mass production of high-yield plants guaran-tees that employees ’salaries are paid, and the world is fed and fueled. Overlapping “re-
gimes of care ”
54arise within the contested space of the plantation and its interspecies
relationships, as situated actors contend over who gets to speak for the seed.55The ten-
sion between caregivers and money makers and their respective notions of care and
value reveals itself as a necessary paradox within the plantation economy.
Conclusions
Human-seed relations explored in this article highlight the situated meaning of care in
the productionist ecologies of late neoliberal capitalism.56On the one hand, the various
forms of seed exploitation and manipulation practiced by workers and scientists sup-
port the critique of monocrop ecologies. Seeds and their ecosystems are enlisted in the
51. Rajan, Lively Capital , 16, 23 –24.
52. Ibid., 19.53. Haraway, When Species Meet.
54. van Dooren, Flight Ways ,8 7–124.
55. Barnes, “Separating the Wheat from the Chaff, ”95.
56. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Nothing Comes without Its World, ”211.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 441Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

schemes of biotechnology and the dreams of biocapitalism.57Possessed by the spirit of
capitalism and its productivist agendas,58the oil palm seed is a “captive form of life, ”in
van Dooren ’s sense of a life produced through fundamentally coercive relationships.59
Following Harry Cleaver and Jason Moore, one might describe seeds as the nonwaged,
extrahuman workers whose vitality is appropriated and transformed by humans into
capitalist value.60
Yet oil palm seeds are also lethal capital whose proliferation wreaks ecological
havoc on complex biological systems. The notion of lethal capital complements the no-
tion of species as “lively capital ”developed by Rajan and others by attending to the
destructive effects of particular lifeforms on other organisms and the environment.
Lethal capital might encompass proliferating cash crops such as oil palm and soy, but
also invasive and introduced species that radically undermine existing ecosystems andtheir living communities. The concept draws attention to unloving rather than “un-
loved ”organisms that do violence to other species and their environment.
61
At the same time, however, capitalist “natures ”such as monocrop plantations are
also multispecies “contact zones ”where humans become invested in material, ethical,
and affective ways in the seeds toward which they practice care.62At the heart of the
plantation system is a group of people who nurture these organisms as seeds of life
rather than kernels of pro ﬁt. The forms of care they exercise are distinctive: passionate,
parental, highly scienti ﬁc, but also conditional and brutally selective. Yet scientists and
nursery workers in their own ways also practice “multispecies love ”as they immerse
themselves in the lives of their vegetal “babies. ”63The widely documented destructive
external effects of the oil palm industry obscure the internal care that animates the
affective attachments of corporate actors to seeds, even as these attachments remainmarginalized within the dominant logic of neoliberal capitalism and techno-scienti ﬁc
advancement.
64
In this light, condemnations of the violence of biotechnical capitalism, while legit-
imate in many respects, fail to appreciate the ways in which corporate actors ’affective
attachments to plants as agentive lifeforms may transcend plants ’value as capital.65In
these economies of affect, seeds constitute what Susan Leigh Star and James Griesemer
describe as “boundary objects. ”66Alternately “babies, ”“runts, ”or“green gold, ”the seeds
57. Kirksey, Schuetze, and Helmreich, “Introduction, ”1.
58. Kirksey, Emergent Ecologies ,1 6 9 –70.
59. van Dooren, Flight Ways ,8 7–124.
60. Cleaver, Reading Capital Politically ; Moore, Capitalism.
61. On “unloved species, ”see van Dooren and Rose, “Introduction. ”
62. On “contact zones, ”see Kirksey, “The Multispecies Salon, ”8; Barad, “On Touching, ”208; Haraway,
When Species Meet , 287.
63. On “multispecies love, ”see Tsing, “Arts of Inclusion, ”19.
64. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”692.
65. See Glover, “A System Designed for Rice? ”
66. Star and Griesemer, “Institutional Ecology. ”442 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

accrete meaning as they travel across material and affective realms, while also draw-
ing together (but also apart) disparate yet mutually dependent individuals within the
corporate nexus. In Harapan Baru, the drive for care toward crops as commodi ﬁable
produce rarely goes uncontested —including by the sector ’s own constituents.67The vio-
lence of seed selection, manipulation, and culling certainly imposes on seeds a singular
mode and temporality of growth.68Yet seeds too are living histories constituted by the
places, practices, and persons involved in their management across time and space.Even in the techno-capitalist ecology of monocrop oil palm plantations, “nothing
comes without its world. ”
69
To return to Chrulew ’s question and my counter-question in the introduction to
this article, extinction and proliferation are both at play in the palm oil matrix. Care for
seeds enacted by corporate actors troubles the issue of how, and who, we should lovewhen it comes to a plant whose proliferation causes and depends on the extinction of
other species, and which is itself subjected to coercive violence. Care within the palm
oil sector is, as Puig de la Bellacasa notes, “political, messy and dirty, not an innocent
category. ”
70A nonidealized vision of care requires attending to con ﬂicts and tensions
inherent in the relational practices of knowing, thinking, and acting in capitalist inter-
species relations.71As we wade through the troubled waters of cui bono ,o r “who bene ﬁts
[more] ”in the techno-scienti ﬁc politics of making and perfecting the species,72we must
also attend to life-generating care exercised within entities widely associated with the
life-destroying pursuit of pro ﬁt.
As Rajan notes, technoscience is coproduced through the deliberations and ac-
tions of policy makers, activists, purchasers, and other actors.73Similarly, the implica-
tions of this article extend beyond the realm of the plantation and the body of the seed.Palm oil is the most popular and cheapest vegetable oil on the market, and an ingredi-
ent in over half of all packaged goods, including foodstuffs, cosmetics, and cleaning
products. We, too, as consumers, participate in the social world of oil palm as a grow-
ing global commodity of worldly consequences. Refusing “only-human stories ”of the
biosocial transformations wrought by techno-scienti ﬁc capitalism, as I have sought to
do, is a critical starting point in rethinking interspecies relations in more ethically
grounded ways.
74This includes cultivating “arts of attentiveness ”75toward organisms,
like oil palm, of destructive and ethically ambivalent effects.76Lively “ethographies ”77
67. On commodi ﬁable produce, see Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”700.
68. Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World , 168.
69. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Nothing Comes without its World. ”
70. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”707. See also Rajan, Lively Capital ,4 4 0 –46.
71. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Nothing Comes Without its World, ”204.
72. Haraway, Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.
73. Rajan, Lively Capital ,1 7 .
74. van Dooren, Kirksey, and Münster, “Multispecies Studies, ”2–3, 6.
75. van Dooren, Kirksey, and Münster, “Multispecies Studies. ”
76. Ginn, Beisel, and Barua, “Flourishing. ”
77. Van Dooren and Rose, “Lively Ethography. ”Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 443Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

such as the seed stories shared in this article bring us to realize that to consume palm
oil is to become involved in the manifold extinctions and proliferations that produce
palm oil as a multispecies process. Each seed embodies the simultaneous liveliness and
lethality of commodi ﬁed lifeforms. And just as the presence of each seed is enabled by
the absence of countless culled others, so too every drop extracted from it carries
within it a complex history of consequential care and coercion.
SOPHIE CHAO is a doctoral candidate in social anthropology at Macquarie University, Sydney.
She received her bachelor of arts in oriental studies and master of science in social anthropologyfrom the University of Oxford. Sophie has previously worked for the United Nations Education,
Science, and Culture Organization (UNESCO) and human rights organization Forest Peoples Pro-
gramme in Indonesia. She is coeditor of Conﬂict or Consent? The Palm Oil Sector at a Crossroads
(2013), “A Sweetness Like unto Death ”: Voices of the Indigenous Malind of Merauke, Papua (2013),
and Divers Paths to Justice: Legal Pluralism and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in Southeast
Asia (2011).
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to the staff members of Harapan Baru for their support and participation in the ﬁeld-
work on which this article is based. I also thank Jaap Timmer, Eben Kirksey, and Greg Downey for
their critical insights. This research was funded by an Endeavour International Postgraduate Scholar-ship, a Wenner-Gren Dissertation Fieldwork Grant, and a Macquarie University Fieldwork Research
Grant. I also thank the three anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions.
References
Archambault, Julie S. “Taking Love Seriously in Human-Plant Relations in Mozambique: Toward an
Anthropology of Affective Encounters. ”Cultural Anthropology 31, no. 2 (2016): 244 –71. doi:10.14506
/ca31.2.05.
Barad, Karen. “On Touching —The Inhuman That Therefore I Am. ”Differences 23, no. 3 (2012): 206 –23.
doi:10.1215/10407391 –1892943.
Barnes, Jessica. “Separating the Wheat from the Chaff: The Social Worlds of Wheat. ”Environment and
Society: Advances in Research 7( 2 0 1 6 ) :8 9 –106. doi:10.3167/ares.2016.070106.
Brooks, Sally H. “Living with Materiality or Confronting Asian Diversity? The Case of Iron-Bioforti ﬁed
Rice Research in the Philippines. ”East Asian Science, Technology and Society 5, no. 2 (2011): 173 –88.
doi:10.1215/18752160 –1262736.
Bryce, Emma. “Sequenced Palm Oil Genome Paves the Way for Sustainable Plantations. ”Guardian ,
July 26, 2013. www.theguardian.com/environment/wor ld-on-a-plate/2013/jul/26/palm-oil
-genome-deforestation-sustainability .
Chrulew, Matthew. “Managing Love and Death at the Zoo: The Biopolitics of Endangered Species Pre-
servation. ”Australian Humanities Review (Online) 50 (2011): 137 –57.www.australianhumanities
review.org/archive/Issue-May-2011/chrulew.html .
Cleaver, Harry M. Reading Capital Politically . Brighton, UK: Harvester, 1979.
Despret, Vinciane. “The Body We Care For: Figures for Anthropo-Zoo-Genesis. ”
Body Society 10, no. 2 –3
(2004): 111 –34. doi:10.1177/1357034X04042938.
Ginn, Franklin, Uli Beisel, and Maan Barua. “Flourishing with Awkward Creatures: Togetherness,
Vulnerability, Killing. ”Environmental Humanities 4 (2014): 113 –24. doi:10.1215/22011919 –3614953.
Glover, Dominic. “A System Designed for Rice? Materiality and the Invention/Discovery of the Sys-
tem of Rice Intensi ﬁcation. ”East Asian Science, Technology and Society 5, no. 2 (2011): 217 –37.
doi:10.1215/18752160 –1273080.444 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

Haraway, Donna J. Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium. FemaleMan©_Meets_OncoMouseTM:F e m i n i s m
and Technoscience. New York: Routledge, 1997.
⸻ .When Species Meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008.
Hardt, Michael. “Foreword: What Affects Are Good For. ”InThe Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social ,
edited by Patricia C. Ticineto and Jean Halley, ix –xiii. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007.
Harlan, Jack R. “Genetics of Disaster. ”Journal of Environmental Quality 1, no. 3 (1972): 212 –15. doi:
10.2134/jeq1972.00472425000100030002x.
Hartigan, John Jr. Care of the Species: Races of Corn and the Science of Plant Biodiversity .M i n n e a p o l i s :U n i -
versity of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Hustak, Carla, and Natasha Myers. “Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the Sciences
of Plant/Insect Encounters. ”differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies 23, no. 3 (2012): 74 –
118. doi:10.1215/10407391 –1892907.
Kirksey, Eben S. Emergent Ecologies . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2015.
⸻ .“The Multispecies Salon. ”Antennae 32 (2015): 8 –12.
Kirksey, Eben S., and Stefan Helmreich. “The Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography. ”Cultural
Anthropology 25, no. 4 (2010): 545 –76. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01069.x.
Kirksey, Eben S., Craig Schuetze, and Stefan Helmreich. “Introduction: Tactics of Multispecies Eth-
nography. ”InThe Multispecies Salon , edited by Eben S. Kirksey, 1 –24. Durham, NC: Duke Univer-
sity Press. 2014.
Kortright, Chris. “On Labor and Creative Transformations in the Experimental Fields of the Philip-
pines. ”East Asian Science, Technology and Society 7, no. 4 (2013): 557 –78. doi:10.1215/18752160 –
2392710.
Latimer, Joanne, and María Puig de la Bellacasa. “Re-thinking the Ethical: Everyday Shifts of Care in
Biogerontology. ”InEthics, Law, and Society , edited by Nicolette Priaulx and Anthony Wrigley,
153–74. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2013.
Lee, Jieun. “Placental Economies: Care, Anticipation, and Vital Matters in the Placenta Stem Cell Lab
in Korea. ”BioSocieties 11, no. 4 (2016): 458 –75. doi:10.1057/biosoc.2016.8.
Marder, Michael. “The Sense of Seeds, or Seminal Events. ”Environmental Philosophy (2015): 87 –97.
doi:10.5840/envirophil201542920.
⸻ .Plant-Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal Life . New York: Columbia University Press, 2013.
⸻ .“Vegetal Anti-Metaphysics: Learning from Plants. ”Continental Philosophy Review 44, no. 4
(2011): 469 –89. doi:10.1007/s11007 –011–9201 –x.
Martin, Aryn, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu “The Politics of Care in Technoscience. ”Social Studies of
Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 625 –41. doi:10.1177/0306312715602073.
Massumi, Brian. Politics of Affect . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2015.
Mol, Anne-Marie. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice . Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2002.
Moore, Jason. Capitalism in the Web of Life . Brooklyn: Verso, 2015.
Myers, Natasha. “Conversations on Plant Sensing: Notes from the Field. ”NatureCulture 3 (2015): 35 –66.
Nabhan, Gary P. Enduring Seeds: Native American Agriculture and Wild Plant Conservation .S a nF r a n c i s c o :
North Point, 1989.
Parreñas, Juno S. Decolonizing Extinction: The Work of Care in Orangutan Rehabilitation . Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2018.
Petrenko, Chelsea, Julia Paltseva, and Stephanie Searle. Ecological Impacts of Palm Oil Expansion in Indo-
nesia. ICCT White Paper. Washington, DC: The International Council on Clean Transportation,
2016. www.theicct.org/sites/default/ ﬁles/publications/Indonesia-palm-oil-expansion_ICCT_
july2016.pdf .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”So-
cial Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716. doi:10.1177/0306312715599851.
⸻ .“‘Nothing Comes without its World ’:T h i n k i n gw i t hC a r e . ”Sociological Review 60, no. 2 (2012):
197–216. doi:10.1111/j.1467 –954X.2012.02070.x.Chao / Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector 445Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

⸻ .“Touching Technologies, Touching Visions: The Reclaiming of Sensorial Experience and the
Politics of Speculative Thinking. ”Subjectivity 28, no. 1 (2009): 297 –315. doi:10.1057/sub.2009.17.
Pye, Oliver, and Jayati Bhattacharya. The Palm Oil Controversy in Southeast Asia: A Transnational Perspec-
tive. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, 2013.
Rajan, Kaushik S. Lively Capital: Biotechnologies, Ethics, and Governance in Global Markets . Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2012.
Rose, Deborah B. Wild Dog Dreaming: Love and Extinction . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
2011.
Rose, Deborah B., and Thom van Dooren. “Introduction. ”Australian Humanities Review , vol. 50. Special
issue, “Unloved Others: Death of the Disregarded in the Time of Extinctions, ”edited by Debo-
rah Bird Rose and Thom van Dooren, 1 –4, 2011.
Scott, James C. Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed .N e w
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998.
Sheridan, Michael. “Boundary Plants, the Social Production of Space, and Vegetative Agency in
Agrarian Societies. ”Environment and Society: Advances in Research 7( 2 0 1 6 ) :2 9 –49. doi:10.3167/
ares.2016.070103.
Star, Susan L., and James R. Griesemer. “Institutional Ecology, ‘Translations, ’and Boundary Objects:
Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907 –39.”Social Stud-
ies of Science 19, no. 3 (1989): 387 –420. doi:10.1177/030631289019003001.
Stone, Glenn D., and Dominic Glover. “Disembedding Grain: Golden Rice, the Green Revolution, and
Heirloom Seeds in the Philippines. ”Agriculture and Human Values 34, no. 1 (2016): 87 –102. doi:
10.1007/s10460 –016–9696 –1.
Tsing, Anna L. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins .P r i n c e -
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
⸻ .“Arts of Inclusion; or, How to Love a Mushroom. ”Australian Humanities Review (Online) 50
(2011): 5 –22.
van Dooren, Thom. Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction . New York: Columbia University
Press, 2014.
van Dooren, Thom, and Deborah B. Rose. “Lively Ethography: Storying Animist Worlds. ”Environmen-
tal Humanities 8, no. 1 (2016): 77 –94. doi:10.1215/22011919 –3527731.
van Dooren, Thom, Eben S. Kirksey, and Ursula Münster. “Multispecies Studies: Cultivating Arts of
Attentiveness. ”Environmental Humanities 8 (2016): 1 –23. doi:10.1215/22011919 –3527695.446 Environmental Humanities 10:2 / November 2018Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/10/2/421/1551220/421chao.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 11 October 2025

