Vol.:(0123456789)1 3Agriculture and Human Values (2021) 38:881–892 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-021-10191-4
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, 
and emergent taxonomies in northern Chile
Sebastián Ureta1  · Alvaro Otaegui1
Accepted: 5 January 2021 / Published online: 15 March 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021
Abstract
In recent decades, anthropogenic soils have become so ubiquitous that for some authors they should be taken as the “golden 
spike” signaling the start of the Anthropocene. Despite their prominence, leading soil taxonomies have resisted calls to rec-
ognize them as a proper kind of soil. Such omission has importantly limited the ways in which soil practitioners can account 
and deal with the sociopolitical aspects embedded in soil formation. Approaching the issue from a sociomaterial perspec-
tive, this paper studies the effects of such omission on the work of soil scientists working in northern Chile. By contrasting 
their usage of the USDA/NRCS soil typology with the realities found in the field, the work of strategic unknowing that such 
typologies achieve becomes evident. To challenge such situation, the paper concludes exploring the notion of emergent tax-
onomies, classifications that are sensitive to local configurations of materials, living beings and power out which soils emerge.
Keywords Anthropogenic soils · USDA/NRCS soil taxonomies · Strategic unknowing · Lines of flight
Abbreviations
ICOMANTH  International Committee on Anthropo-
genic Soils
USDA  United States Department of Agriculture
FAO  Food and Agriculture Organization
The (not so) biggest rat
In his opening remarks at the first meeting of the Interna-
tional Committee on Anthropogenic Soils (ICOMANTH) 
held in Las Vegas in September 1998, Horace Smith, then 
director of the Soil Survey Division of the US Department 
of Agriculture (USDA), referred to the challenges ahead for 
the committee in the following terms:
Now we are taking on another big challenge, anthro-
pogenic soils - perhaps the "biggest rat in the Soil 
Taxonomy barn." Why would I refer to anthropogenic soils as the "biggest rat in the barn?" Because com-
ing to grips with anthropogenic soils forces us to face 
some very complex and controversial issues that did 
not come to the front when we were dealing with other 
soil groups. As a result, we will be forced to revisit and 
perhaps rethink some of our basic concepts. … [For 
example] What is soil? This is an old question, one 
we have struggled with over the years. Dealing with 
anthropogenic materials adds a whole new dimension 
to it. (Kimble et al. 1998, p. viii)
ICOMANTH was formed by the USDA in 1988, as a 
technical committee endowed with “defining appropriate 
classes in Soil Taxonomy for soils that have their major 
properties derived from human activities” (ICOMANTH 
1995, p. 1). The main motivation of the committee was 
the recognition that current soil categories did a poor job 
when describing the kind of soils that most practitioners 
were increasingly finding in the field, soils where human 
intervention was utterly inescapable (for an overview of 
historical evidence see Capra et al. 2015). This intervention 
was so severe that “in many cases the ‘parent material’ is 
not earthy material that could be observed in landscapes not 
disturbed by human activity” (ICOMANTH 1995, p. 3). As 
a consequence, it was thought that novel soil nomenclatures 
might be necessary, even a whole new category for anthro-
pogenic soils. * Sebastián Ureta 
 sureta@uahurtado.cl
 Alvaro Otaegui 
 alvaro.otaegui@gmail.com
1 Department of Sociology, Universidad Alberto 
Hurtado, Erasmo Escala 1884, 8340577 Santiago, 
Santiago Región Metropolitana, Chile
882 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
This potential inclusion was not trivial. As noted by sev -
eral analysts (Engel-Di Mauro 2014; Hartemink 2016; War -
kentin 2006), since its very beginnings in the late nineteenth 
century, soil science has had as one its leading mantras the 
notion of soil as a “natural body,” meaning that soil is seen 
as being solely composed of physico-chemical properties 
and morphologies. More crucially, as explored by Selcer 
(2015, p. 184), this notion was one of the very few inter -
national agreements in a field crisscrossed by multiple and 
contradictory national, even regional, definitions and tax-
onomies. As a reaction to this, when the USDA soil taxono-
mies were enacted in 1975 they aimed at providing a clear 
classifying scheme through which, in the words of an USDA 
official, “all competent soil scientists, regardless of experi-
ence and rank, [would be] equally capable of accurately and 
consistently classifying soils” (Ditzler and Ahrens 2006, p. 
145). Such clearness rested in maintaining the notion of soils 
as a natural body, so from its inception the taxonomy did not 
acknowledge any kind of human presence in soils, seeing it 
(at best) as an external factor contributing to soil modifica-
tion. So, including a new category for anthropogenic soils in 
USDA soil taxonomies, “the lingua franca of pedologists” 
(Warkentin 2006, p. 201), was a revolutionary idea, opening 
different kinds of venues to rethink the relationships between 
human beings and soils in more integrated ways.
In line with this approach, at first ICOMANTH recog-
nized that physico-chemical and morphological patterns 
alone were no longer enough to classify a soil. In most cases, 
chemistry/morphology would need to be accompanied by 
another, more obscure (from the standpoint of soil science) 
discipline: social history. After all, “in the vast majority of 
cases of anthropogenic soils, the anthropogenic processes 
resulting in the present expression of morphology are a 
matter of historical record” (ICOMANTH 1995, p. 4). The 
recognition that soil not only has a geological but also a 
social historicity, appeared to be an attempt at putting aside 
the discipline’s foundational aversion to consider the “social 
aspects of soil formation” (Engel-Di Mauro 2014, p. 28), 
even mounting an open challenge to the notion of soils as 
solely “natural bodies,” following the conventional modern-
ist notion of nature as something completely separated from 
human beings.
However, in practice, this “rethink” was no more than a 
mere nod towards social history. This can be seen in the sec-
ond Circular Letter of 1997, where the committee assumed 
the principle that no matter the kind of possible categories 
and components researched, “the same groups of processes 
used in natural soils [should] apply to Anthropogenic soils” 
(ICOMANTH 1997, p. 2). As a result, any classification 
schema developed for anthropogenic soils must adapt to the 
usual categories and processes already considered in the 
taxonomy.Given this framing, in the end, it was the notion of anthro-
pogenic soils itself that ended up paradoxically having no 
place in the changes proposed by ICOMANTH. As its chair 
John Galbraith later explained:
The Committee has renamed its study subject [anthro-
pogenic soils to] “human-altered and human-trans-
ported” (HAHT) soils because humans can transport 
and manufacture materials that become soils and may 
affect (but do not control) biogeochemical pedogenic 
processes in natural settings where soils form. (Gal-
braith 2012, p. 1)
In the end, the conception of soil as a “natural body” pre-
vailed, mostly given ICOMANTH members’ commitment 
to the belief that “all soil genesis processes are natural. 
Although humans may generate new materials and add them 
to the environment, these can affect but not generate bio-
geochemical processes in natural settings where soils form” 
(Capra et al. 2015). Despite the initial claim of aiming to 
“rethink some of our basic concepts,” ultimately the commit-
tee only cemented the conventional notion of human beings 
as external factors to soil formation, blocking the path for 
any proper inclusion of the concept of “anthropogenic” in 
USDA soil taxonomies.
Such an exclusion did not stop the concept of anthro-
pogenic soils from being used widely. Besides its presence 
in other taxonomies–especially in the FAO’s World Refer -
ence Base1—the term has become quite prominent in cur -
rent debates about the Anthropocene and its impact on soils, 
where some even claim that the emergence of anthropogenic 
soils should be considered as the “golden spikes” for sign-
aling the start of the Anthropocene as a geological epoch 
(Certini and Scalengue 2011; Leguédois et al. 2016; Richter 
2020).
Instead of stopping the usage of the term, the USDA 
taxonomies’ commitment to soils as a “natural body” has 
backfired internally, severely limiting the capacity of US 
institutional soil science—and its followers throughout the 
world—to properly acknowledge the sociocultural and politi -
cal dynamics embedded into contemporary processes of 
soil formation. As it was candidly recognized by an USDA 
official, “as observers of soils, we tend to see what we are 
taught to see and may not strive to observe more once we 
know enough to complete the task of classifying a soil” (Dit-
zler and Ahrens 2006, p. 143). The resistance on the part 
of ICOMANTH to properly integrate anthropogenic soils 
in the USDA taxonomies meant then that anyone using 
1 Under the label of Anthrosols, defining them as “soils that have 
been modified profoundly through human activities, such as addition 
of organic materials or household wastes, irrigation and cultivation” 
(FAO 2006, p. 71).
883
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, and emergent taxonomies in…
1 3
them—especially soil practitioners on the ground—would 
have no incentive to deal with anthropogenic factors behind 
pedogenesis, or the processes of soil formation, severely lim-
iting their capacity to properly engage with some of the most 
pressing challenges facing soils nowadays.
This paper dwells on this process of “strategic unknow -
ing” (McGoey 2012), exploring a further issue that, so far, 
has not been considered by the literature: what happens 
when these soil taxonomies travel, especially to places far 
away from the centers of knowledge production? Or, in 
particular, what has been the effect of the invisibility of 
anthropogenic soils in the USDA taxonomy in the work of 
soil scientists located in places far away—both geographi-
cally and in terms of influence—from the locations where 
such taxonomies were created? Given the ample usage of 
the USDA soil taxonomy in several global south regions—
especially in Latin America—this question is of uttermost 
importance for the global status of soils. Taking into con-
sideration that these areas are the ones expected to suffer the 
worst consequences of climate change, the weaknesses of 
soil taxonomies in recognizing and dealing with anthropo-
genic interference becomes a crucial issue for environmental 
politics.
This paper will proceed as follows. In the next section, it 
will present the issue of the politics of soil taxonomies from 
the conceptual framework of the recent sociomaterial stud-
ies of soils. In order to analyze the practical challenges that 
emerge from using the USDA soil taxonomies in areas heav -
ily affected by human intervention, it will then explore its 
usage to classify the soils of the Copiapó Valley in northern 
Chile, both by an official guidebook and by a practitioner in 
the field. Finally, the conclusion will provide clues that can 
help us to develop novel kinds of taxonomies for anthropo-
genic soils, that could help soil practitioners better deal with 
the challenges posed by the Anthropocene.
The politics of traveling soil taxonomies
This paper takes inspiration and aims to contribute to the 
rapidly growing field of sociomaterial studies of soil (for 
overviews see Krzywoszynska and Marchesi 2020; Salazar 
et al. 2020). Mixing elements from political ecology, science 
and technology studies, environmental humanities, feminist 
studies, among others, this literature is especially relevant to 
question the absence of anthropogenic factors in soil taxono-
mies because from the very start it resists any categorization 
of soils where “the human is only considered “one ‘element’ 
of soil ecosystems and formation processes that ‘lies apart’ 
because human activities have higher impacts” (Puig de la 
Bellacasa 2015, p. 703). On the contrary, soils should be 
always seen as “…dynamic ecologies in the becoming of 
which human beings are implicated, with whom they are shaped, and on which they depend” (Krzywoszynska and 
Marchesi 2020, p. 194).
Soils emerge through processes of “intra-relating” (Barad 
2007), or constitutive entanglements, between multiple enti-
ties, inorganic and organic, including human beings. As a 
result, soils are always relational entities, “produced through 
a complex set of cultural practices engaged in by real people, 
rather than simply being a bundle of natural determinations 
waiting for the expert’s successful unveiling” (Lyons 2014, 
p. 214). It is argued that what we call soils does not reside 
on a particular substance or group of well-defined compo-
nents, but on the relations between such entities, relations 
that are not external but rather define what is each one of 
these entities at different moments of time. Soil is not solely 
a substance but a relation; one that emerges out of the entan-
glement between chemical and organic components, water 
and time, climates and living beings—among them humans.
Given this framing, this perspective appears to be espe-
cially fruitful to enliven and densify conventional soil taxon-
omies. In particular, it strives to show that “there is no politi-
cally neutral classification system” (Engel-Di Mauro 2014, 
p. 32). Like any other classification system, soil taxonomies 
“are of social origin and perform social roles and meanings, 
even while reflecting systematic attention to selected salient 
qualities in nature” (Waterton et al. 2017 , p. 6). Soil taxono-
mies are never merely technical devices, but also have a cer -
tain kind of politics or aim at making concrete distinctions 
in the material and social worlds they classify (Bowker and 
Star, 2000), distinctions that have practical consequences for 
the entities being classified.
Such politics is derived, firstly, from the recognition that 
any classificatory scheme is located in a certain time and 
space and always bade the marks of its location. In soil sci-
ence, such historicity has been made evident in the work of 
authors such as Hartemink (2016) or Capra et al. (2015), 
both showing how soil taxonomies are influenced by the 
historical context in which they were made. In particular, 
such classifications have been historically tied to particu-
lar uses of the land, especially agricultural ones (Engel-Di 
Mauro 2014), usually appearing more as tools for the con-
tinued exploitation of soil rather than merely descriptive cat-
egories. As a consequence, taxonomies are always partial, 
highlighting some things and relations while obscuring, even 
proscribing, others, as explicitly recognized by Ditzler and 
Ahrens (2006, p. 143) in the quote above. To produce tax-
onomies is always to produce forms of “situated knowledge” 
(Haraway 1988), or knowledge that is embedded not only 
in time and particular locations, but also in the particular 
actions and judgments of the ones making the categories. 
Thus, such situated characteristics mean that as much as 
they help us to see things, soil taxonomies also force us 
to unsee others. In their practical lives, taxonomies enact 
forms of “strategic unknowing” (McGoey 2012), referring to 
884 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
“the multifaceted ways that ignorance can be harnessed as a 
resource, enabling knowledge to be deflected, obscured, con-
cealed or magnified in a way that increases the scope of what 
remains unintelligible” (p. 1). As seen on the introduction, 
on our case such unknowing was explicitly directed towards 
ignoring most social and politics processes participating in 
soil formation, hence allowing soil science to maintain the 
notion of soil as solely a “natural body”.
All these elements become especially salient when taxon -
omies travel, especially to places far away from their centers 
of production. As the literature on the topic has concluded, 
concepts and technologies “can only be considered ‘the 
same thing’ as long as they remain in the same ‘place’, that 
is, as long as they are in a place where they are made to refer 
to each other” (de Laet 2000, p. 163). Traveling knowledge 
devices such as taxonomies “may grow in scope, sharpen 
or become more rounded, they may acquire new labels and 
fulfill new functions, even while they maintain a strong hold 
of their integrity” (Morgan 2010, p. 6). Accordingly, trave-
ling always involves a certain degree of difference, of trans-
mutation, a process in which the travel concept/technology 
changes and becomes slightly (or manifestly) different.
These changes are especially relevant when analyzing the 
trip taxonomies take from industrialized countries to the so-
called global south. As noted by Rodriguez Medina ( 2013 , p. 
29), the movement of conceptual devices such as taxonomies 
usually “is not negotiated because actors of less developed 
social worlds usually cannot debate in the international 
scenario (…) the knowledge produced in the most prestig-
ious institutions—and the theoretical, methodological, and 
ontological assumptions that it involves.” The recognition of 
such fundamental asymmetry does not mean to imply that 
concepts at the receiving end are unchanged and monolithic, 
enacting some sort of “ecological imperialism” (Clark and 
Foster, 2009); on the contrary, “even the most generalized 
technoscience, like any other practice, always has a local 
history and a local politics” (Anderson and Adams 2008, 
p. 188). Through their daily usage, the products of western 
science and technology are “localized;” they perform local 
versions of themselves through a series of recurrent and 
highly specific practices. However, an important asymmetry 
remains, usually meaning that in the case of any controversy 
between the arriving device and local knowledge, “western 
realities [would be taken as] … “the reality,” and other peo -
ple’s realities are considered merely different interpretations 
of reality” (da Costa Marques 2014, p. 85).
In summary, soil taxonomies have not only practical, 
but also political consequences for the entities being clas-
sified and their users. As Puig de la Bellacasa (2015, p. 
692) notes, “modes of soil care and soil ontologies are 
entangled: what soil is thought to be affects the ways in 
which we care for it, and vice versa.” Especially when trav -
elling to peripheral locations, classifications such as the USDA soil taxonomy become materializations of a double 
politics: one based on maintaining the notion of soil as 
a “natural body” – hence excluding the consideration of 
sociopolitical issues in soil analyses – and one where they 
are the highly-respected representatives of western sci-
ence. The manifestation of such power when taxonomies 
arrive to a location such as northern Chile will become 
evident in the next two sections. The first section deals 
with the usage of USDA soil taxonomy in a synoptic over -
view of the soils in the Copiapó Valley while the second 
is centered on its usage by a local soil science practitioner 
on his daily work duties.
Unseeing from above
Landing in the Desierto de Atacama Airport, the main air -
port of the Atacama region (800 km north of the capital city 
of Santiago), it seems quite outlandish to think that local 
soils could welcome any kind of life, even less so agricul-
tural practices. After all, as its name reveals, you are arriving 
to a place located at the edge of the Atacama Desert, “con-
sidered the oldest and continuously driest nonpolar desert 
on Earth” (Bull et al. 2016 , p. 216). However, not only do 
these soils have rich microscopic life (Connon et al. 2007), 
but they also have been the basis of long-lasting agricultural 
practices. This starts to become evident when, some 20 km 
upon leaving the airport in the direction of the regional capi-
tal Copiapó, the landscape starts to change, with green spots 
appearing here and there by the side of the highway, signal-
ing agricultural fields (mainly olive plantations). This situa-
tion only intensified while following the Copiapó River Val-
ley up the Andes, where you will find yourself surrounded 
by grapevines, some of them climbing hundreds of meters up 
the hills. The contrast with the completely cloudless sky and 
the surrounding barren mountains is quite stunning.
As it could be expected, such extensive agriculture is not 
casual. On the one hand, it rests on the availability of water, 
which comes from the Copiapó River (especially in the 
upper part of the valley) and underground wells. Already by 
the VI century, and probably before that, such water attracted 
indigenous populations to the area, where agriculture was 
one of their main activities (Niemeyer et al. 1998). The later 
colonization of the area by groups such as the Diaguitas, 
the Inca, and the Spanish, brought further waves of changes 
to local soils, as different watering and seeding techniques 
were introduced (Jorquera-Jaramillo 2008, p. 307). During 
the nineteenth century, agricultural production increased due 
to the demand of the mining industry that flourished at that 
time, turning the region into one of the world’s leading min-
ing districts by the mid-century.
885
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, and emergent taxonomies in…
1 3
After a period of relative stagnation in the first half of 
the twentieth century, in addition to a temporal decadence 
of mining,2 this sector has experienced a huge agricultural 
boom since the 1970s, especially in the industrial produc-
tion of table grapes for export to the US and Asian markets 
(Utrilla and Veliz 2010). Giving that such products arrive 
to these locations during mid-season, when there is little 
competition from elsewhere, they tend to fetch high prices, 
resulting in an intense pressure to increase production in 
the region. Among the several resources that this boom 
attracted were professionals trained in soil science and 
their soil taxonomies.
In Chile, academic soil science grew out of agriculture 
programs and has maintained this connection ever since 
(Casanova 2013). This emergence started in late 1940s, 
with the carrying out of the first partial soil surveys in Chile 
(Vessel 1947). Given the Cold War context, this was a time 
in which the United Stated had a strong presence on the 
continent through programs of technical assistance (Centeno 
and Silva 1998), where the reform of the agriculture sector 
in accordance with scientific principles was one of its more 
visible initiatives. Chile was at the forefront of such initia-
tives (Quesada 2018), so it is not strange that already in late 
1950s the authors of the first nation-wide soil classification 
effort declared that “the concepts and names are those given 
… [by] the U.S.D.A.” (Roberts and Diaz 1959, p. 37). Given 
that Roberts is also recognized as the father of the discipline 
in Chile (Casanova 2013, p. 12), you could say that soil sci-
ence and the USDA soil taxonomies arrived at the same time 
in Chile. As declared by two leading local soil scientists a 
few years ago, “there is no universally accepted [soil] clas-
sification scheme. However, of the different existing sys-
tems, Chile has adopted the one defined by the United States 
Department of Agriculture (USDA)” (Luzio and Casanova 
2006, p. 40).
The preponderance of this framing is fairly evident in 
the book The soils of Chile (Casanova et al. 2013), the most 
highly-regarded synoptic view of national soils, based on a 
condensation of decades of soil science research in Chile. In 
its main section on the Copiapó Valley, it states that:
…along the Copiapó Valley, the main soil series are 
classified principally as Typic Haplocambids, Typic 
Haplocalcids, Typic Haplosalids and Sodic Haplocam-
bids. … Other less developed colluvium soils coexist 
in this sector, with those used for table grape produc-
tion showing weak soil structure, abundant coarse frag-ments and some profile HCl reaction. The landscape in 
the lower section of this valley, i.e. from Copiapó city 
to the coast, is open, with fine-textured soils in rem-
nant terrace positions, which are rich in soluble salts 
… throughout their deep and stratified profiles. Most 
soils present a darker Ap horizon, where the highest 
values of chemical properties are expressed, and then 
decrease below 20 cm depth. As in the upper part of 
the valley, less developed colluvial soils are found and 
are considered skeletal. … Therefore, considering the 
presence of coarse sediments in the upper part of the 
valley and fine materials in the lower part, the princi-
pal constraints of these Aridisols are stoniness, drain-
age in some cases, salinity, alkalinity and sodicity. 
However, most soils are included in I–IV LCC, where 
table grape production is an important activity. (p. 45)
As it could be expected, local soils are classified as being 
formed mostly by different kinds of Aridisols (Typic Haplo-
cambids, Typic Haplocalcids, Typic Haplosalids, and Sodic 
Haplocambids), or soils that the USDA taxonomy describe 
as “a combination of a lack of water … for very extended 
periods, one or more pedogenic horizons, a surface hori -
zon or horizons not significantly darkened by humus, and 
absence of deep, wide cracks (…) and andic soil proper -
ties” (Soil Survey Staff 1999, p. 120). The fact that most 
of these kinds of soils are characterized as “Typic” creates 
the impression of the basin as constituted by different kinds 
of standard soils, marked mainly by the arid climate and 
local geologies. Besides the comment about the “weak soil 
structure” of the soils used for table grape production, there 
is no mention whatsoever of anthropic interference in the 
creation of local soils. Despite the evidence, human action 
is not even mentioned in the last section, when the main con-
straints to local soils are mentioned. These soils, it seems, 
have remained largely unchanged since ancient times.
By directly following the USDA Soil Taxonomy, Casa -
nova and coauthors were largely unable to account for any 
kind of anthropogenic impact on their assessment of the 
Fig. 1  Example of typical soils of the Copiapó Valley from The 
Soils of Chile (taken from Casanova et al. 2013, p. 48). (Color figure 
online)
2 Over the last decades, mineral extraction has reached massive pro-
portions again due to the high value of copper in international mar -
kets, a reactivation that has also left behind a considerable inherit-
ance of anthropogenic transformations in the local soils, mainly in the 
form of heavy metals pollution.
886 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
soils in the Copiapó Valley. Even in the case of viticulture, 
it is only noted that it is an “important activity,” including it 
as the most representative visual example of local soils, as 
seen in Fig.  1. This presentation not only portrays agricul-
ture as seemingly the natural use of local soils, despite its 
radical artificial character (see below), but also minimizes 
the important environmentally detrimental effects that this 
activity has caused, from pollution and salinization produced 
by an excessive use of agrochemicals (Callejas et al. 2004) 
to radical modifications of the basin´s original geodynamics 
by an extensive process of construction of agricultural soils 
on hillsides (Castro et al. 2009, p. 82).
This insistence on seeing these soils as merely “typic” 
Aridisols is even more striking taking into consideration that 
the guidebook does acknowledge the massive impacts of 
anthropogenic activities in the only other section devoted to 
the Copiapó Valley,:
Even though one could argue that the phenomena of 
landslides, collapses and so on are natural, it is equally 
true that human actions (mining, deforestation, fires, 
road networks, construction etc.) trigger these events 
to occur with greater severity (Espinosa et al. 1985). 
Indeed, a clear example is the change in productive 
land use in the Copiapó Valley from the mid 1970s, 
with an increase in the area planted with bush vines 
in the order of 236% (Castro et al. 2009a, b). This has 
meant the introduction of significant morphologi-
cal changes, exceeding in many places the morpho-
dynamic thresholds, and generating impacts on the 
morphology dynamic. These impacts are significant 
in terms of increased vulnerability to mass removal 
occurring in episodes of heavy rains associated with 
the El Niño years, with hazard for the resident popula-
tion and agricultural workers, and in generating signifi -
cant loss of infrastructure. (p. 122)
In contrast with the first quote, here the massive agricultural 
transformation of the valley is presented as having impor -
tant detrimental effects, especially in morphological changes 
that have increased the chance of landslides. However, such 
intensive and extensive anthropogenic impact is not con-
nected with soil generation; morphology appearing as com-
pletely separated from pedogenesis.
Through such omission, anthropogenic effects on soils are 
turned largely into “strategic unknowns” (McGoey 2012 ), or 
entities that are deemed as invisible or ill-defined for stra-
tegic reasons, in this case to maintain the mantra of soils as 
solely a “natural body.” Through such omission, synoptic 
views such as The Soils of Chile  can remain in the safe zone 
of dealing solely with geochemical and biological processes, 
largely avoiding the thorny issues of the sociopolitical and 
economic factors embedded into soil formation on the area. 
For local soil science practitioners, however, such strategic unknowing was more difficult to enact, as we will explore 
in the next section.
Unseeing from below3
To demonstrate his passion for soils, Miguel regularly 
describes himself with the strange neologism of “Sue-
lologo,” or soil-logist. With a background in agronomy and 
soil science, he has worked as the leading expert in soil mat-
ters for a local association of agricultural producers since 
arriving to Copiapó a few years back. His daily routine 
includes moving all over the basin, visiting different farms 
to do research on their soils with the aim of enhancing their 
agricultural productivity, the main focus of most land own-
ers. In parallel, due to his personal ecological beliefs, he 
has also become an enthusiastic advocate of multiple kinds 
of innovations aiming at establishing mutually nourishing 
relationships among local soils, their surrounding environ-
ment, and human users. As a result, an important part of his 
job is centered on balancing these contrasting demands, but 
this is made easier due to his jovial nature and easygoing 
disposition.
Given his background in soil science – having had among 
his professors several authors of the works included in The 
Soils of Chile – the USDA soil taxonomy was featured prom-
inently as one of the tools he used to classify local soils, as 
he explained to us in one of our earliest meetings.
There are two international [soil] classifications. There 
is the one from FAO, which is the one we should use 
because it uses a metric scheme, [and the one from 
the] USDA, the United States Department of Agri-
culture, that defines names for the soil. In the USDA, 
there are 10, and they are easier and more focused on 
agriculture. It’s the agriculture department after all! 
Soils are defined for agriculture; instead, FAO clas-
sifies everything as soil, even a parking lot is techni -
cally an Anthrosol of such quality, and this is useless 
for agriculture … FAO classifies everything, even if 
it is a piece of cement. It is technically an Anthro-
sol and I don’t know what else … For example, here 
in the valley I have seen three soil orders. There are 
Entisols, that are newly formed soils … [mainly] soils 
created from aluviones [mud floods] that have many 
3 These visits with Miguel were part of a larger ethnographic field-
work, conducted between August 2017 and July 2019, aiming at 
analyzing the practices of differe nt soil-related experts based in the 
Copiapó Valley. The method for collecting the data was mostly par -
ticipant observation, which produced a wide array of fieldnotes and 
audiovisual material, which were used to write this article. Pseudo-
nyms have been used for all the names of the people, businesses, and 
institutions mentioned in order to protect their privacy.
887
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, and emergent taxonomies in…
1 3
layers, many stones. There … are Aridisols, which are 
arid desert soils that also have river formation or a 
lot of wind influence and have salinity problems, have 
much more stratification, are somewhat thicker, ... and 
there are some Mollisols, or soil of organic matter, … 
you see a black soil, good agricultural soil, … with-
out stones or only a few, sand with good permeability, 
little salinity, understood? And you say, ‘oh, what a 
nice soil to work with!’. … but of course, if I go to 
[the upper part of the basin], when I get to the ground 
I have to jump over the stones. And that’s an Entisol, 
especially now, because we had an aluvion two years 
ago. So, you see a layer of rock, a layer of sand, and 
below you see buried soil. So there are approximately 
10 orders, and so there is a guide. So, I know more or 
less the ones here. … this is how I classify these soils. 
It is a taxonomic key … I imagine that it must be the 
same with [geological] strata. In the end, soil is the 
same as geology, [the only difference is] that you can 
see them [directly].
This extract is highly illuminating of the virtues and prob-
lems of using the USDA soil taxonomy for the soils of the 
Copiapó Valley. As Miguel acknowledges, this taxonomy 
is highly useful for rapidly classifying local soils, offering 
a limited number of alternatives from which to select. In 
contrast, the FAO taxonomy is dismissed as classifying “eve-
rything as soil.” Tellingly, by grounding such a critique, he 
directly speaks about the “anthrosols” category, but rapidly 
dismisses it as being useless for agricultural soils such as the 
ones he has to oversee. Using the USDA scheme, he is able 
to organize the basin’s soils into three neat categories: Enti-
sols, Aridisols, and to a lesser degree, Mollisols. From such 
a vantage point, as he concludes, soils appear to be similar 
to geological strata, fairly immutable structures beyond any 
controversy or misinterpretation.
Some cracks rapidly appear in this general assessment, 
though. As Miguel notes, many local soils correspond to 
Entisols, or “newly formed soils” as he describes them. He 
blames huge “aluviones” or mud floods that affected the 
valley in March 2015 and May 2017 as the main cause for 
the creation of these soils. However, even ignoring the prob -
able climate change-related causes of the floods (Bozkurt 
et al. 2016), such soils did not emerge by themselves nor 
are they a result of any kind of “natural” process. As we 
will see below, such soils emerged due to human action—
for example, when the owners and local authorities decided 
to “repair” the buried fields, removing mud with heavy 
machinery, adding further organic matter and agrochemi-
cals, rebuilding irrigation infrastructures, and so on. So, 
such “natural” Entisols were produced by human action, 
something that easily goes unacknowledged when using the 
category in a straightforward way.Beyond its practical content, Miguel words are a good 
example of the performative power of conceptual soil tax-
onomies, especially the ones coming from prestigious insti-
tutions located in foreign countries. Even though local soils 
are almost completely manufactured (as we will see below), 
he just cannot see this soil as different from a “natural body.”
Anthropogenic soils between projects 
and repair
Miguel’s quote allows him to be seen as the perfect embodi-
ment of strategic unknowing, as he seems to be unable to 
see soils beyond the USDA soil taxonomies. But as soon as 
we left his office to accompany him on several of his daily 
rounds of visits to farms in the valley, an alternative, more 
generative taxonomy emerged. To explore its contours, we 
are going to briefly describe two visits: one to a field whose 
soils corresponds to an Aridisol, and the other correspond-
ing to an Entisol, in accordance to the USDA soil taxonomy.
In our first outing, we joined Miguel one morning in 
November 2017 on a technical visit to a field located in an 
area known as San Pedro, some 20 km northwest of Copi-
apó. San Pedro is the last agricultural area before the proper 
start of the Atacama Desert. The only reason for agriculture 
existence in such an unlikely location is a number of very 
deep wells (sometimes reaching more than 100 m) that pro-
vide the water needed to irrigate crops. But water availabil-
ity was not the only challenge that agriculture faced in San 
Pedro, as we will soon learn.
At the entrance of the property we met its owner, Ani-
bal, who guided us in his car to the point where Miguel 
was expected to run some soil tests. In the middle between 
two rows of trees lie a “calicata,” a trial pit, of around two 
meters wide and 1.5 m deep. Upon arrival, Miguel aptly 
jump into it, using the pit to explain, especially to us, the 
general characteristics of local soils, pointing to different 
layers and extracting crumbs for us to see closely.
During this process, hints about anthropogenic influence 
on pedogenesis emerge rapidly, as can be seen in the fol -
lowing fieldnotes:
In order to explain to us the concept of horizon, 
Miguel grabs a crumb from the pit wall and brings 
it to us [figure  2]. Upon closer inspection, I noticed 
a dark line crossing all through the crumb, so I ask 
him what it is. “It is a buried horizon,” he replies, “at 
some point it [the surface] could have been burned. It 
could have been grass, or it is organic matter because 
this was a forest long ago ... when [the Spanish con-
queror] Valdivia arrived this was a forest. … because 
of the camanchaca … and then … it became, I’m not 
the biggest fan of the Catholic church, but they liked 
888 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
to build churches, and the only place nearby that had 
wood was this valley, so they cut it down and built all 
the churches in … the region. And then, of course, they 
started to put crops here. We are not blameless in that 
matter either.”
The Camanchaca is a marine stratocumulus cloud that forms 
almost daily in the sea in front of the Atacama Desert and 
moves inland during the night, becoming a thick layer of 
mist in areas near the sea, lasting until midmorning. After 
thousands of years of evolution, some local tree species 
developed the capacity to capture such mist, forming a small 
primeval forest by the side of the Copiapó River all along 
the valley. However, when the Spanish conquerors arrived to 
the area in the XVII century, and in the absence of any other 
source of wood for hundreds of kilometers, they rapidly tore 
down the forest to build churches all over the region, replac-
ing it with agricultural fields, as Miguel recalls. Then a first 
assessment of this supposedly “natural” Aridisols connects 
it with a long history of human usage and transformation, 
forcing Miguel to dwell on multiple informal sources of over 
and underground dynamics, especially historical ones (as 
recognized originally by ICOMANTH) to explain its char -
acteristics to us.
Such anthropogenic presence only became more evident 
when Miguel and Anibal explained to us why we were there 
that day.
[Miguel] …the main difficulty we have in this area is 
salinization. You know that this is a desert, despite 
being a valley ... if you see what is formed here [he 
signals to a white layer by the side of the calicata]. It 
is clearly a saline layer ... there are enormous amounts 
of salts here... Anibal not only has to apply water for 
the tree to consume, but he has to apply a quantity of 
water so that these salts do not enter its bulbs ... [he 
needs to] wash, wash all this fiercely ... [but when he does that] the problem is … erosion. If there’s free 
water on the surface and there’s a 0.1 slope, that water 
moves and as the water moves, it picks up speed and 
drags material, so I may be watering here, and the soil 
will end up down there. It is a physical erosive process 
mediated by anthropogenesis through irrigation.
[Anibal]… within the project, some three months ago 
we put another irrigation hose here [he signals to a 
point just by the side of the calicata]. This was within 
an 8x5 planting frame, ok? ... So the idea ... is to know 
... the conductivity, how the salts have been displaced, 
so when we to put ... the new plant, the planter, … to 
see if we have to make a previous amendment [to the 
soil] ... then you have to see if you have to do a bigger 
washing or use a product, say an acid, or there is no 
greater problem, or [you have to] apply guano [bird 
dropping] at the plantation hole, to be able to manage 
this in the best way.
In this extract, Anibal’s soils appear to be deeply interfered 
with. Not only are they under constant surveillance, but they 
have also become a matter of experimentation. In such a pro-
cess, the soil itself is transformed, receiving large amounts 
of water, resulting in the loss of its original salinity, erosion, 
and the application of acids or guano. To be able to prac-
tice agriculture, at least the one carried out by Anibal, the 
soil must become an artifact of human intervention. During 
these transformations, multiple entities are fully active, as 
mentioned by Miguel, from minerals and water to organic 
beings. Therefore, although Miguel and Anibal have lead-
ing roles in producing these transformations, they are never 
alone in doing this, but in constant collaboration with the 
multiple living and nonliving entities populating the soil, the 
“nonhuman laborers” (Krzywoszynska 2020) of soil forma-
tion processes.
To different degrees, most properties of Aridisols accord-
ing to the USDA soil taxonomy (as seen in the previous sec-
tion) were present in Anibal’s fields. But there were several 
other things as well, human and nonhuman labors, several 
of them that hardly could be described as “natural.” In that 
location, agriculturally impacted Aridisols emerge out of 
a constant managing and, more important, transformation. 
Some components are removed, others added, measures are 
taken and decisions made. This is a constant, reiterative pro-
cess, without an end in sight. If you stop intervening the 
soil, it will rapidly return to its previous state—just another 
unremarkable dusty spot on the border of the driest desert 
on Earth.
Around three months later, we accompanied Miguel on 
another technical visit, this time to a field located upstream 
in the valley, some 25 km east of Copiapó, in an area known 
as Punta del Cobre. Instead of the Aridisols seen in San 
Pedro, Miguel told us that we were going to see mostly 
Fig. 2  Buried horizon. (Color figure online)
889
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, and emergent taxonomies in…
1 3
Entisols, soils characterized by the “dominance of mineral 
soil materials and absence of distinct pedogenic horizons” 
(Soil Survey Staff 1999, p. 120). Given its location in the 
foothills of the Andes, the soils of Punta del Cobre are quite 
rocky, hence they need a lot of water to properly irrigate 
plants. Given that water is also in very limited supply in the 
area, this situation is mitigated by actively intervening on 
soils with heavy machinery, removing as many rocks as pos-
sible, an extraction that also contributes to soil formation.
This intervention on local soils is not only related to 
extracting things from it, but also adding others, as we 
learned shortly after arriving.
At the entrance of the field, Carmen – its manager – 
was waiting for us. We parked the car and start walking 
under a thick layer of vines, their shade a welcomed 
relief from the relentless sunshine. Miguel comments 
to us that, given the high demands of different mar -
kets, there is a need to keep the production stable. 
The producers have a lot of respect for the times of 
the soil and the vines. After harvesting them, through 
careful pruning, the vines are helped to release their 
leaves little by little. Afterwards, as Miguel comments, 
“all the branches and all the organic matter is located 
down there” in a line under the vines [figure  3], “if you 
make a little analysis, what is there is the leaves, the 
branches that were cut last season, and the ones after 
that, and everything was put there, and then everything 
discomposes in certain ways and becomes a part of the 
organic matter of the soils, I mean, it is a cycle,”
As can be seen here, soil formation is not a side effect, but 
a central object of working practices. In Atacama, if you do 
not form soil, you do not have agriculture at all. They are 
co-produced.
With such practices, soil does not appear as merely an 
artifact, like any other human creation. As revealed by 
Miguel, soils appear to be much closer to “bioinfrastruc-
tures” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2014), or a living infrastruc-
ture in whose emerging multiple entities play active parts, especially multiple nonhumans. In some cases, some of 
these nonhumans appear as limits to soils formation (such as 
rocks), and they must be actively removed. On others, suc-
cessful soil formation rest importantly in knowing when to 
retreat, leaving conducting roles to other entities, such as the 
case of the leaves on the ground waiting to become decom-
posed by microorganisms and turn into organic matter.
In Punta del Cobre, this engagement with nonhumans 
consists not only in hearing the humble voices of the thou-
sands microorganisms populating each gram of soil, but also 
the thundering voice of massive geological processes, such 
as the 2015 aluvión.
Some fifty meters further, we arrived to a point in 
which the lines of grapevines are suddenly cut off 
by a completely empty strip of bare land crossing the 
whole extension of the field, the vines only to resume 
some 150 meters away [figure  4]. This empty strip 
was produced by the massive mud floods affecting 
the region on 2015, when a once-in-century amount 
of water fell in a matter of a few hours. As we were 
looking at the devastated panorama, Miguel com-
mented to us, “look at the substratum, if you real-
ize, it has a different color [than the soil under the 
vines],” referring to the whitish material visible on 
the surface of the area. What Miguel was showing 
us was the dirt accumulated for 20 years on the sur -
rounding hills, that the floods have deposited over 
the soils existing here, radically transforming them. 
For him, the most advisable thing to do would be “to 
remove all the stones, to build new soils, aggregate 
organic matter, and introduce [plant] varieties or spe -
cies that could grow on this [new] kind of soil,” for 
example quinoa, “that likes to live within the stones.” 
However, after he speaks, Carmen intervenes saying 
that the owners have decided not to restore the soil 
of this area, “as the [2015] floods came, they are 
Fig. 3  Leaves on the ground. (Color figure online)
 Fig. 4  Aluvión remains cutting through the fields. (Color figure 
online)
890 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
prepared for the floods to come again, so they don’t 
want to invest any more.”
The aluvión revealed the destructive capacities of the 
Earth’s forces in all its utter indifference to human affairs. 
In this context, local soils reemerged out of a process of 
repair, or through the different practices through which 
their inner ecologies were restored. Soil creation also went 
hand in hand with multiple new considerations, such as 
the possibility of introducing quinoa proposed by Miguel. 
In some cases, as it was revealed by Carmen at the end of 
the quote, such considerations directly went against any 
process of soil formation, as economic calculations forbade 
attempts to repair soils, so the aluvión devastation remains, 
visible scars crossing through the middle of the vines.
Similar to the first example, the Entisols of Punta del Cobre 
were characterized by much more than a “dominance of min-
eral soil materials and absence of distinct pedogenic horizons” 
(Soil Survey Staff 1999, p. 120). They were the result of the 
constant work of many entities, human and nonhuman, from 
massive entities such as floods to tiny microorganisms. At 
some points, such work was guided by human efforts, such 
as the extraction of rocks. At others, humans were advised 
merely to be patient while others work on the soil to pro-
duce organic matter. Finally, there were times in which both 
humans and soils were affected by massive climatological 
events, which resulted in the partial repair of some soils, but 
not all of them. All these multiple actions and actors formed 
these Entisols, in an intermingled, symbiotic, way.
Conclusions
The consequences of ICOMANTH’s decision not to 
acknowledge anthropogenic soils as a particular kind of soil 
appear as fairly evident when the USDA soil taxonomies are 
used in the Copiapó Valley in northern Chile. On the one 
hand, from the synoptic view offered by The Soils of Chile, 
local soils are stripped of (almost) any reference to human 
activity, besides a passing nod to the viticulture practiced in 
the valley. As a consequence, pedogenesis appears as largely 
a natural process, a view that is conveniently in line with the 
notion of soils as a “natural body. On the other hand, when 
seen through the daily practices of a local soil scientist such 
as Miguel, such taxonomies appear to be clearly at odds with 
what he found on his daily rounds. However, even when 
frequently acknowledging the ample ways in which human 
(and nonhuman) activity was involved into pedogenesis in 
the valley, he appeared to be still dependent on these tax-
onomies to describe them. As a consequence, the USDA soil 
taxonomies not only became poor descriptors of local soil 
but also constrained the emergence of richer and nuanced classifications for them. In both cases, the way Chilean soil 
scientists think about the soils of Atacama appear to be 
“constrained by a classification system premised on [foreign] 
subjects who define objects rather than thinking from within 
the messiness of [local] relations” (Lyons 2014, p. 229). 
In a way, learning to use these taxonomies in Atacama is a 
process of learning to unsee, to turn anthropogenic effects on 
soil formation into “strategic unknowns” (McGoey 2012), 
for the benefit of the persistence of the notion of soils as 
merely a “natural body.”
However, we do not think that the solution to such a 
conundrum is to simply add the anthrosols category to the 
USDA soil taxonomy, as done by FAO’s WRB. As critics of 
conventional notions of the Anthropocene have rightly high-
lighted (Crist 2013; Moore 2015), to subsume all the particu -
lar and unequal ways in which particular groups of human 
beings have massively transformed the planet’s environment 
into a singular and monolithic “Anthropos” is of little help. 
All soils are impacted by human actions, but not all humans 
impact soils in the same way. Anthropogenic interventions 
on soils are a particular form of material politics, a form of 
power of some (human) groups over (human and nonhuman) 
others. Given their blindness to such differences, universal 
and monolithic categories such as Anthrosols serve mostly 
to reinforce long-lasting anthropocentrism – such as through 
affirmations that anthropogenic soils “testify the dominance 
of humans” (Capra et al. 2015, p. 1603)– but little else. The 
problem with soil taxonomies lies not solely on the failure of 
classificatory schemes such as USDA’s to recognize anthro-
pogenic soils. This is only the tip of the iceberg. The true 
problem comes afterwards, when such recognition leads us 
to see solely a universal and monolithic Anthropos behind 
the effects of humanity on soils, as usually happens with the 
concept of the Anthropocene.
One possible path to start dealing with this issue is to 
search for  lines of flight from universal categories like the 
USDA soil taxonomies, or “enact spaces or worlds that 
extend beyond Western … frameworks that form the basis of 
what is considered reliable knowledge” (da Costa Marques 
2014 , p. 88). Taking a line of flight  when dealing with thorny 
issues such as human impact on soil formation, especially 
in locations far away from centers of power, means that we 
need to start to develop emergent taxonomies that allow us to 
see the particular ways of being the Anthropos that emerge 
in places such as the Copiapó Valley in northern Chile. 
It would mean to start developing “nomenclature … that 
refers to actual human impact and, possibly, specifies the 
types of social relations behind it” (Engel-Di Mauro 2014, 
p. 30), to start seeing relations that involve not only certain 
local humans but also multiple local nonhumans, all con-
tinually (re)producing soils in unequal ways. These multiple 
entanglements are going to be seen as deeply particular and 
891
Seeing copiapósols: anthropogenic soils, strategic unknowing, and emergent taxonomies in…
1 3
unique, existing in intimately local settings,4 and changing 
as soon as we move them. It would mean to start seeing 
the soils of the Copiapó Valley not as Anthrosols, but as 
Copiapósols.
Acknowledgements The authors are extremely grateful for the 
thoughtful comments and suggestions provided by Salvatore Engel-
Di Mauro on an earlier draft of the paper. They were fundamental for 
reshaping our paper in its current form.
References
Anderson, W., and V. Adams. 2008. Pramoedya’s chickens: Postco -
lonial studies of technoscience. In The handbook of science and 
technology studies, ed. E. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, 
and J. Wajcman. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Barad, K. 2007. Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and 
the entanglement of matter and meaning. Durham: Duke Univer -
sity Press.
Bowker, G., and S.L. Star. 2000. Sorting things out; Classification and 
its consequences. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Bozkurt, D., R. Rondanelli, R. Garreaud, and A. Arriagada. 2016. 
Impact of Warmer Eastern Tropical Pacific SST on the March 
2015 Atacama floods. Monthly Weather Review 144 (11): 4441–
4460. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1175/ MWR-D- 16- 0041.1.
Bull, A.T., J.A. Asenjo, M. Goodfellow, and B. Gómez-Silva. 
2016. The Atacama Desert: Technical resources and the grow -
ing importance of novel microbial diversity. Annual Review of 
Microbiology  70 (1): 215–234. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1146/ annur  
ev- micro- 102215- 095236.
Callejas, R., A. Wieczorek, and C. Kusch. 2004. La raíz del problema 
del bajo potencial productivo de los parrones de uva de mesa está 
en la raíz. CEVID Extensión 1 (2): 1–12.
Capra, G.F., A. Ganga, E. Grilli, S. Vacca, and A. Buondonno. 2015. 
A review on anthropogenic soils from a worldwide perspective. 
Journal of Soils and Sediments 15 (7): 1602–1618. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1007/ s11368- 015- 1110-x.
Casanova, M. 2013. Historia de la educación en suelos en chile, una 
visión desde la Universidad de Chile. Valdivia, Chile: Simposio 
nacional de ciencia del suelo.
Casanova, M., O. Salazar, O. Seguel, and W. Luzio. 2013. The soils of 
Chile. New York: Springer.
Castro, C.P., M.V. Soto, R. Fernandez, M. Märker, and G. Rodolfi. 
2009. Impacto en la geodinámica actual del valle de Nantoco, 
cuenca del río Copiapó, asociado a la reconversión productiva. 
Revista de Geografía Norte Grande 42: 81–99.
Centeno, M.A., and P. Silva. 1998. The politics of expertise in Latin 
America. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Certini, G., and R. Scalengue. 2011. Anthropogenic soils are the golden 
spikes for the Anthropocene. The Holocene 21 (8): 1269–1274.
Clark, B., and J.B. Foster. 2009. Ecological imperialism and the global 
metabolic rift: Unequal exchange and the guano/nitrates trade. 
International Journal of Comparative Sociology 50 (3–4): 311–
334. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00207 15209 105144.
Connon, S.A., E.D. Lester, H.S. Shafaat, D.C. Obenhuber, and A. 
Ponce. 2007. Bacterial diversity in hyperarid Atacama Desert 
soils. Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1029/ 2006J G0003 11.Crist, E. 2013. On the poverty of our nomenclature. Environmental 
Humanities 3: 129–147.
da Costa Marques, I. 2014. Ontological politics and Latin American 
local knowledges. In Beyond imported magic, ed. E. Medina, I.C. 
Marques, and C. Holmes. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
de Laet, M. 2000. Patents, travel, space: Ethnographic encounters 
with objects in transit. Environment and Planning D: Society and 
Space 18: 149–168.
Ditzler, C.A., and R.J. Ahrens. 2006. Development of soil taxonomy 
in the United States of America. Eurasian Soil Science 39 (2): 
141–146. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1134/ S1064 22930 60200 49.
Engel-Di Mauro, S. 2014. Ecology, soils, and the left: An eco-social 
approach. London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
FAO. 2006. World reference base for soil resources 2006. FAO.
Galbraith, J. 2012. Rationale for proposed changes to soil taxon-
omy concerning the International Committee for Anthropo-
genic soils. Soil Horizons 53 (2): 1–5. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2136/  
sh2012- 53-2- lgc.
Haraway, D. 1988. Situated knowledges: The science question in femi-
nism and the privilege of partial perspective. Feminist Studies 14 
(3): 575–599.
Hartemink, A. 2016. Chapter two—The definition of soil since the 
early 1800s. In Advances in Agronomy, ed. D. Sparks, 73–126. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Academic Press.
ICOMANTH. 1995. Circular letter 1 . National Soil Survey Center 
USDA.
ICOMANTH. 1997. Circular letter 2 . National Soil Survey Center 
USDA.
Jorquera-Jaramillo, C. 2008. Agricultura y flora nativa en la Región 
de Atacama: ¿Es posible producir y conservar? In Libro rojo de 
la flora nativa y de los sitios prioritarios para su conservación: 
Región de Atacama, ed. F.A. Squeo, G. Arancio, and J.R. Gutié-
rrez, 305–322. La Serena, Chile: Ediciones Universidad de La 
Serena.
Kimble, J.M., R.J. Ahrens, and R.B. Bryant. 1998. Classification, cor -
relation, and management of Antbropogenic soils, proceedings. 
National Soil Survey Center: USDA-NRCS.
Krzywoszynska, A. 2020. Nonhuman labor and the making of 
resources: Making soils a resource through microbial labor. Envi-
ronmental Humanities 12 (1): 227–249.
Krzywoszynska, A., and G. Marchesi. 2020. Towards a relational mate-
riality of soils. Introduction. Environmental Humanities 12 (1): 
190–204.
Leguédois, S., and G, Séré, A. Auclerc, J. Cortet, H. Huot, S. Ouvrard, 
F. Watteau, C. Schwartz, and J. L. Morel. . 2016. Modelling pedo-
genesis of Technosols. Geoderma 262: 199–212. https:// doi. org/  
10. 1016/j. geode rma. 2015. 08. 008.
Luzio, W., and M. Casanova, eds. 2006. Avances en el conocimiento 
de los suelos de Chile. Santiago, Chile: Editorial Universitaria.
Lyons, K. 2014. Soil science, development, and the “elusive nature” 
of Colombia’s Amazonian plains. The Journal of Latin American 
and Caribbean Anthropology 19 (2): 212–236.
McGoey, L. 2012. Strategic unknowns: Towards a sociology of igno-
rance. Economy and Society  41 (1): 1–16. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
03085 147. 2011. 637330.
Moore, J. 2015. Capitalism in the web of life: Ecology and the accu-
mulation of capital. London: Verso.
Morgan, M. 2010. Travelling facts. In How well do facts travel?, ed. 
P. Howlett and M. Morgan, 3–39. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Niemeyer, H., M. Cervellino, and G. Castillo. 1998. Culturas pre -
históricas de Copiapó. Copiapó, Chile: Museo Regional de 
Atacama.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2014. Encountering bioinfrastructure: Eco-
logical struggles and the sciences of soil. Social Epistemology  
28 (1): 26–40.4 As done, for example, by several indigenous categorizations of soil 
already in existence.
892 S. Ureta, A. Otaegui 
1 3
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific 
futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 
691–716.
Quesada, F. 2018. Desidia estatal y diplomacia filantrópica: El pro-
grama agrícola de la Fundación Rockefeller en Chile, 1940–1970. 
In Filantropía, ciencia y universidad: Nuevos aportes y análi -
sis sociohistóricos sobre la diplomacia académica en América 
Latina, ed. J.J. Morales, 185–219. Santiago, Chile: Ediciones de 
la Universidad Católica Silva Henríquez.
Richter, D.D. 2020. Game changer in soil science. The Anthropocene 
in soil science and pedology. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil 
Science 183 (1): 5–11. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jpln. 20190 0320.
Roberts, R.C., and C. Diaz. 1959. Los grandes grupos de suelos de 
Chile, 7–36. XIX y XX: Agricultura Técnica.
Rodriguez Medina, L. 2013. Centers and Peripheries in Knowledge 
Production. London, UK: Routledge.
Salazar, J.F., C. Granjou, M. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, and M. 
Tironi. 2020. Thinking with soils: Material politics and social 
theory. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Selcer, P. 2015. Fabricating unity: The FAO-UNESCO soil map of the 
world. Historical Social Research/Historische Sozialforschung  
40: 174–201.
Soil Survey Staff. 1999. Soil taxonomy a basic system of soil clas-
sification for making and interpreting soil surveys. United States 
Department of Agriculture.
Utrilla, S., and J. Veliz. 2010. Desarrollo de la viticultura y servicios 
para la producción en el valle de Copiapó (Chile). Revista de Geo-
grafia Norte Grande 46: 67–84.Vessel, A.J. 1947. Soil association areas of Argentina and Chile. Soil 
Science Society of America Journal. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2136/ sssaj  
1947. 03615 99500 11000 C0087x.
Warkentin, B.P. 2006. Footprints in the soil: People and ideas in soil 
history. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Waterton, C., R. Ellis, and B. Wynne. 2017. Barcoding nature: Shift-
ing cultures of taxonomy in an age of biodiversity loss. London, 
UK: Routledge.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Sebastián Ureta  is an associate professor at the Department de Sociol-
ogy, Universidad Alberto Hurtado (Santiago, Chile). Since 2012, he 
has been developing an ethnography on the governance of polluted 
soils in Chile, in particular the one affected by the country’s booming 
mining industry. Along with Patricio Flores, he is about to publish a 
book on the topic entitled “Residual Ecologies: Finding Life within 
Extraction” (University of California Press, forthcoming).
Alvaro Otaegui is a research assistant in the Department of Sociology 
at the Universidad Alberto Hurtado. He holds a MSc in Sociology at 
the Universidad Alberto Hurtado. His research interests mainly focus 
on sociology of knowledge, sociology of education, economic sociol-
ogy and social research methods.
