“Skin of the Earth ”
On Soil, Collaboration, and Temporality
after Fukushima
MANKEI TAM
Department of Anthropology, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, China
Abstract This article explores soil and the multiple pathways it has provided for the cocon-
stitution of forms of life that might be possible following the Fukushima nuclear fallout. In
Iitate, a former evacuation zone where radiation still lingers, farmers and concerned citizensdeploy a coproduction framework that involves experts in making their own science. Incor-
porating tactile knowledge of the environmen t, they make life-strengthening claims on the
future amid state promises of revival and progress. Soil becomes alive in madei , which emerges
from the processes of separating radiocesium from topsoil, growing rice, and other improvisa-
tions for relating to soils that cascade to regenerate a livable world. This article discusses how
the Japanese state utilizes temporal scales that orient its citizenry to a future associated withaccelerated and intensi ﬁed productivity as a sign of progress, incorporating decontamination
technologies to assert control over organic lives and inorganic matter to make them produc-
tive for humans. Through madei , this article addresses how soil guides human attention to
the rediscovery of interspecies temporalities, paces, and rhythms, recon ﬁguring radioactivity
to create what I conceptualize as a regenerative time to underscore how actors reanimate the
future(s) in the here and now.
Keywords soil, Fukushima, nuclear disaster, multispecies, temporality
Under a blue sky, rice seedlings were ﬂourishing in water drawn from the nearby
Mano River. Between the sky and the paddies lies the satoyama forest, where Sugi-
yama had often harvested wood for ﬁrewood and foraged for seasonal delicacies like
mushrooms and butterbur sprouts.1The sun illuminated the rice paddies and the forest,
leaving the furrows between them, along which Sugiyama was plowing with his tractorto plant cosmos, his favorite ﬂower, in the shade. Solar panels powering his house were
ground-mounted alongside the road where traf ﬁc had been gradually increasing. This
1.Satoyama is a transitional landscape in rural Japan that typically connects woodlands or forested
spaces with land that is inhabitable by humans. See Takeuchi et al., Satoyama .
Environmental Humanities 15:2 (July 2023)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-10422278 © 2023 Mankei Tam
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

photograph ( ﬁg. 1) captures a snapshot of Sugiyama ’s livelihood in 2017 after the re-
opening of Iitate, a village that was once exposed to radiation and where it lingers still.2
This was a landscape, as Elaine Gan and Anna Tsing have suggested, “made with
multiple projects, human and non-human. ”Had the Fukushima nuclear disaster not
occurred, Iitate would have been “layered with satoyama dreams, mycorrhizal explora-
tions, nematode invasions, autumn matsutake outings, and much more. ”3As their nar-
rative implies, the Iitate that I describe here should have belonged to a bygone time. OnMarch 11, 2011, tectonic movements in the earth ’sc o r et r i g g e r e da ﬁfteen-meter tsunami
that breached the breakwater at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP)
andﬂooded the seaside reactors. The power plant operator, Tokyo Electric (TEPCO), had
failed to provide backup power to cool down the three reactors, resulting in a series of
hydrogen explosions in the days that followed. The radioactive plume joined seasonal
Figure 1. Sugiyama and his paddies in Iitate, 2017. Photograph by the author.
2. Iitate is located in the Abukuma mountain range in Fukushima prefecture, northwest of Fukushima Daii-
chi Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP). Three-quarters of the village comprises forested land at an average altitude of450 meters. It was home to a population of six thousand people who were scattered over 250 square kilometers
of mountainous, forested terrain. For subsistence, villagers produced rice, vegetables, and ﬂowers while raising
cattle for beef and milk.
3. Gan and Tsing, “How Things Hold, ”140.40 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

winds and snow to arrive at Iitate shortly after the ﬁrst explosion. Radioactive cesium
precipitated into Iitate ’s forests, soils, and villagers ’homes and barns.4When the disas-
ter struck, Sugiyama stopped eating wild mushrooms or harvesting new soils from the
forest to replenish his rice paddies becaus e he felt uncertain about whether mush-
rooms or rice grains would draw radiocesium into their metabolisms. They slipped
beyond Sugiyama ’s control in a radioactive landscape.
After electricity was restored on the fourth day, Sugiyama still had no clue about
the directional change in the wind that was bringing the radiation plume toward Iitate.
Ofﬁcial scientists and ministry bureaucrats parachuted in to warn villagers to remain in
their homes. Sugiyama lamented that the scientists were ill-equipped with radiation
data to estimate the risks or answer simple questions such as whether his then-ninety-
year-old father (we called him Oj¯ ı-chan which literally means “grandpa ”) could touch
the grass outside. Bureaucrats asserted control by taking heavy-handed actions over
the villagers. Within weeks they had ordered Sugiyama ’s family to evacuate. Ami,
Sugiyama ’s wife, felt depressingly idle in the ﬁrst summer of evacuation —no housekeep-
ing, sowing, or foraging. “Time is out of joint, ”as Kim Fortun described the aftermath of
the Bhopal disaster.5More worrying for the couple was whether Oj¯ ı-chan would be able
to return home in his lifetime. Indeed, they were racing against the clock to make a fu-
ture possible at a home that was no longer a given.
In 2017, Sugiyama became the ﬁrst farmer to restart rice cultivation when most
villagers had chosen to leave Iitate. His return was closely tied with the soil and its
regenerative capacities. In this article, I focus on Sugiyama ’s rice paddies to suggest
new pathways for the coconstitution of a livable landscape despite the lingering radio-
activity. I ask, how are technologies deployed to repair disrupted human-soil relationsin the rice paddies? This article addresses how soil directs human attention to a redis-
covery of interspecies temporalities, paces, and rhythms among living and nonliving
beings, creating what I conceptualize as a regenerative time that diverges a future from
that enacted by the biopolitical regime of the state.
Certainly, Sugiyama is not alone. Harada is a soil scientist from Tokyo who as-
sisted in experimenting with new ways of relating to soil immediately after the fallout
occurred. Asakura, a retired entrepreneur and an ex –student activist, came to Iitate to
seek “something to do ”and met Sugiyama and Harada in June 2011. Almost weekly over
the next six years, Asakura visited regularly, and Asakura, Sugiyama, and Harada to-
gether created a nonpro ﬁt organization called Living Together with Fukushima (hereafter
LiFu) to organize like-minded people to make Iitate knowable and thus livable. This
4. Radiation released from the meltdown contains more than a hundred human-made radioactive
isotopes —strontium, cesium, plutonium, iodine, tritium, and so on —of which only a few can be found in nature.
In Iitate, it was mainly cesium-134 and -137, with half-lives of two and thirty years, respectively, that irradiated
the landscape unevenly in the initial months following the meltdown. In this article, I use the generic term “radia-
tion”to denote both the radioactive substance and the energy emitted, that is, the source and its effect.
5. Fortun, Advocacy after Bhopal .Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”41Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

article is based on uninterrupted ethnographic ﬁeldwork conducted over fourteen
months beginning in June 2016. I lived in Iitate after its reopening in April 2017, talk-
ing to would-be returnees and those who had already settled in other places and driv-
ing around to talk with villagers who were struggling with their new life circum-
stances shaped by radiation.6
My attention was drawn to Sugiyama ’s farmland because he and LiFu ’s members
d i dn o tf o l l o wb u tw e r ea h e a do ft h es t a t e ’s rehabilitation schedule. In contrast, for
many environmental activists, Iitate was ruined by “black bags ”that store low-level
radioactive topsoils and other residues in temporary storage facilities known as kario-
kiba (ﬁg. 2). Invisible radiation and the accompanying toxicity are writ large amid the
proliferation of black bags (over two million) and kariokiba in Iitate ’s twenty hamlets,
ﬂattening its landscape while soils and farmlands are discarded and abandoned. Iitate
has become another contributor to what Gabrielle Hecht calls the “anthropocenic apo-
theosis of waste. ”7Ib e g a nm y ﬁeldwork at the height of the production and accumulation
of black bags. Nevertheless, I was struck not so much by the trajectory of biopolitical
violence that many villagers experienced through their abandonment of farmlands
but rather by the persistence of life in Sugiyama ’s rice paddies. I suggest that, coeval
with this slow violence, LiFu has carved out pertinent processes to hold novel technol-
ogies, humans, and the damaged ecology together, orienting the future(s) toward alter-native material and temporal relations with irradiated soils. This persistence begins
with taking soil seriously through practices designed to repair disrupted human-soil
relations that LiFu refers to as madei .
The word madei means “go to any expense, respectfully, but take the time to do
something with one ’s whole heart ”in the local vocabulary. Madei alludes to a temporal
mode of being, complicated by LiFu ’s practices and methods for relating to soil. In Hara-
da’s words, soil is the “skin of the earth ”(pers. comm., 2017). Skin, as Michel Serres of-
fers in an important way of understanding, is the interface where “the world and the
body touch, de ﬁning their common border. Contingency means mutual touching: world
and body meet and caress in the skin ....T h e skin intervenes in the things of the world
and brings about their mingling. ”
8Soil does not stand before the world as a function of
products of geological processes through which life emerges and resources are exploited,managed, and owned for pro ﬁt-taking; for Harada, as the skin of the earth, soil is recon-
ceived through its “betweenness ”—bios and geos, hosts and organisms-in-themselves,
natural and engineered —to become the body-environment interface and the source of
6. Most villagers and many interlocutors chose to give up agricultural life altogether; a few, whom I have
not included in this article, switched to vegetables and ﬂowers to make a living. Some became activists and col-
laborated with the antinuclear groups to make claims for justice and compensation from the Japanese state.They represent a different voice from that of my interlocutors who, facing a diverse range of life circumstances,
were trying to inhabit the radioactive landscape.
7. Hecht, “Interscalar Vehicles. ”
8. Serres, Five Senses ,9 7 .42 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

relationality.9In this article, I trace how Harada and LiFu mingle science with irradiated
soil to form a living whole, remaking science into a practice that goes beyond an objec-
tive inquiry into nature.10
I suggest that, through madei , Sugiyama, Harada, and like-minded Japanese citi-
zens articulate and embody multiple temporalities through creative scienti ﬁc and tech-
nological interventions.11Indeed, the village administration appropriated madei to name
Iitate ’s recovery, which signals a double slowness —being embedded in the rural and
urban dyad and following a timeline that permits the Japanese state to come in ﬁrst to
facilitate recovery. As I will show, madei has become a concept, an analytic, and a set of
relations fabricated through soil, articulating a ﬁne-tuned awareness in the disrupted
Figure 2. Temporary storage facility in Iitate for black bags of contaminated soil, 2017. Photograph by the
author.
9. Lyons, Vital Decomposition ; see also Krzywoszynska and Marches, “Toward a Relational Materiality of
Soils ”; Krzywoszynska, “Caring for Soil Life. ”
10. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil ”; see also Tsing, Mushroom ; Kohn, How Forests Think .
11. In Adriana Petryna ’sLife Exposed , she coins the notion of “biological citizens ”to examine how the sur-
vival of Ukrainians who had been exposed to radiation in the Chernobyl accident was compromised in medical
institutions where of ﬁcial experts and bureaucrats coproduced knowledge and policies to manipulate a popula-
tion at risk. In contrast, LiFu ’s practices have demonstrated that those remaining in Iitate are not impoverished
prey of the state. For the case of Belarus, see also Brown, Manual for Survival ; Kuchinskaya, Politics of Invisibility .Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”43Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

environment that makes radiation reiteratively actionable —it creates regenerative time
in soil, through which human collaboration and interspecies coordination overlap at
the interface between the human and the nonhuman. I shift the site of inquiry to the
microbiome of soil, developing ways of thinking about multispecies livability through
soils whose metabolism animates new intimate relations with technologies, recon ﬁgur-
ing radioactivity to embrace multispecies temporalities. I revisit quotidian agricultural
life to narrate a biopolitics of time through which an environment for life emerges.
In this article, I follow Harada and LiFu as they engage with time differently
through soil. First, I review the role time plays in environmental disasters. I then de-
tail the Japanese state ’s deployment of a radioactive was te infrastructure alongside
other biopolitical technologies to translate radiation risks into what counts as safe in
a new normal while varied trajectories of violence are unleashed in Iitate. In the re-maining sections, I focus on madei to analyze how it offers multispecies pathways for
unlearning and negotiating with radiation, reforging interspecies temporalities that are
crucial for cultivating rice. I trace the temporal patterns involved in making regenera-
tive time for soil that situates other projects concerning the survivability of Sugiyama ’s
family. My ﬁnal remarks trace recent developments in Iitate and Japan since I left the
ﬁeld. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us again that our survival is characterized
by an open-endedness from which we have no escape but through which we coconsti-tute ourselves materially and symbolically as we navigate a multitude of fallout-like
events. In Fukushima, I articulate this open -endedness to raise questions about what
needs to happen.
Regenerative Time
Humanities and social science scholars have long re ﬂected on the nature of time in
environmental disasters. From the perspective of science and technology studies, Kim
Fortun et al. challenge the notion of “disaster time ”that con ﬁnes disaster to a tempo-
rally delimited single event that divides disaster operations and practices into four
phases, namely, “mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. ”
12Instead, they pro-
pose an expanded analytical time frame to include more narratives from stakeholders
that have been ignored by of ﬁcial and expert accounts while documenting the latency
effects of environmental contaminants that such accounts fail to trace scienti ﬁcally
over an extended period of time. Studies of acute disasters such as Bhopal, Chernobyl,
and the BP oil spill have also shown that disasters are not characterized by speci ﬁcities
of time and space, or the discreteness of disaster relief, but rather by the perpetual and
imperceptible uncertainties produced by disasters that people have to endure in every-day life across many generations.
13These studies scrutinize the linear temporality of
disaster narratives, running the gamut from the framing of disaster as a chronic, slow
12. Fortun et al., “Researching Disaster. ”
13. See Fortun, Advocacy after Bhopal ; Petryna, Life Exposed ; Bond, “Governing Disaster. ”44 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

process comprised of “environmental degradation and deferred maintenance on tech-
nological systems ”14to the articulation of post-disaster futures through “circular tem-
porality, ”bringing the reiterative, sometimes messy, nonlinear trajectory of cleanups
and decontamination to the fore.15
The linear model of disaster time makes the fading of disaster to normalcy both
the condition and the ongoing goal of expert and policy interventions, with the aim of
packaging perpetual uncertainties into acceptable risks. Yet, as Ulrich Beck has observed,risks in late industrial environments cannot be contained “in terms of time and space, ”
nor can their delayed effects be predicted “according to established rules of causality,
blame, and liability. ”
16Exploring how risk analysis was used to articulate the hazards
of radiation and make safety claims in the Chernobyl disaster, Barbara Adam argues
that time unfolds on multiple horizons around people and within ecological dynamics“where the entire earth community of living beings is implicated and affected to vary-
ing degrees for an open-ended period. ”
17Rooted in Western “habits of mind, ”she argues
that linear temporality represents radiation impacts in chains of individual exposure
events, utilizing time “in their chronology —their date, duration and order . . . to estab-
lish linear causality, abstraction, reduction and reversibility. ”18Time is taken as exter-
nal and objective by scientists and experts as they study radiation risk as a natural phe-
nomenon. Meanwhile, the open-endedness of disasters like Chernobyl is brought to aclose through processes of normalization and naturalization that bind radiation hazards
within safety limits measured in ﬁnite time durations. Risk calculations based on safety
limits introduce a time lag between fallout events and their environmental repercus-
sions, which Joseph Masco highlights as “a major psychosocial achievement of the indus-
trial age, where in the name of commerce or s ecurity, consequences are loaded into
a nu n c e r t a i nf u t u r e...,m a k i n gi n d u s t r i a l i s ma ne v e ru n f o l d i n gt e m p o r a la sw e l la s
physical force. ”
19This force requires us to grapple with time as a technique, with which
expert knowledge is produced to reorient a post-disaster future secured by state gover-
nance and embedded in capital relations.20
In Japan, after the prime minister declared a nuclear emergency, scientists and
state bureaucrats at multiple levels mobilized to eradicate unknowns concerning the
fallout and compress the multiple temporalities of radiation into time maps, incorporat-ing the linear disaster time model.
21For example, within weeks following the meltdown,
the unit of measurement for airborne radiation was changed from the Gray (Gy/hr) to the
Sievert (Sv/hr) to align the assessment of the health effects of radiation with the human
14. Knowles, “Learning from Disaster? ”777.
15. Kiessling and Maxwell, “Conceptualizing and Capturing Outcomes of Environmental Cleanup. ”
16. Beck, “World Risk Society as Cosmopolitan Society?, ”31.
17. Adam, Timescapes of Modernity , 201.
18. Adam, Timescapes of Modernity , 200.
19. Masco, “Age of Fallout, ”153–54.
20. Bear, “Time as Technique. ”
21. Tam, “Enlivening Data. ”Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”45Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

body.22New standards for measuring the decay of radionuclides in Becquerel (Bq)
units were implemented to evaluate radionuclides entering rice, milk, meat, and water
from the disrupted ecologies. Becquerel and Sievert are functions of time used to express
bodily exposure at hourly, daily, and annual rates. Operating in “empty, homogenous
time, ”23these measurements rework the political stakes of environmental governance
in post-disaster Japan. In this article, I turn to soils and examine how the Japanese state
has invested in the decontamination of Iitate ’s radioactive landscape, asserting human
control over the environment to create an economy of anticipation for a clean and safe
future.24
Soil has always been a target of state control and manipulation. Brett Walker writes
that, throughout the history of Japanese modernization, Fukushima ’s soil had been ex-
ploited in sericulture and agriculture to support the nation ’s expansion in wartime before
it was reclaimed to build the ﬁrst nuclear power plant (FNDPP) to produce electricity for
Tokyo urbanites. The nation and the center of its political economy have always come
ﬁrst, and the people and soil in Fukushima have come second.25Under this ideology,
contamination and suffering are ignored, as state bureaucrats pursue what Maria Puig
de la Bellacasa characterized as the pace of “the productionist ethos ”—“al i n e a ri m p e r -
ative of progress versus fears of regression. ”26Modern productionism has utilized a tem-
poral scale that orients humans to a future associated with accelerated and intensi ﬁed
productivity as a sign of progress, incorporating technoscience to assert control over or-
ganic lives and inorganic matter to make them productive for humans. The demise of
the safety myth of nuclear power and mistrust of government have, however, given rise
to new future-making projects among the citizenry. They deploy a coproduction frame-
work that involves experts in making their own science, incorporating tactile knowledgeto understand radiation hazards amid the state promise of revival and progress still
powered by nuclear and fossil fuels.
27
After Fukushima, the relational force in radiation risk is symbolized in the notion
ofshin (orkokoro )—one ’sh e a r t .28Shin and skin, through madei , are interfaces between
the human body and the environment, relating a new kind of temporality to the ﬁgure
of living soil. Time is not an abstract entity that simply passes but is lived by humans
22. MEXT, “Strengthening of Monitoring. ”
23. Benjamin, Illuminations , 261.
24. Adams, Murphy, and Clarke, “Anticipation. ”
25. Walker, Toxic Archipelago ; see also Stolz, Bad Water .
26. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”694; see also Tsing, Mushroom .
27. For example, see Kimura, Radiation Brain Moms ; Sternsdorff-Cisterna, Food Safety after Fukushima .
See also Morita, Blok, and Kimura, “Environmental Infrastructures ”; Slater, Morioka, and Danzuka, “Micro-
politics of Radiation. ”
28. The new coinages anzen (safety) and anshin (peace of mind) are widely used to mediate concerns with
food safety among the citizenry. See Sternsdorff-Cisterna, Food Safety after Fukushima . For a discussion of how
the heart ( shin/kokoro ) is invoked in Japanese conversations to refer to the importance of the community ideals
of cultivating mutually bene ﬁcial relationships, see Kirby, Trouble Natures .46 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

and nonhumans. As Serres writes, time folds and twists to “make contradiction possi-
ble.”29Inmadei , to paraphrase Serres, time percolates through soil.30
Treating radioactivity as both material and relational, Gan and Tsing are shocked
but fascinated by the disruptive energy that radiocesium has released to unmake the
ecological sociality of forests. They offer a nonverbal way of studying interdependent
temporalities in soils, situating the soil microbiome in the biota of landscapes, which
serve as “sites of struggle and negotiation among many ways of being. ”31They propose
the idea of interspecies coordination to explore how time holds things together when
coordination becomes a “fugue-like play of life ”that comprises “temporal rhythms across
varied practices that together produce a new capacity or emergence. ”32Timing is not
about living at a faster or slower pace; rather, it is about weaving lifecycles of both organic
lives and inorganic matter into knots to form a timescape that makes historically conse-quential claims on the future. Indeed, as Tim Ingold notes,
33temporalizing the (radioac-
tive) landscape means taking temporality as relational in a place and looking for what
people do to correspond with other living and nonliving things. To think with Ingold,
what madei substantiates is the simultaneous processes involved in human relearning
to repair ecological relations on a radioactive landscape, in which one makes powerful
claims on the future through “doing within undergoing. ”34
Puig de la Bellacasa rethinks soil as a “living, interdependent community ”and pro-
poses the notion of care time that nurtures the maintenance and repair of the “multispe-
cies world ”within soils, juxtaposing the technoscienti ﬁc futurity in which “teleological,
progressive, and shiny ideals of innovation ”are anchored.35I extend these concern with
the speci ﬁcity of soil in a somewhat different direction: my goal is to examine how
Sugiyama, Harada, and Asakura make what I call regenerative time in conjunction withtheir own context, that is, when having a future seems impossible and the hope that ani-
mates it manifests in the here and now. Regenerative time adds nuances to what it means
to take care in productive ways, like Sugiyama, who wants to bring the nuclear disaster to
an end to make his father ’s homecoming possible. Regenerative time is a kind of tempo-
rality that denies human control over nature; instead, it stresses the agentic potential
of time that enables actors to reanimate the landscape as an environment for life.
Decontamination and Its Discontent
The Chernobyl fallout, Adam argues, has exposed temporal complexities across Euro-
pean societies and the world through its enormity and the expansive half-lives of radio-
nuclides that are inaccessible to human senses. Rather than characterizing time as
29. Serres, Conversations ,5 0 .
30. Serres, Conversations ,5 8 .
31. Tsing, “Multispecies Ontological Turn?, ”248.
32. Gan and Tsing, “How Things Hold, ”103. See also Gan, “Timing Rice ”; Rose, “Multispecies Knots. ”
33. Ingold, “Temporality of the Landscape. ”
34. Ingold, “Toward a New Humanism. ”
35. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”692, 702, 708.Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”47Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

external and objective, as represented by the clock utilized by modern capitalist states,
she addresses time as contextualized and embedded in particular experiences and ac-
tions that coalesced radiation to “bring to the fore the networked connectivity of earthly
existence. ”36In Fukushima, however, I realized that, through soil, there is a deliberate
manipulation of time manifested in the state ’s responses, which have involved materi-
ally and symbolically separating radiation from the environment to compress the mul-
tiple temporalities of radiation into a single time line. The decontamination policies andtechnoscience of the Japanese state have detemporalized irradiated soils and deesca-
lated the nuclear emergency.
Within weeks after the disaster, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology (MEXT) standardized the scales used to assess radiation. MEXT estab-
lished a monitoring network and a food-inspection system to track radiocesium usingthe measures Sievert (Sv) and Becquerel (Bq). Here, Becquerels and Sieverts are exclu-
sively human temporal scales that translate our biological experiences —breathing and
eating —as exposure events utilizing a linear temporality to establish chains of causality.
For example, the risk that Fukushima ’s children could develop thyroid cancer was as-
sessed by reference to radiation exposure in Sieverts in the ﬁrst weeks of the disaster.
The standardization of scales is also a normalizing process through which citizens have
developed new intimacies with radiation, the physical and biological half-life of whichis rendered visible and legible to state bureaucrats and scientists.
37Maps, charts, and
graphs that were widely circulated via social media and of ﬁcial websites reinforced the
two scales (Becquerels and Sieverts) to rework the safety limits of radiation as environ-
mental biomonitors and indicators, further empowering ministry of ﬁcials to issue evac-
uation orders and make other policy decisions.38
Based on temporal assessments of radiation, Iitate was divided into two zones:
one zone, mainly of forests, with unacceptably high radiation, and the other zone with
radiation levels that could be reduced to a nationally accepted 1 –20 mSv of annual exter-
nal exposure. The latter zone was expected to be inhabitable by 2017. Farmland was cat-
egorized by the amount of radiocesium it contained in Becquerels and decontaminated
using excavators to strip topsoil.39Excavated soil was loaded into the abovementioned
black bags and discarded in kariokiba . With the new legibility of radiation came an envi-
ronment that was defendable by the Ministry of Environment (MoE),40where Iitate ’s
landscape was recon ﬁgured as an object for effective governance following the state ’s
recovery timeline.
36. Adam, Timescapes of Modernity , 204.
37. Weston, Animate Planet .
38. Sternsdorff-Cisterna, Food Safety after Fukushima ; Tam, “Enlivening Data. ”
39. Ministry of Environment, Decontamination Guidelines .
40. Bond, “Governing Disaster. ”According to Bond, large-scale disasters like the BP oil spill open up the
disrupted environment as a new frontier of knowledge and technological intervention that aims at rendering un-certainties and disorders legible. Instead of being an obvious place for protection or restoration, the environment
emerges as a result of the science of new normal.48 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Kariokiba space ran out quickly owing to the rapid accumulation of black bags. Of ﬁ-
cials started to grab farmlands that became known as “temporary temporary storage
grounds ( karikariokiba )”among Iitate villagers —in which the notion of “karikari ”denotes
the linearity of time in cascading form. Many evacuees surrendered their farmland be-
cause the topsoil had been replaced with impoverished sand that they called “guest
soil”(kyakudo) . In time, more than two million black bags (one-tenth of the national total)
were stored in Iitate. After Iitate reopened in 2017, some black bags were moved to Iitate ’s
no-return zone, Nagadoro, which became what I called the karikarikariokiba to depict
the inde ﬁnite process of land-grabbing for waste storage. Over many decades to come,
the Interim Storage Facility (ISF) in the vicinity of the FDNPP at Tomioka and Naraha
will eventually be the ﬁnal resting place of the black bags.41Trashing soil like dirt, decon-
tamination has become a geoengineering process whereby black bags and kariokiba are
monumental and indexical to the progress of local recovery and national revival. Meas-
urements of progress are contingent on the productionist accounting of time —faster/
slower paces, shorter/longer timelines, and the cost-effectiveness of the timescape —to
envision a future. In this waste-production chain, Iitate is designated as a temporary
space for discarding what Hecht calls the “temporal excess ”of the state.42
Decontamination is a scalar project that engages soils with multiple temporal
scales through which Iitate ’s radioactive environment is reframed as legible. As Hecht
argues, scales are not merely measurements but “outcomes of social, cultural, and tech-
nopolitical processes. ”43Becquerel and Sievert are scales implemented as both political
and analytical categories to deescalate the fallout from a crisis to the status of a mere
accident, driving the production of black bags and their pervasive display in (karikari)
kariokiba . Their hyper-visibility not only enabled the citizenry to grasp the enormity of
the fallout through its parts;44spatially, it enacted new boundaries of safety after the
fallout was proclaimed to have been contained exclusively in Fukushima. Fearsome
and incomprehensible radiation during the emergency was translated by maps, charts,
and statistics in daily news and of ﬁcial reports; in turn, its risks were tracked and as-
sessed in Becquerels and Sieverts as slowly but constantly and unsurprisingly diminish-
ing entities. At the end of the state planner ’s recovery timeline, “normal life ”would re-
sume, in which black bags and kariokiba would recede from public attention and time
would dissolve into clocks ticking in the background, as before.
41. Ministry of Environment, Environmental Remediation .
42. Hecht, “Interscalar Vehicles. ”In this article, Hecht explores how the deployment of multifarious scales in
uranium-mining operations produces biopolitical violence in place-making at Mounana, Gabon. Scales are utilized
not only to measure but also to classify, orient, and (dis)empower, always unevenly, certain actors. As a moderniz-
ing force, uranium substantiates multiple scalar claims in which many and diverse actors ﬁnd themselves pressed
into service together in the transnational circuits of the uranium trade to make and unmake the scalability of
nuclear-powered world(s).
43. Hecht, “Interscalar Vehicles, ”111.
44. Carr and Fisher, “Interscaling Awe, De-escalating Disaster. ”Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”49Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

State bureaucrats, as committed productionists, adopted the same suite of tempo-
ral scales to organize their objects of knowledge, anchoring and reorienting them-
selves to pursue the fastest recovery.45In this linear time line, the scalability of decon-
tamination is premised on the legibility of radiation, which is spatially and aesthetically
epitomized in the uniform, transparent, and ordered arrangement of black bags and kar-
iokiba .46Moreover, as a promise of progress, decontamination anticipates a future with-
out contamination. Along this vein, Nishimura, the v illage head, named Iitate ’sr e c o v -
ery a madei process, echoing its ﬁrst introduction by himself in the late 1980s to brand
the then-picturesque village as a “slow life paradise ”(pers. comm., 2017); this time fol-
lowed a time line that let the nation come ﬁrst. While madei carries a nostalgic sense for
him, it points to the future(s) for Harada.
Making Actionable Time for Soil
Soil is the skin of the Earth. Compared with an apple, the thickness of this soil is less
than the apple ’s skin. On this soil, life of the Earth is being nurtured, as though it were
skin that regulates the environment of the Earth. To protect our beautiful Earth, we haveto take care of the soil like what we do every day to our own skin.—Harada
I found this quote (originally published in 2000) in an autobiographical essay about Har-
ada’s research career that was written in 2015. He is hardly the ﬁrst soil scientist to call
the attention of the urbanites and policymakers to the problem of soil degradation.47
Yet, when I interviewed Harada in 2017, I noticed that soil has created a new relational-ity involving himself and other villagers. He said, “Had this nuclear disaster not hap-
pened, I would have continued to be a ‘normal ’academic, whose main duty is to write
research papers. . . . However, in my participation in Iitate, I have to go beyond my role
as a researcher. I have to ask myself to consider things from the perspective of villagers,
to search for their real voice [ honne ]”(pers. comm., 2017).
This quote hints that Harada could no longer treat soil as a research object after the
nuclear disaster. While skin is implicated in a scalar claim about the uniqueness and fra-gility of soil on the Earth, it inspires Harada with the ﬁgure of living soil in exploring a
possible future with villagers. Following Serres, I consider Harada ’sﬁgurative description
45. I am not saying that there were no con ﬂicts of interest among the state bureaucrats. For example, the
MEXT and MoE ’s priorities over economic and environmental governance were ful ﬁlled at the expense of the du-
ties of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries to protect farmers ’livelihoods, laid bare in their expres-
sion “guest soils ”and acts of abandonment.
46. The uniformity and transparency of black bags and kariokiba are captured by numerous images taken
by drones and MoE ’s graphic illustrations. James Scott has traced this style of legibility to the rise of scienti ﬁc
forestry in eighteenth-century European states, in which forests were stripped down to maximize timber yield
(Scott, Seeing Like a State ).
47. Lyons, Vital Decomposition .50 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

of soils a move from scienti ﬁc discussion into a conversation about what he feels about
soils, alluding to sensory engagements —touching, smelling, tasting, hearing, and seeing —
closely getting under the skin.48Through the notion of skin, he places soil on a plane-
tary scale to delineate the geological relationship between soil and earth while intimat-
ing the delicate and capacious interface between the geos and bios of soil. Skin also opens
up Harada ’s journey, in which he travels from the deep time —planetary temporality —of
soil to interspecies lifetimes and sets foot in making quotidian time for soil a matter ofcare as a living being. Although Harada adopts the vocabulary of the MoE, j/C22osen (literally
translated as “decontamination ”), to frame his experiments with removing radiation
from Sugiyama ’s paddies, I take them as a rearrangement rather than a decontamina-
tion precisely because he insists that soil cannot be wasted.
Harada ’s experiments demonstrate a different orientation to innovation because
he entangles himself in the more-than-human temporalities in soil. He found at ﬁrst
that villagers would plow farmlands and pastures before winter to turn organic matter
into soil, thereby accelerating its decomposition and nutrient cycles while disrupting
t h eg r o w t ho fw e e d s .D u r i n gt h eh a r s hw i n t e ro fI i t a t e ,at h i nl a y e ro ff r o z e nt o p s o i l
formed on the plowed farmlands that could be worked by villagers ’hands or backhoes
(ﬁg. 3). Scraped topsoil was buried in ditches. After this process, soil samples from farm-
land showed signi ﬁcantly reduced radiocesium contamination.
49Harada proposed that
this process could be used instead of MoE ’s decontamination using excavators, because
it produced less radioactive waste and preserved more nutritious soils. Although the
MoE ’s handbook mentioned that preserving fertile topsoil as much as possible was desir-
able, there was in practice no punishment for or disadvantage in overdoing by the
mechanical power of excavators and bulldozers. Harada also said that it was not uncom-mon among the operators to dig deeper; after all, it was not “wasteful ”to stuff black bags
with contaminated things. Harada asserted that Iitate ’s seasonality worked —not in a
disastrous way as when the nuclear meltdown occurred —for the removal of radio-
c e s i u mt h r o u g ht h es t r i p p i n go ff r o z e nt o p s o i l s .
50
Soil revealed itself quickly to Harada as an unruly being, owing to its interactions
with precipitated radiocesium and organisms inhabiting Iitate. First, radiation reached
varying depths in the soil with its irregular spread over time on the uneven surfaces ofplowed farmland. In some hamlets, Harada found that radiocesium had penetrated
into subsoils. Second, it was dif ﬁcult to manage the timing for stripping the contami-
nated but nutritious topsoil to preserve farmland productivity. Worse, the frozen soil
on pastures was not hard enough because of its low bulk density. Third, in the summer,
48. Serres, Five Senses .
49. The ﬁrst experiment was conducted during the winter of 2012. Participants were members of LiFu
who came mainly from Tokyo.
50. On Sugiyama ’s farmland, Harada showed that surface radioactivity was reduced by nearly 90 percent
(from 1.28 μSv/h to 0.16 μSv/h), whereas radioactivity in the stripped soil and unfrozen soil of the farmland was
measured at 23,760 Bq/kg and 2,670 Bq/kg, respectively. These results showed that Harada ’s method was as
effective as the MoE ’s decontamination in reducing radioactivity.Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”51Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

boars and monkeys grazed on the farmlands and pushed radiocesium into deeper lay-
ers with their feet; weeds and grasses grew after humans retreated. Interactions be-
tween and interdependence within the local biota made the soil more unpredictableand undermined the effectiveness of Harada ’s scheme. Harada concluded that this
scheme would fail to treat other farmlands and paddies as long as living and nonliving
beings continued to mingle.
Meanwhile, policymakers in the environmental ministry were pursuing a more
hubristic decontamination plan. Racing against the bureaucratic schedule to scrapevaluable topsoil into black bags, Harada was perplexed and anxious. After another two
months of discussion with Asakura and Sugiyama, they found another pathway to
align soil temporalities that Harada later called the “madei method ”(pers. comm., 2016).
As mentioned, the village administration also used madei to brand its plan to re-
cover Iitate from the fallout, which involved large-scale infrastructural investments,
such as new highways, shopping malls, a community center, and schools equipped with
new gyms and sports grounds. Conversely, Harada turned away from these objects ofmassive accumulation; his version of madei entered the microbiome of soil compounded
with radiocesium molecules. It was driven by the situatedness of Iitate ’s farmers and
his decision to go beyond the role of expert that he had previously played. He said, “Had
I not come to Iitate, I would never call myself a soil scientist again ”(pers. comm., 2017).
As such, “soil is the skin of the Earth ”should be understood as what Sarah Ahmed called
a“sweaty concept, ”
51borne out by “a bodily experience that is trying, ”as illustrated by
Harada ’s second attempt at removing radiation from Sugiyama ’s paddies.
After Chernobyl, scientists found that weathered mica, clay minerals in the soil,
can bind radiocesium through exchange with potassium retained in clay molecules.
Figure 3. Topsoil grazed by hand during
the harsh winter in Iitate, January 2012.
Photograph by a member of LiFu.
51. Ahmed, Living a Feminist Life ,1 2–13.52 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Despite being water-soluble, radiocesium bound in clay molecules exhibits a much
lower penetrability in soil when it has reached a depth of approximately ten centime-
ters. To catch these molecules, Harada experimented with letting them “go with the
ﬂow”after the soil defrosted in the spring.
Before this experiment, LiFu ’s members were busied with mapping and analyzing
the radioactivity in the ambient environment and radiocesium levels in food samples.52
Asakura organized visits to Iitate on a weekly basis, arranging time recursively to form
a rhythm that Chloe Ahmann posits as “incrementality, ”a response to slow violence
through “a gradual buildup that sometimes coalesces into something. ”53Thus, Asakura
was able to swiftly mobilize LiFu ’s members to join in improvising with the soil in
Sugiyama ’s paddies. They ﬂooded the paddies with river water and then repurposed a
manual rotary weeder to agitate the soil surface. Clay molecules were released and re-mained temporarily on the muddy surface water before sedimentation began, and soil
particles were deposited again. This was the ﬂeeting moment on which they seized to
facilitate a transition —the muddy water was swept into a drainage ditch with a brush,
and following evaporation of the water, the clay molecules with the bound radiocesium
would slowly penetrate the soil in the ditch and be trapped at a depth of six to seven
centimeters. A clean layer of soil was spread to cover the ditch to prevent weathering
or leakage. Harada also installed a Field Monitoring System (FMS) comprised of sensorsand a solar-powered data-transmission network, which connected to a mobile app to
monitor the movement of radiocesium trapped in the ditch. In the summer of 2012,
with the FMS in place, LiFu began the ﬁrst rice planting in Sugiyama ’s paddies, where a
drastic 80-percent drop in radioactivity was observed.
Much like the interspecies coordination in satoyama described by Gan and Tsing,
timing is vital as the basis of coordination if organic lives and inorganic matter are to
correspond with each other when they offer their temporal cycles and sequences to
make Sugiyama ’s paddies thrive again. In Harada ’sﬁrst attempt, neither the physical
nor the biological times in frozen soils coordinated with Iitate ’ss e a s o n a l i t ya sh eh a d
anticipated. Meanwhile, madei involves a mode of coordination that Harada codesigned
with the soil in Sugiyama ’s farmland. Among the beings there, living (rice, boars, mon-
keys, weeds, forest) and nonliving (cesium, water, mica), that were brought togetherthrough madei , some were aligned in temporal coherence before the disaster, while
others were new or were becoming strange in the post-disaster radioactive landscape.
Madei has also revealed the complex, sometimes frictional, temporalities and arrange-
ments among humans and beyond within seasonal cycles that further open up the pos-
sibility of human agriculture. Otherwise put, through madei Sugiyama ’s everyday life,
which the fallout had disrupted, had been partially and tentatively reconnected.
Human disturbances like raking and pollarding are temporal acts that overlap with
other interspecies coordination to nourish the emergence of satoyama . Indeed, while
52. Tam, “Enlivening Data. ”
53. Ahmann, “‘It’s Exhausting, ’”154. On slow violence, see Nixon, Slow Violence .Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”53Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

coordination takes time to become enduring, it plays a hidden but more prominent role
than human interventions in the resurgence of satoyama . In contrast to rakes, the tools
used in madei—manual family-owned rotary weeders and the FMS brought from other
ﬁeld sites by Harada —have shown that technoscienti ﬁc intervention of humans re-
m a i n sc r u c i a li nt a c k l i n gt h ef a l l o u t ,b e c a u s eh u m a n sa r er e s p o n s i b l ef o rt h er e v i t a l i -
zation of the soil. Weeders and sensors are not shiny but novel technologies Harada
brought into trial-and-error experimentation to cultivate relationships that are other-
wise incommensurable. Weeders have connected the agitation of soil in river water
a n dd r a i n a g eo fr a d i o c e s i u mb o u n db yc l a ym o l e c u l e si nas e q u e n c e ,w h i l et h es e n s o r s
track the movement of radiocesium that h as been trapped and remains in the soil of
the ditches and farmland. In the previous w inter, Harada failed to make the stripping
of frozen topsoil work for the rice planting the following summer. That failure tells ussomething about irradiated soil and its “sweatiness ”as the skin of the Earth.
As Alex Nading points out, nuclear power —weaponry and energy —has turned
numerous places ﬁrst into exclusion zones and then into ecological laboratories in which
experimental attempts are undertaken to navigate and contain disruptive effects of
r a d i a t i o no np e o p l e ’s homes and more-than-human assemblages. Such attempts are
not limited to knowledge production in natural science; they also create experiential
spaces to explore new aesthetic practices and moral grammar.
54
Considering Iitate as an ecological lab and Sugiyama ’s rice paddies as an experien-
tial space, I suggest that Harada ’smadei method has taught him lessons not only techni-
cal but also moral when soil is cultivated as though it is as alive as animals and plants.
One lesson pertains to collaboration, which has brought human responsibility back in
the future-making of post-disaster Fukushima. Ignoring top-down state-imposed restric-tions on entering Iitate, Harada met with other citizens and scientists who had persisted
with their technostruggles in a radioactive landscape.
55In the divergent processes used
to single out radiocesium, soil was so over ﬂowing with radiation that it had become
too relational, making Harada wonder: “N oo n ek n o w se x a c t l yw h e r et h es a f e t yl i m i t
is . . . to the subtleties involved [in radiation], we have to observe, experiment, and
analyze repeatedly; meanwhile, we have to be careful [shinch /C22o] in making decisions. This
is what we call science ”(pers. comm., 2017). Irradiated soil made him recognize the limi-
tations of his knowledge of soil engineering and management for productivity.
In a different context, Annelise Riles and Hirokazu Miyazaki observe that ﬁnancial
professionals in Tokyo developed a new kind of collaborative thinking when the failure
of market coordination had stripped them of their sense of agency during extreme
54. Nading, “Living in a Toxic World. ”Indeed, in laboratories where animals and plants are treated as
experimental entities, anthropologists have raised questions about what counts as nature, what counts as life(valuable or killable), and how professionals and experts differentiate their relationships with the research entities
from each other. For example, see Sharp, Animal Ethos ; Chao, “Seed Care. ”
55. In Animate Planet , Weston coins the notions of technostruggle and techno-intimacy to analyze the use
ofﬂexible technologies such as handheld dosimeters that produce new science and knowledge about radiation
and help people make decisions that contend with the course of action asserted by the Japanese state.54 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

uncertainties. Riles and Miyazaki differentiate collaboration from coordination, which
they consider autonomous and top-down, and notice that the experts have undergone
what Miyazaki calls a “retooling, ”56through which they reinvigorate expertise and re-
gain agency by suspending top-down discipline in collaborations to become amateurs
who “do not lay claim to an instrumental purpose for their work (no matter how skilled
or dedicated they may be). ”57Similarly, in madei , Harada redressed a soil that had be-
come both operational and indeterminate through unlearning the scienti ﬁc practices
that treat soil as an object that he had adopted before the disaster; meanwhile, through
new relationalities among villagers, LiFu members, and himself, he relearned his prac-
tices alongside the living and nonliving beings in the altered ecologies.
As its etymology suggests, madei demands a deliberate engagement with time in
practice with one ’s whole heart.58Through soil, Harada has also learned to cultivate
intimate knowledge and interaction in a series of technological interventions that
emerged from the rediscovery of interspecies temporalities and rhythms of nonliving
beings cascading to regenerate a livable world. In Sugiyama ’s paddies, Harada deployed
sampling devices and monitoring sensors to demarcate operational boundaries that cre-
ated conditions suitable for planting rice. Harada used Iitate ’s radioactive soil to relate
to people who wanted to correspond with each other through their own retooling. Note
that collaboration has its tempos and enmeshes soil in other scales —maps, charts,
graphs, and illustrations —that Harada enlisted to tease out the multiplicity of tempo-
ralities in soil across living and nonliving beings, telling stories about soil from the
planetary to the microbiomic scale. As such, madei has added another layer of mean-
ing to the idea of soil as the skin of the Earth: it enables soil to mingle, like the skin
that Serres describes, with humans and more-than-humans to explore new pathwaysof life that are inextricably entangled in multispecies relationalities that are dif ﬁcult
to de ﬁne objectively.
I am not saying that radiation can be easily overcome. As Tsing notes, it obviated
multispecies coordination in satoyama forests and unmade anthropocentric times. In
Sugiyama ’s paddies, however, rice is reanimated to open up a temporal ﬁeld of regener-
ative capacities in which scientists and citizens learn together to grapple with the vul-
nerabilities and disruptions that radiate from the fallout. Since 2012, the repetition ofrice cultivation rehearsed a pattern that became concrete and enduring, intensifying
the motivation ( yaruki , as Sugiyama puts it) to grow sake rice to make Japanese rice wine
for the ﬁrst time in Sugiyama ’s and his wife, Ami ’s, entire lives. Sugiyama also joined
some returned villagers to form a joint venture, turning deserted farmlands and (kari)
kariokiba into small solar farms that regenerate soils to become pastures. While these
56. Miyazaki, “Saving TEPCO. ”
57. Riles. “Market Collaboration, ”565.
58. In Crafting Selves , Kondo suggests that kokoro —one’s heart —conjoins one ’s feelings and thoughts
with everyday practices to the realization of one ’s selfhood in relation to the others in one ’s family and work-
place. See also Kirby, Troubled Natures .Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”55Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

will be stories for another paper, they offer us a glimpse into Sugiyama ’s dreams beyond
the state ’s promise of progress —one in which the world is reversible once nuclear power
is made predictable and Fukushima is under control again.
Conclusion
“Return to nature, gently, ”wrote Asakura in his eulogy for Sugiyama ’s father, Oj¯ ıchan.
He died peacefully a year after his return to Iitate. During the evacuation, he walked
every day for his health and counted every little step to homecoming. For Asakura,because Oj¯ ıchan lived a digni ﬁed life, his death means not an end but an opening; for
Sugiyama, Oj¯ ıchan ’s knot in the family ’s generational time has been tightened.
59My
precious memory with him recalls his gentle touch with the grass and soil when we
chatted in the garden ( ﬁg. 4). As I write, I realize his homecoming was also timely.
As I have suggested throughout this article, soil has provided multiple pathways
for the coconstitution of prospective forms of (human) life on a radioactive landscape.
Soil has been enacted by the practices of Asakura, Harada, and Sugiyama working to-
gether as a research entity, a platform of getting together, and a stratum for agriculture,
Figure 4. Sugiyama ’s father returned home, 2017. Photograph by the author.
59. Rose, “Multispecies Knots. ”56 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

but it is more than that. Soil enfolds the uneasy intimacies with radiation with which
it has been infused as well as Harada ’s care. Its ambivalent, dense, and entangled rela-
tionality opens up new frontiers of knowledge and reserves interstices within which
radiocesium meets clay molecules, citizen s and scientists come together, farmers are
troubled with boars and monkeys, rice germinates, and solar farms emerge. “Soil is the
skin of the Earth ”underscores the ideal of a livable earthen planet as constituted of
collaborations between humans and nonhumans. Science, in this sense, is an immer-sive mode of learning that renders the environment both conceivable and perceivable.
With soil, Asakura, Harada, and Sugiyama have become more than citizens and scien-
tists in reclaiming science, agriculture, and dignity from the damaged ecology, because
there is always an over ﬂow of relations within soil as life in madei .
I began this article with the claim that madei , constituted by the practices and meth-
ods of relating to soil, guides human attention to a mode of sociality that differs from that
enforced by the biopolitical regime of the state. Madei emerges from the processes of
separating radiocesium from topsoil, cultivating rice, and other improvisations for relat-
ing to soils, making a regenerative time to orient a future that might become reality. Re-
generative time is a reminder of the impossibility of asserting human control over the
environment, as many scholars have already pointed out by questioning the linear disas-
ter time model and risk analysis premised on anthropocentric assumptions. More impor-tantly, it admits that human life is only a moment in the environment, contaminated or
not, whereby the future is imagined and experimented. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic
and climate change, which have underscored the long-term crises of humanity, regen-
erative time demands us to rethink the notion of productivity and seek practices to
achieve it right away when soil is embroiled in madei .
This future is not a regression to any speci ﬁc past but a rediscovery of interspe-
cies temporalities, paces, and rhythms of the living and nonliving beings cascading to
regenerate soils in farmlands, satoyama , and forests. As exempli ﬁed in Sugiyama ’s pad-
dies, madei emerges from the coordination and collaboration that bring technological
arrangements and interspecies temporalities together to attend to disrupted relations
and incommensurable differences in ec ological assembla ges. Under the of ﬁcial rubric
of decontamination, soil is devalued —“worthless ”in Sugiyama ’sw o r d s —as unpro-
ductive waste, deemed legible and manageable as evanescent dots along a single time-
line of recovery. Denial of soil as alive unleashed a homogenizing force that let black
bags and kariokiba gain traction, disparaging everyday temporalities that soil had ca-
pacitated. Madei , whose interventions are of and in time, engages the nuclear past and
present by scaling them against geological and ecological times.
In 2019, three days after Typhoon No. 19 swept across Japan from the Paci ﬁc
Ocean, a piece of news occupying a small corner of the country reported that radioac-
tive wastewater in the tanks at the FDNPP had leaked into the sea and black bags stor-
ing radioactive soil at Iitate were lost to the river.
60The prime minister has since
60.Mainichi Shinbun ,“11 Bags of Contaminated Soil. ”Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”57Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

proposed discharging wastewater into the sea and recycling contaminated soils for
road construction despite opposition from ﬁshers and environmentalists. Antinuclear
NGOs condemned the proposals as time-wasting by scaling the waste against the half-
lives of radionuclides that will outlast many generations; nonetheless, they failed to
mobilize as many Japanese as they had in 2011.61Yet, these NGOs were half-wrong.
State of ﬁcials are committed productionists seeking to bring the fallout to closure and
restart the old nuclear reactors to address climate change.62T h e s ed o u b l ep r o m i s e s
encompass a progressivist future that is con tingent on the linearity of time that treats
radiation as ephemeral, predictable, and co ntrollable, which, as I have argued, estab-
lishes the very conditions of the violent entanglements in Iitate.
Silence is a “failure to acknowledge the gravity of violence. ”63In this sense, anti-
nuclear activists ’relentless decrying of the open-endedness of the fallout is justi ﬁable
in its own right. Yet, such anti-politics may produce harm if it ignores or rejects alterna-
tive practices in search of the persistence of life in attuning to the contaminated pres-
ent.64I have discussed in this article other pathways for exploring the open-endedness
of the fallout that do not make captives of the people affected, who stay with the trou-
bles of an irretrievable past and a vulnerabl e present without an apparent future. In Ii-
tate, I learned that collaboration can be achieved without relying on top-down disci-
plines, becoming improvisational and conjunctural in times of indeterminacy, openingup new modes of sociality along with radiation and other beings. I see new symbiotic
relations between humans and soil that stimulate more innovative and scalable, while
at the same time compassionate, responses in the face of a crisis as grave as nuclear
fallout, contending with the state for the real.
MANKEI TAM is a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Anthropology at the Chinese Univer-
sity of Hong Kong. His works investigate citizens ’self-empowering practices and social innova-
tions in Japan following the Fukushima nuclear disaster.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Anna Krzywoszynska and two anonymous reviewers for their comments, criti-cisms, and suggestions. This article has been possible thanks to the support of the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (PDFS2021-4H05).
References
Adam, Barbara. Timescapes of Modernity: The Environment and Invisible Hazards . London: Routledge,
1998.
Adams, Vincanne, Michelle Murphy, and Adele E. Clarke. “Anticipation: Technoscience, Life, Affect,
Temporality. ”Subjectivity 28 (2009): 246 –65.
61. For example, see Burnie, Reality of the Fukushima Radioactive Water Crisis .
62.Financial Times ,“Japan Says Nuclear Crucial. ”
63. Rose, “Multispecies Knots, ”139.
64. Roberts, “What Gets Inside. ”58 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Ahmann, Chloe. “‘It’s Exhausting to Create an Event out of Nothing ’: Slow Violence and the Manipu-
lation of Time. ”Cultural Anthropology 33, no. 1 (2018): 142 –71.
Ahmed, Sara. Living a Feminist Life . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.
Bear, Laura. “Time as Technique. ”Annual Review of Anthropology 45 (2016): 487 –502.
Beck, Ulrich. “World Risk Society as Cosmopolitan Society? Ecological Questions in a Framework of
Manufactured Uncertainties. ”Theory, Culture, and Society 13, no. 4 (1996): 1 –32.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations: Essays and Re ﬂections . Translated by Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken,
1969.
Bond, David. “Governing Disaster: The Political Life of the Environment During the BP Oil Spill. ”Cul-
tural Anthropology 28, no. 4 (2013): 694 –715.
Brown, Kate. Manual for Survival: A Chernobyl Guide to the Future . New York: W. W. Norton, 2019.
Burnie, Shaun. The Reality of the Fukushima Radioactive Water Crisis . Tokyo: Greenpeace East Asia and
Greenpeace Japan, October 2020. https://www.greenpeace.org/static/planet4-japan-stateless
/2020/10/5e303093-greenpeace_stemmingthetide2020_fukushima_radioactive_water_crisis_en_ﬁnal.pdf .
C a r r ,E .S u m m e r s o n ,a n dB r o o k eF i s h e r . “Interscaling Awe, De-escalating Disaster. ”InScale: Discourse
and Dimensions of Social Life , edited by E. Summerson Carr and Michael Lempert, 133 –56. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2016.
Chao, Sophie. “Seed Care in the Palm Oil Sector. ”Environmental Humanities 10, no. 2 (2018): 421 –46.
Financial Times .“Japan Says Nuclear Crucial to Hitting Net Zero Goal by 2050. ”February 2, 2021. https://
www.ft.com/content/47b189de-bb5e-409b-87b9-86405661fc03 .
Fortun, Kim. Advocacy after Bhopal: Environmentalism, Disaster, New Global Orders . Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2001.
Fortun, Kim, Scott Gabriel Knowles, Vivian Choi, Paul Jobin, Miwao Matsumoto, Pedro de la Torre III,
Max Liboiron, and Luis Felipe R. Murillo. ”Researching Disaster from an STS Perspective. ”In
The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies , edited by Ulrike Felt, Rayvon Fouché, Clark A.
Miller, Laurel Smith-Doerr, 1003
–28. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017.
Gan, Elaine. “Timing Rice: An Inquiry into More-than-Human Temporalities of the Anthropocene. ”
New Formations 92 (2017): 87 –101.
Gan, Elaine, and Anna Tsing. “How Things Hold: A Diagram of Coordination in a Satoyama Forest. ”
Social Analysis 62, no. 4 (2018): 102 –45.
Hecht, Gabrielle. “Interscalar Vehicles for an African Anthropocene: On Waste, Temporality, and Vio-
lence. ”Cultural Anthropology 33, no. 1 (2018): 109 –41.
Ingold, Tim. “The Temporality of the Landscape. ”World Archaeology 25, no. 2 (1993): 152 –74.
Ingold, Tim. “Toward a New Humanism: One World Anthropology. ”Journal of Ethnographic Theory 8,
nos. 1/2 (2018): 158 –71.
Kiessling, Brittany, and Keely Maxwell. “Conceptualizing and Capturing Outcomes of Environmental
Cleanup at Contaminated Sites. ”Environment and Society: Advances in Research 12 (2021): 164 –80.
Kimura, Aya Hirata. Radiation Brain Moms and Citizen Scientists: The Gender Politics of Food Contamination
after Fukushima . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016.
Kirby, Peter. Troubled Natures: Waste, Environment, Japan . Honolulu: University of Hawai ‘i Press, 2010.
Knowles, Scott Gabriel. “Learning from Disaster? The History of Technology and the Future of Disas-
ter Research. ”Technology and Culture 55, no. 4 (2014): 773 –84.
Kohn, Eduardo. How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology Beyond the Human .B e r k e l e y :U n i v e r s i t yo f
California Press, 2013.
Kondo, Dorinne. Crafting Selves: Power, Gender, and Discourses of Identity in a Japanese Workplace . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role of Attentiveness in More-
Than-Human Ethics. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 44, no. 4 (2019): 661 –75.
Krzywoszynska, Anna, and Ukgreta Marches. “Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils: Introduc-
tion. ”Environmental Humanities 12, no. 1 (2020): 190 –204.Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”59Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Kuchinskaya, Olga. The Politics of Invisibility: Public Knowledge about Radiation Health Effects after Cher-
nobyl . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Lyons, Kristina M. Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners and Life Politics . Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2020.
Mainichi Shinbun .“11 Bags of Contaminated Soil Lost in Iitate and Tamura, the Government Con-
ﬁrmed after Typhoon No. 19 hit Fukushima Prefecture. ”October 15, 2019. https://mainichi.jp
/articles/20191015/k00/00m/040/050000c .
Masco, Joseph. “The Age of Fallout. ”History of the Present 5, no. 2 (2015): 137 –68.
MEXT (Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology). “Strengthening of Monitor-
ing of Environmental Radioactivity Levels by Prefecture. ”June 8, 2011. https://radioactivity.nra
.go.jp/en/contents/1000/318/24/1304084_0608.pdf .
Ministry of Environment. Decontamination Guidelines . 2013. http://josen.env.go.jp/en/framework/pdf
/decontamination_guidelines_2nd.pdf .
Ministry of Environment. Environmental Reme diation in Japan . March 2018. http://josen.env.go.jp/en
/pdf/progressseet_progress_on_cleanup_efforts.pdf .
Miyazaki, Hirokazu. “Saving TEPCO: Debt, Credit, and the ‘End ’of Finance in Post-Fukushima Japan. ”
InCorporation and Citizenship , edited by Greg Urban, 127 –40. Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
vania Press, 2014.
Morita, Atsuro, Anders Blok, and Shuhei Kimura. “Environmental Infrastructures of Emergency: The
Formation of a Civic Radiation Monitoring Map during the Fukushima Disaster. ”InNuclear Dis-
aster at Fukushima Daiichi: Social, Political, and Environmental Issues , edited by Richard Hindmarsh,
78–96. London: Routledge, 2013.
Nading, Alex. “Living in a Toxic World. ”Annual Review of Anthropology 49 (2020): 209 –24.
Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2011.
Petryna, Adriana. Life Exposed: Biological Citizens after Chernobyl . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2002.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”So-
cial Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
Riles, Annelise. “Market Collaboration: Finance, Culture, and Ethnography after Neoliberalism. ”
American Anthropologist 115, no. 4 (2013): 555 –69.
Roberts, Elizabeth F. S. “What Gets Inside: Violent Entanglements and Toxic Boundaries in Mexico
City. ”Cultural Anthropology 32, no. 4 (2017): 592 –619.
Rose, Deborah Bird. “Multispecies Knots of Ethical Time. ”Environmental Philosophy 9, no. 1 (2012):
127–40.
Scott, James. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed .N e w
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998.
Serres, Michel. Conversations on Science, Culture, and Time . Translated by Roxanne Lapidus. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Serres, Michel. The Five Senses: A Philosophy of Mingled Bodies . Translated by Margaret Sankey and Peter
Cowley. London: Continuum, 2008.
Sharp, Leslie. Animal Ethos: The Morality of Human-Animal Encounters in Experimental Lab Science . Oakland:
University of California Press, 2018.
Slater, David H., Rika Morioka, and Haruka Danzuka. “Micro-politics of Radiation: Young Mothers
Looking for a Voice in Post-3.11 Fukushima. ”Critical Asian Studies 46, no. 3 (2014): 485 –508.
Sternsdorff-Cisterna, Nicolas. Food Safety after Fukushima: Scienti ﬁc Citizenship and the Politics of Risk .
Honolulu: University of Hawai ‘i Press, 2019.
Stolz, Robert. Bad Water: Nature, Pollution, and Politics in Japan, 1870 –1950 . Durham, NC: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 2014.
Takeuchi, Kazuhiko, Robert D. Brown, Izumi Washitani, Atsushi Tsunekawa, and Makoto Yokohari,
eds. Satoyama: The Traditional Rural Landscape of Japan . Tokyo: Springer, 2003.60 Environmental Humanities 15:2 / July 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

Tam, Mankei. “Enlivening Data: Reassembling Life in Post-Fukushima Japan. ”In“Engaging the Data
Moment. ”Special issue, STS Encounters 11, no. 1 (2020): 199 –226.
Tsing, Anna L. “A Multispecies Ontological Turn? ”InThe World Multiple: The Quotidian Politics of Know-
ing and Generating Entangled Worlds , edited by Keiichi Omura, Grant Jun Otsuki, Shiho Satsuka,
Atsuro Morita, 233 –47. London: Routledge, 2021.
Tsing, Anna L. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins .P r i n c e -
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Walker, Brett L. Toxic Archipelago: A History of Industrial Disease in Japan . Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press, 2010.
Weston, Kath. Animate Planet: Making Visceral Sense of Living in a High-Tech Ecologically Damaged World .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.Tam / “Skin of the Earth ”61Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/2/39/1986344/39tam.pdf by guest on 06 September 2025

