Soil, Seeds, and Roses: Plantation Afterlives
in an Argentine Soybean Frontier
Tamar Blickstein1,2
Abstract
In the Argentine Chaco —a world hotspot of agribusiness-driven deforestation —descendants of European settlers ( gringos )
who built manual cotton plantations on Indigenous land and labor in the twentieth century, have since been displaced from farm-
ing by the “soy boom. ”Nevertheless, plantation legacies persist in the racialized plant-relations of these actors today, and in their
conﬂicted —and often acquiescent —attitudes to agribusiness. Drawing on emergent theories of the “Plantationocene, ”this
essay examines how three settler interlocutors grieve the loss of plant-worlds that soy agribusiness has displaced, with a focus on
living soil, cotton seeds, and potted roses. I show that these multispecies attachments perform a double role: while they sensitize
these actors to the ecological fallouts of the soy boom, they also reinforce settler colonial plantation logics of racialized progressthat ultimately feed their acquiescence to that agribusiness model.
Keywords
Plantationocene, agribusiness-driven deforestation, settler colonialism, environmental anthropology, Gran Chaco, multispeciesattachment
Introduction
In the deforestation frontiers of the Argentine Chaco,1many
gringos feel an acute sense of loss for vanishing plant-worlds,
yet few contest the agribusiness model that propels that loss.Before the “soy boom ”displaced them from farming, these
gringos
2—or descendants of European settlers —built small
scale cotton plantations on Indigenous land and labor throughoutthe twentieth century. Today, gringos are increasingly affectedby dangerous agrochemical intoxication, soil degradation, andclimate upheavals linked to soy agribusiness. They speak mourn-fully of crumbling cotton gins, bygone cotton seeds, and gardensthat have withered from drought or pesticides since the arrival of
genetically modi ﬁed (GM) farming. The forests around them are
disappearing at one of the fastest rates in the world, displacingecologies and livelihoods.
3They fear for a future that excludes
them as their young abandon the countryside for work. Still,they do not resist agribusiness.
In this essay, I draw on my ethnographic ﬁeldwork to
explore how racialized plantation afterlives in the Argentine
Chaco shape gringos ’acquiescence to an agricultural model
that imperils them and the plant species they love. The assentof local farmers and ex-farmers —mostly of European
descent —in soy frontiers across Argentina has posed a
puzzle to researchers, given the soy boom ’s tremendous toll
on health, employment, environment, and social relations (Grasand Hernández 2014; Lapegna and Kuhin 2023; Leguizamón2020; Newell 2009). Whereas many countries have seen broad-based farmer movements against GM agribusiness, farmer
consent in Argentina has helped consolidate a “soy state ”
(Hetherington 2020), with soy agriculture occupying half thecountry ’s arable land and a third of its exports.
4Gringo
farmers are less likely to contest big agribusiness in Argentina
than racialized populations of mestizo criollos orcampesinos
(peasants) and Indigenous people, who have formed fronts of
opposition like Mocase. Yet to date, the racialized class dynam-
ics of gringo acquiescence remain an under-explored feature ofArgentine agribusiness expansion.
Many of the displaced gringo cotton farmers I lived among
in Chaco Province, Argentina between 2010 and 2023 heldsteadfast to the logic of monocrop progress that their parents
and grandparents raised them with —a logic that links settler-
colonial plantation identities to present-day soy ﬁelds.
5This
logic recurred in over 100 interviews and life histories I con-
ducted in several Chaco towns with gringo cotton planters
and descendants, and in dozens more testimonies aboutgringos among Indigenous and criollo ex-pickers and their fam-
ilies. Those called “gringos ”in Chaco are descendants of
European immigrants recruited in the 1920s to plant cottonon lands freshly usurped from Indigenous people in the
1Ca’Foscari University, Venice, Italy
2Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany
Corresponding Author:
Tamar Blickstein, Ca ’Foscari University of Venice, 30123 Venezia, Italy.
Email: tb121@columbia.eduArticle
Journal of Ethnobiology
2024, Vol. 44(1) 23 –33
© The Author(s) 2024Article reuse guidelines:sagepub.com/journals-permissionsDOI: 10.1177/02780771241232293journals.sagepub.com/home/ebi

genocidal “Conquest of the Desert ”campaign.6Policies like the
“Immigration and Colonization Law ”(Ley Avellaneda ) granted
European settlers 100 hectares of ﬁscal (aka. dispossessed
Indigenous) lands with an aim to civilize and populate the
Argentine frontiers through agriculture.7This policy did not
apply to the mixed-race criollo peasants in Chaco or to surviv-
ing Indigenous people, the latter of whom were often con ﬁned
toreducciones (labor reservations) to work on gringo cotton
plantations.8Nevertheless, gringos internalized Argentina ’s
national narrative of a melting pot ( crisol ) nation built on
“empty ”land through the hard work of European immigrants.
These historical silences and privileges were encoded into land-tenure schemas that favored gringos over their pickers and
peons.
9Today, many gringos lease their inherited small farms
to big conglomerates as they struggle ﬁnancially after years
of accumulated debt, while those who “made it ”in soy have
usually left for the big cities, and Chaco remains one of the
poorest Provinces in the country. Yet settler colonial historiesand plantation legacies still map onto present-day identities
and class positions.
The imprint of plantation afterlives on present-day
agribusiness is highlighted by emerging perspectives on
the“Plantationocene. ”
10As both a concept and an analytic
frame, the Plantationocene brings into sharp relief how endur-ing plantation logics and racialized affects shape monocul-
tures across distinct times and s cales. This makes it easier
to trace the continuities between labor-intensive cottonﬁelds of the past that were visibly racialized, and the vast
GM soy ﬁelds that replaced that labor with machines and pes-
ticides (Hetherington 2020; Ofstehage 2021). As a criticalalternative to the more common term “Anthropocene, ”the
Plantationocene centers the rise of race as a social formation
in colonial plantation agriculture 500 years ago as the structur-ally determining foundation of today ’s agribusiness frontiers
and attendant climate disasters (Carney 2021; Davis et al.
2019; Haraway 2015; Wolford 2021; see also Escobar 2007;McKittrick 2011; Wynter 1971). From this vantage, environ-
mental racism is not just a collateral of the Anthropocene, but
one of its centrally de ﬁning features (Pulido 2017).
Like racialization processes more generally, the affective
and structural afterlives of colonial plantations can manifest
in surreptitious ways that make them dif ﬁcult to detect or
trace ethnographically (Blickstein 2019). In light of this, ethno-
biological approaches to the Plantationocene can offer a vital
ethnographic anchor. Decolonial approaches to ethnobiologyhave stressed the weight of history on plant –people dynamics,
and the importance of moving beyond the “ethno-ecological
present ”to consider how the colonial past shapes both “the
natural resources themselves ”and the uses, desires and affec-
tive attachments people invest in them (Nabhan et al. 2011,
2; see also Chao 2022; Carney 2003; McAlvay et al. 2021;Ogden 2021; Reo 2019). In Argentina, ethnobiology highlights
how gringo identities —forged through agrarian settler colonial
histories —continue to shape racialized multispecies attach-
ments and attitudes today, making gringos signi ﬁcantly lesslikely to place ontological, ecological, medicinal, and nutritional
value on native plant life and endangered forests than their
Indigenous and criollo counterparts (Arias Toledo, Colantonio,and Galetto 2007; Kujawska et al. 2017; Martínez 2013; Trillo
and Audisio 2018; Trillo, Arias Toledo, and Colantonio 2016).
By the same token, gringo feelings of grief, love or longing forparticular species and landscapes can shed useful light on the
affective drivers of the soy boom and its harms.
Bearing this in mind, the rest of this essay draws on my
ﬁeldwork to trace how racialized cotton plantation legacies
shape settlers ’attachments to plant-worlds in ways that
impact their attitudes to agrib usiness. I argue that, while
certain multispecies attachments have the potential to forge
resistance to the Argentine soy boom, they operate here as
loci of the Plantationocene, in ways that ultimately perpetuatethe GM agribusiness model. In the next three sections, I
present the cases of three settler interlocutors who grieve —
but do not contest —the soy boom ’s displacement of a partic-
ular multispecies relation to which each is attached: soil,
cotton seeds, and roses.
Soil
“Soy kills the soil. It destroys everything! With soy, they
use a weed-killer that destroys the grass pastures [ …],
which kills the soil and [ …] the quebracho colorado
trees (tannin trees emblematic of Chaco). Because the
trees and the soil need the grass too. It ’s also an attack
on small farmers ( pequeños productores ). The poison
killed my lemon trees. It killed my squash and my
pumpkin. The hens died too, so I no longer have eggs.Soy kills all this, and you can ’t even eat soy. In ten or
ﬁfteen years, the soil won ’t produce anything at all. ”
-Marta
“La soja mata ”(“soy kills ”) were the last the words I
expected to hear from someone like Marta, a 79-year-oldretired gringa cotton planter. This slogan typically circulates
among small activist communities of landless and smallholder
peasants, or campesinos , across the soy frontiers of the Gran
Chaco at large (Hetherington 2020), and is associated with
Indigenous-led and criollo-led movements against toxic soy
fumigation and deforestation in the Argentine Chaco in partic-ular (Lapegna 2017). Marta, on the other hand, is a proud
gringo “daughter of founders (fundadores )”in the colony
where she was raised, and hardly identi ﬁes with the racialized
underclasses who were peons or cotton pickers on her
family ’s plantation. In our conversations, she earnestly
recounted the settler origin story of European immigrant“founding ”in an “empty desert ”— a narrative that erases the
past and present dispossessions of the Indigenous people the
immigrants colonized. She praised the gringo values of capital-ist progress that led to the agribusiness boom, and never consid-
ered joining the grassroots associations and organizations
protesting agrochemicals, dispossessions or deforestation in24 Journal of Ethnobiology 44(1)
the Chaco region. At face value, then, Marta ’s lament seems
rife with contradiction: she indicts soy for killing the living
soil she needs and loves, but her behavior and values as agringo ex-planter re ﬂect a complacency toward that very agri-
business killer.
Plantation legacies help make sense of these apparent con-
tradictions. In the rest of this section, I describe how the
gringo notion of a living soil accommodates both a sorrow at
the soy boom ’s assault on soil life-worlds, as well as an attach-
ment to settler monocrop progress —an attachment so deep
that it eclipses a broader critique of agribusiness monocultures
on the ground.
Marta ’s nostalgia for cotton plantation prosperity offers one
example of soil ’s double role as both a site of multispecies loss,
and a vector of settler colonial desire. Woven throughout ourconversations about soil, Marta described the shards of a shat-
tered social landscape of agrarian settler capitalism. Soy, Marta
said, not only kills the soil, but has also replaced the “empo-
rium”of the cotton regime with its bustling gins, mills and
textile factories. Along with cotton, it ousted other lucrative
monocrops, like sorghum and sun ﬂower that middle or even
medium-small farmers like herself had crop-rotated in the
past—crops used for food products like sun ﬂower oil that
“we [Argentines] can eat. ”In lethally fumigating the quebracho
trees ( Schinopsis ) and their grassy companion species (such as
Elionorus musitcus andSpartina argentinensis ), soy also bull-
dozed the quebracho-based tannin industry —a lucrative basis
of capitalist productivity in twentieth century Chaco (Bonifacio
2023). In turn, Marta worried that agrochemical toxicity and
lack of pasture had left farmers with “no more animals. ”This
wide-ranging absence spanned insects in the soil, backyard
animals like Marta ’s hens, ﬁsh from vanishing or intoxicated
streams and wild game from the bushlands —including numer-
ous endangered species (such as peccaries and armadillos) tra-
ditionally used as food or medicine by local Chaco peoples
(Arias Toledo et al. 2014; Martínez 2013).
11Marta was preoc-
cupied by the dwindling small-scale cattle industry —also a
driver of Chaco deforestation over time —that she feared
was now being overtaken by sojización (literally, “soyiﬁca-
tion”) and large-scale feedlot cattle farming. Perhaps most
mournful of all for Chaco ex-planters like Marta was that “all
the people are gone. ”Political support for settler farmers had
been replaced by rural abandonment. Gringo cotton
Cooperatives and gins had fallen into postindustrial ruin. The
young people had migrated away, leaving the old people towither in rural towns and hamlets. Manual laborers had been
replaced by machines and agrochemicals, eviscerating the con-
joined, racialized “work culture ”of soils, plants, and people
that had “given life to Chaco ”(a racialized dimension of soil
that I return to later).
Most gringo farmers I spoke to did not evoke explicitly
more-than-human ontologies to describe soil vitality (Lyons
2020). Yet their capitalist settler values and plantation nostal-
gias are bound up in a relational understanding of the soil asa“multispecies community of biota ”(Puig de la Bellacasa2015). Having spent their lives sowing the ﬁelds before the
arrival of GM agriculture, gringos like Marta developed an inti-
mately tactile, ﬁrst-hand knowledge of cotton plantation
farming that attuned them to the entangled interdependencies
of different species, and to the interconnected ways that crops
and soils “sense, perceive and respond to their environments ”
(Myers 2015). Like the soil itself, plantation progress and
settler modernity are multispecies relations for many gringos.
“Progress ”for them does not operate in a linear sphere of tele-
ological thinking outside of multispecies worlds, but rather in
and through those worlds. When Marta longs for the living
soil of the racialized plantation, she also longs for a soil invital relation with the grass of the pastures, the quebracho
trees, and the wider Chaco ecosystem of insect, microbial,
animal, and plant life that depends on these relations. Inkilling the soil, soy has displaced both the cotton plantation
colony, and countless relational interspecies entanglements
that existed alongside it.
Marta ’s multispecies attunement to soil worlds is also
gendered, in ways that sensitized her to the ecological and
embodied fallouts of soy agrochemicals, yet withoutleading her to politically contest them. Like Amalia
Leguizamón (2020) observed in the Argentine Pampa, I
found that rural gringo women like Marta in the ArgentineChaco were more likely than their husbands or other male
counterparts to draw relational connections between their
own species ’bodies and those living in the soil. During dis-
creet conversations about soy —particularly when men were
not present —some confessed their concern about the human
impacts of substances like g lyphosate (which GM soy is
engineered to tolerate) and the much harsher 2,4-D that is
often mixed with glyphosate in Argentina. Cis-gender
women in traditional roles, as Leguizamón (2020) notes,have often been socialized into a greater sense of responsibil-
ity for the bodies and lives they care for, and in Chaco too,
they were more likely to take note of rising birth defectsamong their children and cancer rates among their family
members.
However, while they worried the new generation of biotech-
nologies might have gone too far, the vast majority did not join
movements to regulate the spread of GM agrotoxins in their
environs —with the exception of a small handful of rural teach-
ers affected by illegal pesticide drift. In most cases, their plan-
tation heritage had left gringos with a love –hate relationship to
pesticides. When asked, gringos like Marta did not hesitate topraise the chemicals that had rid her family ’s manual cotton
plantation of soils plagued with too much of the wrong kind
of life for monocrops to thrive. Gringo life and monocrop lifewere intertwined, insofar as both relied on investments in
future yields of gringo progreso —competitive agricultural
exports in sustainably pro ﬁtable settler soils, and socially
mobile offspring who aspired —often successfully —to
form the professional and governing classes in nearby cities.
As the old dream of gringo futurity wanes for those
ex-farmers left behind, grief for lost soils, and landscapesBlickstein 25
mixes with colonial nostalgia (Rosaldo 1989) for the old cer-
tainties of racialized class privilege. This nostalgia is
riddled with blindspots about t he past that reinforce gringo
adherence to the monocultural status quo today. For instance,
it was commonplace for gring o interlocutors like Marta to
praise the horizontal bonds of their plantation institutionsand the meritocratic system s that allowed hard-working
farmers get ahead through sacri ﬁce and work culture —
traits many of them also associate with gringo soy moguls ’
success. Meanwhile, the testim onies I gathered about cotton-
picking align with archival evidence that twentieth century
Chaco plantations were marked by differential pay-scales
along colonial lines of evolutionist distinction that not
only favored gringo planters, but also compensated locally
colonized Indigenous people of hunter-gatherer backgroundsless than “sedentary ”Indigenous-descended or mestizo cotton
pickers coming from outside Ch aco (see also: Bossert 2012).
Marta ’s attachment to the dream of gringo privilege, and her
reluctance to acknowledge the colonial inequalities in which
her family ’s plantation was complicit, also blinds her to the
dispossessions that new agricultural frontiers have wroughton smallholders, including those in her own community.
Ultimately, what many gringos grieve is not so much the
advent of GM agribusiness as the passing of a previousstage of the Plantationocene. Even if she is aggrieved by the
death of soil, Marta sees gringo success as a marker of her
community ’s superior aptitude to turn the living soil into
more life. Allying with the rac ialized smallholders who
resist monocultures, pesticides and frontier expansion would
require Marta to question something fundamental about whos h ei s .M a r t am a yb ep a i n e d —even poisoned —by the
advent of the soy boom, but her plantation dream leaves
little room to resist it.
Seeds
“Mechanization was just a hoax ( un engaño ) for us small
farmers, wasn ’t it? …The engineers came with their
advice, and we believed them [ …] Better seeds, no
more pests, it seemed great [ …]. Until we discovered
how much worse off it [GM technology] was for us
[small-farmers] in the long run. ”—Emiliano
Emiliano ’s feelings of betrayal at the hands of GM cotton
seeds poses yet another puzzle, to which racialized plantation
legacies might offer a clue. Like a living soil, seeds representthe promise of settler progress among my interlocutors: the bib-
lical“parable of the sower, ”for instance, was often invoked in
church meetings, and a common tribute at immigration festivalsand commemorations was to praise the European grandparents
for“planting the seeds of progress in the virgin soil. ”
Emiliano ’s accusation, it seemed to me, bitterly disrupted that
narrative of progress, which he and some other middle-aged
ex-farmers had been reminiscing about with me over yerba
matés that afternoon. His choice of words —“un engaño ”—is suggestive of trickery and cheating. Hadn ’t the “experts ”
known small farmers like themselves could not afford to
plant GM cotton in the long run? Fooled by this sleight ofhand, they soon fell into debt, stopped planting altogether,
and had to rent out their patchwork of farmlands to big con-
glomerates and a few wealthy farmers who increasingly plantGM soy instead of GM cotton.
Despite this, gringos like Emiliano did not critique the agri-
business model or seek alliances with other rural groups it leftbehind. Instead, for reasons I now turn to, his solidarities landed
with farmer movements led by big agribusiness against the
state.
The Plantationocene —with its idealization of simpli ﬁed
large-scale monocultures, racialized frontier logics, and fervor
for capitalist progress —has shaped gringo settler identities
in ways that made them especially liable to believe in the
promise of GM seeds. Zero-till farming, as Birgit Müller
(2021) notes in a much wealthier settler-colonial context ofCanada, has been successfully marketed to farmers around
the world as a modernizing project and a “world view. ”
Whether in the Global North or the Global South, settler mono-crop farmers are often particularly susceptible to believing in
the natural law of market selection, and tend to trust in the
science delivered to them by emissaries of successful privatecorporations.
In Argentina, the campaign to bring GM seeds to cotton
farmers like Emiliano was tailored to the ideological pro ﬁle
of these particular settler planters, and to the chain of economic
crises they faced in the years leading up to the economic crash
of 2000. The introduction of synthetic fabrics and neoliberalagrarian policies in the 1980s and 1990s led to plummeting
cotton prices and the breakdown of government protections
for farmers. GM farming, which began in the ArgentinePampas in 1996, exploded into Chaco after the market crash
of 2000 when poor people ’s lands became enticingly cheap
for agribusiness expansion, with new seeds engineered to toler-ate the harsh heat.
It is within this context of agricultural crisis that biotech
engineers —the“tricksters ”— entered the scene. They came
with promises of economic deliverance through “pioneering
”
agriculture at the “frontiers ”of biotechnology —notions that
deeply resonated with gringos ’self-image as capitalist nation-
builders in the wilderness. They spoke of “progress ”as an ef ﬁ-
cient economy of scale. Among my interlocutors, progreso is
variously understood as the domestication of nature throughfarming, accumulation of capital, moral betterment through sac-
riﬁce, agro-technological advancement, and the markers of
social mobility among their offspring —such as educational
degrees, travels abroad, urban living, and white-collar profes-
sionalism. The engineers mirrored those settler values and
aspirations: they were urbanites decorated with scienti ﬁc
titles and authoritative technological knowledge, yet they pre-
sented themselves charmingly as fellow gringo agriculturalists
descended from European immigrant family farmers. The bro-chures they brought with them glistened with enticing ﬁgures,26 Journal of Ethnobiology 44(1)
colorful graphs and lustrous images of weed-free ﬁelds that
appealed to the gringos ’plantation desires and market-crash
anxieties alike.
One less-discussed feature of the Plantationocene is the way
it often perpetuates an addictive cycle of desire for an expansive
sense of control and order among Global South farmers them-selves. My interlocutors believed the “technological package ”
of GM seeds and herbicides would restore their control over
the chaos that kept them up at night: unstable cotton prices,deregulated agrarian state protections, increasingly erratic ﬂuc-
tuations in climate conditions (resulting from intensi ﬁed defor-
estation), and the “feral proliferation ”(Tsing, Mathews, and
Bubandt 2019) of inconvenient nonhuman others that adapt
to, and thrive in, monocrop ﬁelds (Beilin and Suryanarayanan
2017). Instead of regaining control, many small and middlescale Chaco famers found themselves locked into a system
that controlled them. GM seeds, chemicals and fertilizers
gave Chaco planters the ﬁelds of their dreams in the short
run, only to drive them into debt down the line as the cost of
increasing herbicide applications and expensive machinery
exceeded their pro ﬁt margins. In a spiral reminiscent of better-
known GM cotton hubs of the Global South, like India (Flachs
and Stone 2019), most of these Chaco planters were priced out
of cotton farming altogether by foreign-owned conglomerates.In hindsight, Emiliano sees the engineers ’promise of control as
an engineered illusion, an “engaño. ”Nevertheless, he does not
blame the agribusiness message for the trickery of its messen-gers. Instead, as I shall now show, he blames the racialized
poor.
Racialized settler identities have not ﬁgured prominently in
studies of contemporary Argentine farming politics, yet I
believe they are central to understanding why many gringo
farmers priced out of —or intoxicated by —GM agriculture,
have nevertheless acquiesced to the model that marginalized
them. The politics of this acceptance came dramatically to
public attention in the wake of “el con ﬂicto del campo ”—
the state ’s con ﬂict with “the countryside ”that arose in 2008.
On the surface, this does not look like a racialized affair, but
a rural –urban divide that superseded class and historical differ-
ences. The con ﬂict began after the Ministry of the Economy,
under the Peronist presidency of Cristina Kirchner (2008 –
2015), announced a hike in export taxes on soybean commod-ities from 35% to 44%. In response, four major agrarian orga-
nizations from across a spectrum of political and economic
orientations came together to block the measure. These organi-zations included the Sociedad Rural —representing a powerful
elite of the richest agrarian landowners and lobbyists for agri-
business —as well as its traditional archenemy, the
Federación Agraria Argentina , which represents small and
medium scale farmers like Emiliano. The alliance was striking,
given that the
Sociedad Rural had persecuted gringo small
farmer resistance during the last military dictatorship (1976 –
1983)12and forged policies to radically deregulate farmer pro-
tections. This erosion of protections hit gringo small farmershard in an economically and ecologically volatile climate, andmany still mourn the privatization of their cotton gins and
farming cooperatives which, as one former gin manager put it
with tears in his eyes, held the memory of their parents andgrandparents in its now-disintegrated structures.
Despite these cleavages, racialized plantation legacies have
exercised a forceful in ﬂuence on gringo affects and subjectivi-
ties, making them susceptible to bonds of allegiance with the
very groups that harmed them. Biotechnology corporations
are adept rallying farmer identities in very different parts ofthe world as “under attack ”(Müller 2021) —whether by the
state, or by unwanted guests and pests of various species. In
the Argentine Chaco, gringo ex-planters who had been pricedout of small or medium scale cotton farming nevertheless
shared the sentiments and solidarities of their wealthier
gringo counterparts across the country who had orchestratedEl Campo –that is to say, descendants of those who had once
beneﬁtted from ﬁscal land distribution policies directed at
European settlers. They regarded the high export tariffs onsoybean products as part of an “anticolono ”intervention on
the part of the state, targeting them as a group. In other
words, the force of racialized plantation identities was sostrong that even impoverished small-scale ex-planters identi ﬁed
more with rich land-owning gringos of wealthier provinces than
with nongringo subsistence farming peasant or campesino pop-
ulations of their own region who, like themselves, were dispos-
sessed by large-scale agribusiness.
Many ex-planters were especially disgruntled to see the pre-
vious racialized hierarchies of labor shaken in the wake of these
“anticolono ”measures. They would often complain to each
other, and to me, that the Kirchner government ’s soy tax was
funding cash transfers to the poor or unemployed (a measure
known as the Fondo Soja Solidaria ). They felt it attacked
gringo work culture by punishing “those who work ”— that
is to say, gringo farmers —for the sake of “those who do not
work, ”the criollo and Indigenous poor. However, when
probed about the jobs these populations had eschewed, theexamples many gringos offered were rooted in fantasies
about plantation divisions of labor. Some noted, for instance,
that since the cash transfers required all children to attendschool, the labor of children or youth was no longer available
to gringos, while adults were no longer willing to do low
paid temporary work ( “changas ”) that would disqualify them
for poverty relief without offering them equivalent bene ﬁts.
As one gringo put it:
Nowadays they run around with cellphones or mopeds,
and complain that they ’re poor or that their lands were
stolen. But it ’s they who choose not to work. It ’s impos-
sible to get a changuero (informal temporary worker) to
ﬁx this or that, or clean the house. No one wants to
work anymore. That is the lack of work culture.
On the other hand, most Indigenous Qom and criollo ex-pickers
I spoke to welcomed measures such as the Asignación
Universal por Hijo (a monthly sum per child of poor families)Blickstein 27
as a necessary —if insuf ﬁcient —aid in a time of widespread
resource extraction, joblessness, and rapid depletion of bush-
land economies.13
In this light, the gringos ’sense of betrayal is directed at their
ex-pickers, whom they scapegoat for the loss of “work culture ”
that impacts all of rural Chaco, including gringos themselves.Albeit with racialized structural differences intact, both
ex-pickers and ex-planters ﬁnd themselves living off of the
soy that is encroaching on their forests and ﬁelds, upending pre-
vious ways of life. While some line up to “wait”for cash trans-
fers that keep them just above the poverty line (Auyero 2012) in
an ongoing colonial occupation, the others lease out stolenlands they got for free and no longer plant in, to soy conglom-
erates who will destroy their soils.
Roses
“The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad; and the
desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. ”–Isaiah
35:1
“Why bother planting roses if they rip them away? This is
the lack of belonging [ …] to a place. The soil that I
adore, that I love. ”–José
When José talked to me longingly about potted roses in
2013, we were in the midst of one of the Gran Chaco ’s worst
droughts in a century. José ’s town, in the north of Chaco
Province, had been struck with a particular virulence. Ageingranchers and planters wept at the loss of cattle and crops. Yet
for José, absent rainfall was not the point. The point, for José,
was that the roses were gone.
A middle-aged gringo barber, José had never planted cotton
himself but had spent his childhood on his parents ’plantation,
and wrote lyrical pamphlets about cotton times that werepopular among immigrant associations in the area. Our conver-
sation had turned from cotton to roses at what struck me as an
odd interval. We were talking about his grandparents ’strong
sense of belonging and community in plantation times, and
how that world was slipping fast out of reach. Roses were for
José the focal point in this story of downturn, characterizednot by climatic upheavals, but by an onslaught of racialized
others into the town. He spoke with a sense of injury about
the suspected rose thieves: unemployed Indigenous andcriollo people, living on state welfare, with no sense of belong-
ing to the town. Listening to José, it was as though the rose
vandals had uprooted his very person: the former pickers hadplucked the ﬂowers —and settler belonging itself —right
out of their pots.
A passion for roses might have sensitized someone like José
to the desertifying conditions that make thirsty ﬂower gardens
unthinkable in drought-af ﬂicted Chaco. It might have led him
to worry about the forests disintegrating all around him in thewake of the soy boom, or to wonder how many other species
—domesticated or not —are in danger. He might have con-
demned the soy boom itself for stealing away the plant-lifehe loves. Yet, like Marta and Emiliano, José ’s plant affections
and af ﬂictions do not result in contestation against the agribusi-
ness model.
To explore why, in the rest of this ﬁnal section, I trace the
mechanisms of José ’s colonial nostalgia for roses under the
looming shadow of the Plantationocene. José ’s nostalgia
sheds light on similar forms of garden-based identities and
longings I noticed in the Chaco that act as vectors of racialized
colonial thinking, while de ﬂecting attention from the impacts of
monocultures and agribusiness. Colonial nostalgia, like ecolog-
ical nostalgia (Angé and Berliner 2021), is built on layers of
disavowal wherein “people mourn the passing of what they
themselves have destroyed ”(Rosaldo 1989, 108). Just as eco-
logical nostalgia often silences histories of environmental
racism, colonial nostalgia for plantation times serves to makecolonialism ’s structures of “racial domination seem innocent
and pure ”(Rosaldo ibid: 107; see also Ogden 2021). As
José
’s case demonstrates well, this disavowal in Chaco often
manifests not only in the longing for an innocent past, but
also in a racialized scapegoating of colonized people in the
present.
José’s attachment to roses re ﬂects a common set of
plant-relations among my interlocutors. Throughout the
former cotton belt —especially before the 2013 drought —
gringo families I spoke or lived with would often point to
their past or present ﬂower gardens as a mirror of their values
and identities as colonos , or settler farmers. For those home-
gardeners who still farmed, verdant windowsills or patio
gardens were an expression of ongoing productivity and a well-
tended domestic life. For the greater number who had ceasedfarming, ﬂowers were often all that remained of their family ’s
agricultural activity after permanently moving away from the
countryside. Thus even if it was merely cosmetic, a ﬂower
garden represented something central to them about who they
were.
Some home gardeners described their plant-relations in
settler colonial idioms that pushed the limits of metaphor.
Roses are locally imagined as European ﬂowers that stand in
contrast to the desert wilderness of Chaco before colonization.Echoing a common refrain among gringos in Chaco, one home-
gardener said ﬂowers like roses were a reminder of gringos ’
ancestral capacity as “frontier settlers ”(colonos pioneros )t o
“stake the teeth of the plow in the virgin soil. ”That is to say,
their capacity to plant something, both literally and ﬁguratively,
where before there was “nothing. ”
Garden ethnographers from England to Mozambique have
cautioned against an overly metaphorical understanding of
the way gardeners engage plant-life (Archambault 2016;Degnen 2009). People and plants “serve as interpretants
of one another ”for gardeners, and thus their plant relations
are never merely metaphorical or mechanistic, but entail the“writing of social relations, memory, experience, and personal
history onto individual plants and gardens ”(Degnen 2009,
163). For gringo gardeners in Chaco, planting ﬂowers is not
just a metaphor for agricultural colonization, but an embodied28 Journal of Ethnobiology 44(1)
social ritual of settler world-making in the postplantation era. In
linking gardening to the myth of founding in “virgin ”soil, my
interlocutor evokes a commemorative practice of belonginggrounded in the negation of Indigenous primacy on the land.
This is why, for José, a rose is more than just a rose. For him,
colorful potted ﬂowers, and delicate roses in particular, act in the
social world of gringos by fostering a “sense of belonging ”
(sentido de pertenencia ) to the town. A rose garden, made
visible on the patio or in pots on the windowsills, is a sociallyembedded practice. Put on displ ay, gardens are an esthetic,
public expression of private “work culture ”for many gringos in
Chaco. They are an interface between the private and publicspheres —a chance to publicly represent the private individual ’s
domestication of nature. One plants a garden to see and be seen,
and when many neighbors do so, an aggregate or collectivesense of belonging is forti ﬁed in the town at large. Roses are espe-
cially apt at fostering public displays of belonging because they
appear fragile, and in fact require careful tending, as well asscarce resources such as water and soils not native to Chaco.
This esthetic of care is central to the potted-garden ’s civic function.
As José put it:
We would plant [the roses] knowing people would look
on and admire them …We need to feel this sense of
belonging: that I take care of my house and the otherstake care of theirs, and all of us say: “what a beautiful
town, how nice it is to be here. ”
As with many other horticultural expressions of belonging
and work culture in the cotton belt towns I visited, this one per-
formed a racialized ranking of class status for my gringo inter-locutors. And not just because gardening represented property,
leisure time, and the material resources for ornamental “care.”
When speaking of gardens, my gringo interlocutors would oftenpoint out that Indigenous and criollo homes had no ﬂowers in
the verandas. Flower gardens are a “gringo thing, ”they would
tell me. When asking them why, I expected stories about immigrantcultural traditions transplant ed from Europe to the Americas. The
answers I got, however, were often ﬁrmly rooted in the local plan-
tation logics that ordered racialized labor hierarchies in the cottonﬁelds. Some evoked the differing capacities for sedentary agricul-
ture across distinct stages o f development represented by gringos ,
criollos andaborígenes .“You have to understand, our Indians here
a r en o tt h eA z t e c s . ”Or:“They don ’t know how to work, they never
made it to agriculture. ”And“they were still in the Stone Age when
we got here —if it weren ’t for us they ’d still be running about in
feathers and arrows. ”The creoles, meanwhile, were explicitly
assessed as a midway stage between Indigenous people and
Europeans by many gringos: they “carry agriculture in their
blood, ”one gringo told me, “a n dt h e yl i k et og a r d e nt o o ,b u t
only what they need to live. ”Once they ’ve eaten, he added disap-
provingly, they “prefer to sit around and play the guitar. ”
Vegetables and fruit trees aside, an absence of ﬂowers in the
patios indicated a deeper lack of vision, capitalist accumulation,
and work ethic that many gringos evoked about their plantationlaborers. Gringos knew that planting ornamental ﬂowers in their
windows or patios was more an esthetic pastime than a transplanted
mode of agricultural production. Nevertheless, it was a civilized
esthetic.
José’s drought-af ﬂicted town was not a good place for a rose
to thrive, however. Though agribusiness representativesdeﬂected responsibility for the 2013 drought, a number of
agronomists from the town ’s INTA chapter (National
Agricultural Technology Institute) as well as local residentsinformed me that big foreign-owned conglomerates were fun-
neling water from already drier and poorer areas like this one
to soy ﬁelds near other towns further south, through accords
made with the government. They added that the acceleration
of agribusiness-driven deforestation had heightened scorching
heat waves and the frequency of wild ﬁres and dust storms
(see also Baumann et al. 2022). In town, agribusiness develop-
ment had replaced dirt paths with paved roads, and trees had
been felled in the process, heating up the environs further.What was left of the town ’s lagoon and swamps had now entirely
dried up. The strain on water infrastructure was heightened by an
exponential growth of the town ’s population, which nearly
doubled after intensive mechanization massively cut rural jobs
between 1991 and 2001, and increased steadily ever since like
most large towns in Chaco Province (INDEC 2010) —a paradox-
ically rural peri-urban sprawl that re ﬂects what Monika Krause
(2013) dubbed the “ruralization of the world. ”With water
so scarce and demographics rising, rose gardens becamesomething of a costly effort to maintain even for middle
classes, and even before that year ’s drought. A wealthy
doctor I knew kept his lush ﬂower garden visible, but tantaliz-
ingly locked behind a high iron gate, which passersby would
sometimes comment upon admiringly or reproachfully during
the drought. Others kept less c ontroversial cacti and succu-
lents discretely tucked into backyards or close to the ground
behind patio fences guarded by dogs. Evidently one still felt
pressure to plant something, yet planting too much or thewrong things was a public display of avarice.
W h i l eJ o s éw a sa w a r eo ft h ed r oughts plaguing his area, he
nevertheless viewed the demise of the rose garden as a sign ofmoral and political decay, having less to do with agribusiness
than with an in ﬂux of “too many ”Indigenous people and creole
peasants into the town. As Gastón Gordillo (2016) has noted,
modes of racialization in what he terms “White Argentina ”have
often manifested spatially, wherein people of European immigrant
descent fear being surrounded and overtaken by a “savage
outside ”composed by people of visibly Indigenous descent.
Even in the big cities, this fear harkens back to a settler colonial
frontier imaginary of el malón , referring to the historic raids by
militarily autonomous Indigenous people on horseback defending
their territory against European settlers after Argentina ’sn a t i o n -
state formation, and sometimes vandalizing or stealing settlers ’
cattle (Gordillo 2016). In peri-rural Chaco towns, this spatial
imaginary of Indigenous in ﬂux into domesticated gringo space
was common, but often took on agricultural idioms or referents.This is indeed the case for José ’s complaints about rose thievesBlickstein 29
and vandals who, in capturing gringos ’domestic ﬂowers, para-
sitically attack settler belonging to the town:
Before you could have roses in your garden! [ …] But
now, all these people came from outside. When you
plant ﬂowers in the front yard, they ’ll pass by and yank
them right out. Just to do some damage. So we ’ve tired
of it. We ’ll say, why bother planting roses if they rip
them away? This is the lack of belonging. The lack ofbelonging to a place. The soil that I adore, that I love.
In our conversations, José described this demographic of
so-called “outsiders ”like the feral proliferation of weeds or
pests in a monocrop ﬁeld (Beilin and Suryanarayanan 2017;
Tsing, Mathews, and Bubandt 2019) —a species that was once
useful had mutated, grown out of c ontrol, and parasitically con-
sumed the gardens of settler belonging. José echoed many other
interlocutors when he complained that the vandals grew exponen-tially in slums on the outskirts of town ( “like lice, ”another gringo
added) sapping “work culture ”by living on cash transfers paid for
by gringos. He was nostalgic for his prior relations with this pop-ulation, whom he insists he had “very much liked ”in plantation
times when they worked for his family in an ef ﬁcient orderly
manner ( “like slaves, ”many Indigenous Qom ex-pickers have
noted) and contributed to the settler economy ’s progress. Now,
they were doing the opposite. Figuratively, they were eroding a
public sense of work culture, order, and the town ’s“pulchritude ”
—as José termed it —and by extension, a sense of collective care
and belonging. They did so (literally) by assaulting the ﬂower pots
of people like José, to the point where roses —and belonging —
had begun to rot from within:
Ever since [the aborígenes came in], work culture is
being lost …Now the common citizens too have aban-
doned themselves. [..]It ’s gotten to the point that even
thegringos have been infected by its contagion ( se con-
tagiaron ). […] We need to feel this sense of belonging:
that I take care of my house and the others take care of
theirs, and all of us say:
“what a beautiful town, how
nice it is to be here. ”Today, the lack of belonging is in
everyone! This is the problem. I ’d like to feel proud of
my place here, of my hometown. But I don ’t. I feel
shame. This is no longer my town.
After evoking his “love for the soil, ”José comes to reveal that the
worst of his fears has materialized. What seems to be a malaise of
less civilized vandals has infected his own gringo heart.
Conclusions
The cases of Marta, Emiliano, and José illustrate some of the
affective and multispecies mechanisms of the Plantationocenein the agribusiness frontiers of the Argentine Chaco. Building
on the ethnobiology of gringo plant attachments, and on my
long-term ﬁeldwork in the region, I have explored why thesethree gringos and their communities do not resist the soy
boom and GM agriculture, even though they grieve the plant-
worlds that have been sacri ﬁced to the socio-ecological devas-
tations of this agribusiness model. I have suggested that their
deep attachment to racialized plantation logics —and to their
historic and ongoing position of settler privilege within thatsystem —overdetermines their capacity to forge alliances
across racialized class distinctions. Thus, while their multispecies
love and loss sensitizes them to the ecological fallouts of the soyboom, their in-group loyalties to “White Argentina ”(Gordillo
2016) ultimately helps bolster that agribusiness model.
Methodologically, these plantati on logics are particularly salient
to observe at ethnographic sites of mu ltispecies loss, since it is here
that the tensions between ecological critique and racialized affect
come to the fore. When Marta grieves a dying soil at the handsof GM soy, she also grieves the los t cotton plantations she associ-
ates with settler futures. Thus, her longing for multispecies soils is
also an affective investment in the gringo monocultural model ofextractive, agrochemically intense farming that links the two
crops across very distinct times and scales of production.
Emiliano resents how his class of small gringo producers waspriced out of cotton farming by agribusiness elites who “tricked ”
them into buying GM seeds they could not afford. Like Marta,
however, he does not ally with campesino and Indigenous small-holder movements, but with the very gringo-led agrarian elites
w h od e f e n ds o yf a r m i n ga g a i n s tt h es t a t e .J o s él o v e sa n dl o n g s
for rose gardens of the past at a time of escalating drought, andfeels his sense of identity and belonging is bound up in their uncer-
tain fate. Yet it is Indigenous rose vandals, rather than deserti ﬁca-
tion, that animate his fear, stirri ng biopolitical fantasies of pest
control against the Native people he sees as invaders.
Taken together, these three portraits lend insight into the work-
ings of the Plantationocene, and help us appreciate the concept ’s
value for ethnographic, ethnobiologi cal, and multispecies research.
While the Plantationocene is wrought through large scale technol-
ogies of biopower, it also unfold s in the seemingly minute affec-
tive attachments that arise in people ’s engagement with dying
soils, dried up gardens, and lost seeds. If plantations generate
the conditions of their own reproduction, the Plantationocenehighlights the structural centralit y of racialization to that unfolding
process in time and place (Carney 2021; McKittrick 2011). As an
analytic, it helps us trace how older plantation biopolitics —such
as the policing of racialized labor hierarchies and the control of
crops through pesticides —are transposed onto people and
plants imagined as invasive and feral in the towns near agribusi-ness frontiers (Chao 2022). E thnographically, a focus on “plots”
(Wynter 1971), on garden “love”(Archambault 2016) and on
“patchy ”sites of multispecies relations (Tsing, Mathews, and
Bubandt 2019) helps us gain a more i ntimate and storied foothold
into the particular ways these Plantationocene logics are repro-
duced on the ground. In turn, this intimacy lends insight intomore macro dynamics of agricultural biotechnology expansion
that characterizes the Plantationocene today.
While agribusiness is a strikingly g lobal and standardized affair,
the environmental racism that sust ains it is not uniform. The three30 Journal of Ethnobiology 44(1)
ﬁgures I have presented here highlight the importance of consider-
ing local agrarian and national his toricities, contingencies and sub-
jectivities in analyzing how plantation afterlives take particularforms. For example, just across the border in Paraguay, the demo-
graphics and histories of cam pesino struggles around soy look
quite different, such that Kregg Hetherington found it morehelpful to focus on the biopolitics of soy governance —what he
calls “agribiopolitics ”— than on the racialized labor regimes
emphasized by the concept of the Plantationocene (Hetherington2020, fn. 38). By contrast, I have argued that Argentina ’s settler
colonial state formation as a European crisol (melting pot) on
Indigenous lands, and its racialized agrarian structures in gringomonocultural ﬁelds, make the Plantationocene an especially gen-
erative frame for analyzing the country ’s GM soy frontiers, par-
ticularly in a historic cash crop region like the Chaco. I believeit may also offer a useful analytic tool for future ethnographies
of agrarian affects and politics in Argentina following the
recent election of right-wing populist President Javier Milei,whose proposals to eliminate agricultural taxes on soy and
social services to the poor are popular among many gringos at
the time of this writing (see fn. 5). Analyses of agribusiness inthe Plantationocene are most helpful when they allow us to
draw links between structural plantation logics at large, and the
local and affective contingencies of their unfolding.
While these three stories re ﬂect the speci ﬁcities of a fallen
settler middle class in a Global South soybean frontier, they
also hold a stark mirror to many other societies in the unfoldingclimate crisis, who remain attached to the very food systems
that imperil us. The Plantationocene is fueled by the “cruel opti-
mism ”of everyday actors —Lauren Berlant ’s (2011) term for
the paradoxically hopeful desires we invest in status quo behav-
iors that cause us harm (Blickstein 2024). Deforestation, dis-
possession, biodiversity loss, soil-degradation, agro-toxicity,and job-loss rates may look alarmingly clear from the bird ’s
eye view of satellite data maps or the statistics of NGOs
(Baumann et al. 2022), but for those living inside the multispe-cies worlds of those numbers and maps on the ground, they may
not feel so clear-cut, even in the throes of immense loss.
Declaration of Con ﬂicting Interests
The author declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This project hasreceived funding from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation program under the Marie Sk łodowska-Curie grant
agreement No. 846550 LANLOSS.
Notes
1. The Argentine Chaco is part of the greater Gran Chaco ecore-
gion, which stretches over a million square kilometers acrossArgentina, Paraguay, Bolivia, and the Mato Grosso. Thesecond largest biome in South America after the Amazon
basin, the Gran Chaco contains one of the world ’s largest remain-
ing continuous tropical dry forests, more than half of which is in
Argentina (spanning 489,000 km
2). Over 19.3 hectares of
Argentina ’s Chaco forests have been lost to agribusiness since
1985, with a signi ﬁcant spike since the COVID-19 pandemic
(Baumann et al. 2022).
2.Gringo is an emic category with which my interlocutors of
twentieth century European immigrant descent self-
identi ﬁed, and which they used to distinguish themselves
from criollos (rural populations of mixed, or mestizo , ances-
try), often in explicitly racializ ed terms of class distinction.
This nomenclature is not ﬁxed or homogenous across the
region, and the term criollo is often used by Indigenous
peoples to designate all classes of non-Indigenous people as
blancos (whites) or settle rs, thus treating gringos as a subcat-
egory of criollos .
3. Agribusiness pushes into xerophytic forests, open woodlands,
scrubs, savannas, and grasslands. It has reduced the number of
“quebracho ”trees, a species of the generum Schinopsis that
includes S. balansae (“Quebracho colorado chaqueño ”),S.
quebracho-colorado (“Quebracho colorado ”), and S. hankeana
(“Horco quebracho ”). Other affected tree species include
Barnesia sarmentoi (“Palo santo ”),Aspidosperma quebracho
blanco (“Quebracho blanco ”), and Prosopis spp. ( “Algarrobo ”).
Also affected are shrubs ( Acacia ,Mimosa ,Prosopis , and
Celtis ), cacti ( Opuntia andCereus ), grasses ( Elionorus musitcus
andSpartina argentinensis ), and palm species ( Copernica alba ).
Indigenous uses and knowledge of this plant-life are accordingly
impacted (see: Arenas and Scarpa 2007; Arias Toledo,
Colantonio, and Galetto 2007; Arias Toledo et al. 2014).
4. In Brazil, India, and South Africa, for instance, farmers have
formed broad-based social movements against GM agribusiness
(Scoones 2008).
5. The interviews used for this essay were collected prior to the
Presidential election of Javier Milei on November 19, 2023.
See my conclusion for a brief outlook on this issue.
6. A nation-building war of Indigenous extermination and dispos-
session in the Argentine National Territories, which began in
1879 in Patagonia under General Julio Roca, and extended into
the early twentieth century in the interior regions of the Chaco
area, albeit in a less systematic manner.
7. Such as Ley 817 and Ley 5559.8. The two groups were not dispossessed and racialized in equiva-
lent ways: Indigenous Chaco nations such as the Qom (Toba),
Wichí (Mataco), and Moqoit (Mocoví) —who were considered
militarily autonomous naciones under Spanish rule —were
dispossessed by the Argentine state and made to work on
their own homelands. Criollo workers mostly migrated from
neighboring regions that had previously been colonized and
incorporated by the Spanish, and though many have mixed
Indigenous ancestry (e.g. Guaraní, Quechua), most do not iden-
tify as Indigenous.
9. A campesino base of criollo and some Indigenous farmers
formed in the 1950s when the ﬁrst wave of Peronism distributed
plots of about 50 hectares (half the size of those accorded to
gringos decades earlier via Ley 817 and Ley 5559), however
this was not enough to shake the racialized class system
that was already in place. Older land tenure schemas favoringBlickstein 31
gringos ultimately prevailed, many of which persist via the land
tenure criteria of the Province ’s Instituto de Colonización.
10. Haraway (2015, fn. 5) originally de ﬁned the Plantationocene as
“the devastating transformation of diverse kinds of human-
tended farms, pastures, and forests into extractive and enclosedplantations, relying on slave labor and other forms of exploited,alienated, and usually spatially transported labor ”; a process that
continues with “the rapid displacement and reformulation of
germ plasm, genomes, cuttings, and all other names and formsof part organisms and of deracinated plants, animals, andpeople. ”
11. Endangered armadillos (locally called “Tatús ”) include
Tolypeutes matacus andPriodontes maximus. Endangered pec-
caries include Catagonus wagneri ,Pecari tajacu , and Tayassu
pecari (see: SAREM https://cma.sarem.org.ar/es). On endan-
gered bird species (e.g. Hylatomus schulzii and Amazona
aestiva ) see: https://datazone.birdlife.org.
12. Some gringo cotton planters I interviewed were members of the
Federación Agraria who joined small-farmers ’“agrarian
leagues ”in Chaco Province to resist agribusiness dispossessions
during the 1976 –1983 military dictatorship (Roze 1992) —yet
based on my ﬁndings, these were gringo-exclusive groups that
did not welcome the criollo subsistence farmers who were also
persecuted.
13. Various scholarly, NGO and UNICEF reports attest to this mea-
sure’s positive impact on Indigenous quality of life (see Biocca
2017).
References
Angé, O., and D. Berliner, eds. 2021. Ecological Nostalgias: Memory,
Affect & Creativity in Times of Ecological Upheavals . Studies in
Environmental Anthropology and Ethnobiology, vol. 26.New York: Berghan Books.
Archambault, J. 2016. “Taking Love Seriously in Human-Plant
Relations in Mozambique: Toward an Anthropology of Affective
Encounters. ”Cultural Anthropology 31: 244 –271. https://doi.org/
10.14506/ca31.2.05.
Arenas, P., and G. Scarpa. 2007. “Edible Wild Plants of the Chorote
Indians, Gran Chaco, Argentina. ”Botanical Journal of the
Linnean Society 153: 73 –85. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8339.
2007.00576.x.
Arias Toledo, B., S. Colantonio, and L. Galetto. 2007. “Knowledge
and Use of Edible and Medicinal Plants in Two Populations from
the Chaco Forest, Córdoba Province, Argentina. ”Journal of
Ethnobiology 27: 218 –232. https://doi.org/10.1186/1746-4269-9-
79.
Arias Toledo, B., C. Trillo, M. Grilli, S. Colantonio, and L. Galetto.
2014. “Relationships Between Land-Use Types and Plant Species
Used by Traditional Ethno-Medical System. ”European Journal
of Medicinal Plants 4: 998 –1021. https://doi.org/10.9734/EJMP/
2014/6570.
Auyero, J. 2012. Patients of the State: The Politics of Waiting in
Argentina . Durham: Duke University Press.
Baumann, M., N. Gasparri, A. Buchadas, J. Oeser, P. Meyfroidt,
C. Levers, A. Romero-Muñoz, Y. le Polain de Waroux,
D. Müller, and T. Kuemmerle. 2022. “Frontier Metrics for a
Process-Based Understanding of Deforestation Dynamics. ”
Environmental Research Letters 17: 095010. https://doi.org/
10.1088/1748-9326/ac8b9a.Beilin, K. O., and S. Suryanarayanan. 2017. “The War Between
Amaranth and Soy: Interspecies Resistance to Transgenic SoyAgriculture in Argentina. ”Environmental Humanities 9: 204 –
229. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-4215211.
Berlant, L. 2011. Cruel Optimism . Durham: Duke University Press.
Biocca, M. 2017. “Dispossession and Protection in the Neoliberal Era:
The Politics of Rural Development in Indigenous Communities inChaco, Argentina. ”Tipití: Journal of the Society for the
Anthropology of Lowland South America 15: 118 –143. Available
at: https://digitalcommons.trinity.edu/tipiti/vol15/iss2/2. Accessed
July 11, 2022.
BirdLife International [webpa ge]. Accessed November 1, 2023.
https://datazone.birdlife.org.
Blickstein, T. 2019. “Affects of Racialization. ”InAffective Societies:
Key Concepts , edited by Jan Slaby, and Christian von Scheve,
152
–165. London: Routledge. Available at: https://philpapers.
org/archive/SLAASK.pdf#page =173.
Blickstein, T. 2024. “Entwaldung als ‘cruel optimism. ’Die Expansion
des Agrobusiness in Südamerika aus der Perspektive von LaurenBerlants Theorie. (M. Thurner, Trans.). ”InAffektive Dynamiken
der Gegenwart , edited by D. Doris Kolesch, 265 –277. Berlin:
Neofalis.
Bonifacio, V. 2023. “Of Feral and Obedient Cows: Colonization as
Domestication in the Paraguayan Chaco. ”Cultural Anthropology
38: 8–35. https://doi.org/10.14506/ca38.1.02.
Bossert, F. 2012. “Ingenios Azucareros y Relaciones Interétnicas. ”In
Al Pie de los Andes , edited by P. Sendón, and D. Villar, 161 –184.
Cochabamba: UCB-CIHA.
Carney, J. 2003. “African Traditional Plant Knowledge in the
Circum-Caribbean Region. ”Journal of Ethnobiology 23 (2):
167–185. Available at: https://ethnobiology.org/sites/default/ ﬁles/
pdfs/JoE/23-2/Carnery2003.pdf.
Carney, J. 2021. “Subsistence in the Plantationocene: Dooryard
Gardens, Agrobiodiversity, and the Subaltern Economies ofSlavery. ”The Journal of Peasant Studies 48: 1075 –1099. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2020.1725488.
Chao, S. 2022. In the Shadow of the Palms: More-Than-Human
Becomings in West Papua . Durham: Duke University Press.
Davis, J., A. Moulton, L. Van Sant, and B. Williams. 2019.
“Anthropocene, Capitalocene, …Plantationocene?: A Manifesto
for Ecological Justice in an Age of Global Crises. ”Geography
Compass 13 (5): e12438. https://doi.org/10.1111/gec3.12438.
Degnen, C. 2009. “On Vegetable Love: Gardening, Plants and People
in the North of England. ”The Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute 15: 151 –167. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9655.2008.
01535.x.
Escobar, A. 2007. “Worlds and Knowledges Otherwise. ”Cultural
Studies 21: 179 –210. https://doi.org/10.1080/09502380601162506.
Flachs, A., and G. Stone. 2019. “Farmer Knowledge Across the
Commodi
ﬁcation Spectrum: Rice, Cotton and Vegetables in
Telangana, India. ”Journal of Agrarian Change 19: 614 –634.
https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12295.
Gordillo, G. 2016. “The Savage Outside of White Argentina. ”In
Rethinking Race in Modern Argentina , edited by P. Alberto, and
E. Elena, 241 –267. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gras, C., and V. Hernández. 2014. “Agribusiness and Large-Scale
Farming: Capitalist Globalisation in Argentine Agriculture. ”
Canadian Journal of Development Studies / Revue canadienned’études du développement 35: 339 –357. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02255189.2014.933702.32 Journal of Ethnobiology 44(1)
Haraway, D. 2015. “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene,
Chthulucene: Making Kin. ”Environmental Humanities 6: 159 –
165. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3615934.
Hetherington, K. 2020. The Government of Beans: Regulating Life in
the Age of Monocrops . Durham: Duke University Press.
INDEC. 2010. Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos [webpage].
Accessed December 1, 2022: https://www.indec.gob.ar/.
Krause, M. 2013. “The Ruralization of the World. ”Public Culture 25:
233–248. https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-2020575.
Kujawska, M., N. I. Hilgert, H. A. Keller, and G. Gil. 2017. “Medicinal
Plant Diversity and Inter-Cultural Interactions Between Indigenous
Guaraní, Criollos and Polish Migrants in the Subtropics of
Argentina. ”PLoS ONE 12 (1): e0169373. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0169373.
Lapegna, P. 2017. “The Political Economy of the Agro-Export Boom
Under the Kirchners: Hegemony and Passive Revolution in
Argentina. ”Journal of Agrarian Change 17: 313 –329. https://doi.
org/10.1111/joac.12205.
Lapegna, P., and J. Kuhin. 2023. “Ambiguities at Sites of Acceptance:
Agrarian Neoliberalism and He rbicide Exposure in Argentina. ”
Environmental Justice 16: 82 –88. https://doi.org/10.1089/env.2021.
0104.
Leguizamón, A. 2020. Seeds of Power: Environmental Injustice and
Genetically Modi ﬁed Soybeans in Argentina . Durham: Duke
University Press.
Lyons, K. 2020. Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners and Life
Politics . Durham: Duke University Press.
Martínez, G. J. 2013. “Use of Fauna in the Traditional Medicine of
Native Toba (Qom) from the Argentine Gran Chaco Region: AnEthnozoological and Conservationist Approach. ”Ethnobiology
and Conservation, 2. Available at: https://doi.org/10.15451/ec2013-
8-2.2-1-43.
McAlvay, A. C., C. G. Armstrong, J. Baker, L. Black Elk, S. Bosco,
N. Hanazaki, L. Joseph, T. E., et al. 2021. “Ethnobiology Phase
VI: Decolonizing Institutions, Projects, and Scholarship. ”Journal
of Ethnobiology 41: 170 –191. https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-0771-
41.2.170.
McKittrick, K. 2011. “On Plantations, Prisons, and a Black Sense of
Place. ”Social & Cultural Geography 12: 947 –963. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14649365.2011.624280.
Müller, B. 2021.
“Glyphosate: A Love Story. Ordinary Thoughtlessness
and Response-Ability in Industrial Farming. ”Journal of Agrarian
Change 21: 160 –179. https://doi.org/10.1111/joac.12374.
Myers, N. 2015. “Conversations on Plant-Sensing. ”Nature Culture 3:
35–66. https://doi.org/10.18910/75519.
Nabhan, G., K. Chambers, D. Tecklin, E. Perramond, and T. Sheridan.
2011. “Ethnobiology for a Diverse World De ﬁning New Disciplinary
Trajectories: Mixing Political Ecology with Ethnobiology. ”Journal
of Ethnobiology 31: 1–3. https://doi.org/10.29 93/0278-0771-33.1.2.Newell, P. 2009. “Bio-Hegemony: The Political Economy of
Agricultural Biotechnology in Argentina. ”Journal of Latin
American Studies 41: 27 –57.
Ofstehage, A. 2021. Working the Plantationocene. Exertions .
[online] https://doi.org/10.21428/1d6be30e.932d8ce0.
Ogden, L. 2021. Loss and Wonder at the World ’s End . Durham: Duke
University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. “Making Time for Soil:
Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”Social Studies of
Science 45: 691 –716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851.
Pulido, L. 2017. “Geographies of Race and Ethnicity II:
Environmental Racism, Racial Capitalism and State-SanctionedViolence. ”Progress in Human Geography 41: 524 –533. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0309132516646495.
Reo, N. J. 2019. “Inawendiwin and Relational Accountability in
Anishnaabeg Studies: The Crux of the Biscuit. ”Journal of
Ethnobiology 39: 65 –75. https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-0771-39.1.65.
Rosaldo, R. 1989. “Imperialist Nostalgia. ”Representations 26: 107 –
122. https://doi.org/10.2307/2928525
Roze, J. P. 1992. Conﬂictos agrarios en la Argentina: El proceso lig-
uista . Buenos Aires: CEAL.
SAREM: Categorización 2019 de los Mamíferos de Argentina Según
su Riesgo de Extinción [website]. Accessed December 1, 2022.
https://cma.sarem.org.ar/es.
Scoones, I. 2008. “Mobilizing Against GM Crops in India, South
Africa and Brazil. ”Journal of Agrarian Change 8: 315 –
344. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-0366.2008.00172.x.
Trillo, C., B. Arias Toledo, and S. E. Colantonio. 2016. “Uso y percepción
del bosque por pobladores de diferente tradición cultural de la Lagunade Mar Chiquita, Córdoba, Argentina. ”Ecología Austral 26: 7–16.
Available at: http://ojs.ecologiaa ustral.com.ar/index.php/Ecologia_
Austral/article/view/199. Accessed August 3, 2023.
Trillo, C., and C. Audisio. 2018. “Home Garden Medicine Plants of
Inhabitants of Different Cultural Traditions in Chaco Forests ofCórdoba, Argentina. ”Boletín Latinoamericano y del Caribe de
Plantas Medicinales y Aromáticas 17: 104 –119. Available
at: https://blacpma.usach.cl/sites/blacpma/ ﬁles/articulo_2_-_1395_-_
104_-_119.pdf. Accessed August 3, 2023.
Tsing, A. L., A. S. Mathews, and N. Bubandt. 2019. “Patchy
Anthropocene: Landscape Structure, Multispecies History, andthe Retooling of Anthropology: An Introduction to Supplement20.”Current Anthropology 60: S186 –S197. https://doi.org/
10.1086/703391
Wolford, W. 2021. “The Plantationocene: A Lusotropical Contribution
to the Theory. ”Annals of the American Association of Geographers
111: 1622 –1639. https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2020.1850231.
Wynter, S. 1971. “Novel and History, Plot and Plantation. ”Savacou 5:
95–102. https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cluster=1309605694180
2721826&hl=en&as_sdt=5,33&sciodt=0,33.Blickstein 33
