Soil Security  2 (2021) 100004 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Soil Security  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/soisec  
Soil health  and well-being:  Redeﬁning  soil health  based  upon  a plurality  of 
values  
Claire  N. Friedrichsen  a , ∗ , Sheryl  Hagen-Zakarison  b , Maren  L. Friesen  c , d , Carol R. McFarland  c , 
Haiying  Tao c , J.D. Wulfhorst  a 
a Natural Resources  and Society, University  of Idaho, 875 Perimeter  Drive, Moscow, IS 83844, United States 
b Zakarison  Partnership,  Pullman, WA 99163, United States 
c Department  of Plant Pathology,  Washington  State University,  Pullman, WA 99164, United States 
d Department  of Crop and Soil Sciences, Washington  State University,  Pullman, WA 99164, United States 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Ethnopedology  
Soil quality 
Qualitative  
Adoption  
Perception  
Soil security 
Nature’s contributions  to people 
Ecosystem  services a b s t r a c t 
The dominant  research  paradigm  for soil health emphasizes  instrumental  values to achieve sustainable  food sys- 
tems. However,  soil provides  a plurality  of values in society beyond instrumental  value contributing  to human 
well-being.  This research  aims to understand  the relational  values that soil provides  farmers by examining  the 
meaningfulness  and intrinsic  motivation  for building  soil health among wheat farmers in the Inland Paciﬁc North- 
west (iPNW).  Data were collected  from two soil health work sessions and 11 in-depth  semi-structured  interviews  
with innovator  wheat farmers to understanding  broader perspectives  and meanings  of soil health. Four themes 
of relational  values emerged  from the data showing  the link between  soil health and human well-being.  The 
results suggest that the term soil health should not be exclusively  assessed  by its instrumental  values but also by 
its relational  values supporting  a plural valuation  of soil health. Incorporating  soil health’s plural valuation  into 
research  will contribute  to more eﬀective  holistic innovations  supporting  human and environmental  well-being.  
This research  provides  important  insights into deﬁning  soil health and for transforming  the innovation  paradigm  
of soil health to include relational  values and cultural ecosystem  services for transforming  our current food system 
into an equitable,  sustainable,  healthy,  and just system. Changing  soil health assessments  to acknowledge  addi- 
tional soil health management  outcomes  related to human well-being  may facilitate  decision-making,  support 
the intrinsic  motivation  of soil health, and provide support to transformative  food systems.  
1. Introduction  
Building  an equitable,  just, sustainable,  and healthy  food system 
is a complex  and dynamic  challenge.  The three main agro-innovation  
paradigms  are eﬃciency,  demand  restraint,  and food system transfor-  
mation ( El Bilali et al., 2019 ). An agro-innovation  paradigm  is the dom- 
inant framework  of social norms in the research  community,  deﬁning  
the problem  of focus, the acceptable  methods,  and the breadth  of ac- 
ceptable  solutions  for transforming  the food system to build a sustain-  
able future. Soil science  falls within the eﬃciency  paradigm.  Currently,  
soil science  innovations  aim to improve  environmental  quality while 
also increasing  economic  viability  and agricultural  production  to trans- 
form our food systems  ( Peña, 2017; Tilman et al., 2011 ). Therefore,  
innovations  only promote  soil health’s  instrumental  values, neglecting,  
and marginalizing  non-instrumental  values of soil health (Ellis et al., 
2019). For example,  the absence  of the concept  of psychological  well- 
being from the soil health for human health conversation  ( Brevik et al., 
2020 ). Instrumental  values of soil are the unilateral  ﬂow of the beneﬁt 
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: clairef@uidaho.edu  (C.N. Friedrichsen).  from soil to humans  to improve  human well-being  ( e.g., nutrient  cycling,  
plant available  water, and pollutant  degradation)  ( Alcamo  et al., 2003 ). 
Developing  innovations  that only advance  instrumentally  valued 
outcomes  simpliﬁes  the multi-dimensional  social outcomes  of the food 
system,  neglecting  the non-material  human well-being  aspects  of agri- 
culture,  which leads to their degradation  ( National  Research  Council,  
2003; Niles et al., 2018; Stefanovic  et al., 2020 ). We argue that by ignor- 
ing the relational  and plural valuation  of soil health, soil science  does not 
eﬀectively  address  the dynamic  and complex  societal  challenges  linked 
to creating  a sustainable  food system.  The Nature’s  Connection  to Peo- 
ple (NCP) framework  proposed  by the Intergovernmental  Science-Policy  
Platform  on Biodiversity  and Ecosystem  Services  (IPBES)  advances  the 
ecosystem  services  framework  by stating that values are pluralistic  and 
are determined  by cultural  models ( Díaz et al., 2018; Ellis et al., 2019; 
Pascual  et al., 2017 ). NCP recognizes  that the relationships  humans  
have with nature across cultures  and contexts  require  a more nuanced  
understanding  of the types of values beyond  instrumental  valuation  
( Ellis et al., 2019 ). And that power diﬀerentials  between  stakeholders  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soisec.2021.100004  
Received  4 August 2020; Received  in revised form 23 December  2020; Accepted  10 January  2021 
Available  online 16 January  2021 
2667-0062/©2021  The Author(s).  Published  by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND  license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ) 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
determine  which values of nature are pursued  and promoted  within the 
dominant  agro-innovation  paradigm  ( Arias-Arévalo  et al., 2017 ). 
There is a diversity  of values related to nature ( Kenter et al., 2019 ). 
Nature is valued pluralistically  beyond  just instrumental  values, depend-  
ing on cultural  models or diverse  world views ( Pascual  et al., 2017 ). 
Intrinsic  values exist outside  of the value placed on nature by humans  
(e.g., diversity  of soil types). Relational  values are the beneﬁts  derived  
from a caring relationship  with soil by an individual  or a community.  
arew are a multi-directional  ﬂow of beneﬁts  from individuals  and com- 
munities  to the soil, and vice versa through  soil stewardship  ( Chan et al., 
2016; Pascual  et al., 2017 ). Farmers  have intrinsic  and relational  values 
for soil derived  from their stewardship  and care for the soil ( Keith et al., 
2016 ; Puig de la Bellacasa,  2015; Tironi et al., 2020 ). Relational  values 
of soil stewardship  are the base of indigenous  or traditional  ecological  
knowledge.  However,  due to the systematic  imperialism  of indigenous  
knowledge  by soil science,  these values have been erased. This is com- 
pared to the exploitative  western  perception  and concept  of land own- 
ership (Peña, 2017) . Relational  values, a concept  taken from indigenous  
knowledge  ( Gould et al., 2019 ), conceptually  advances  the poorly de- 
ﬁned term cultural  ecosystem  services,  which is seen as a unidirectional  
ﬂow of beneﬁts  from nature to humans  ( Daniel et al., 2012; Ellis et al., 
2019; Himes and Muraca,  2018 ). 
1.1. Deﬁning  soil health 
A working  deﬁnition  of soil health is the soil’s ability to func- 
tion and provide  for the well-being  of humans,  plants, and animals  
( Kibblewhiteg  et al., 2008 ). These include  attributes,  such as soil or- 
ganic matter,  soil pH, nutrient  levels, and the prevalence  of pests versus 
beneﬁcial  organisms,  as well as physical  properties,  such as soil depth, 
compaction,  and water inﬁltration.  Soil health assessments  are typically  
done through  a combination  of on-farm  measurements  and sending  sam- 
ples to commercial  labs for chemical  and biological  measurements.  Im- 
portantly,  there is no single measurement  that captures  what factors 
make soil healthy;  diﬀerent  regions  and land-use  histories  will have dif- 
ferent soil properties  that limit plant productivity  and ecosystem  ser- 
vices. 
While the importance  of diﬀerent  indicators  varies, many studies 
track a soil’s progression  towards  being healthy  through  collecting  soil 
samples  from speciﬁc  land areas under varying  aspirational  conserva-  
tion practices  and comparing  these to nearby "business  as usual" soils. 
Identiﬁed  aspirational  soil conservation  practices  explored  in the litera- 
ture include  no-till ( Nunes et al., 2018 ) and cover crops ( Stewart  et al., 
2018 ). In addition,  nearby “undisturbed  land ”( Maharjan  et al., 2020 ) 
may provide  a baseline  of what a potentially  healthy  soil looks like in 
a speciﬁc  region and may help deﬁne the potential  range of a system.  
The act of deﬁning  the baseline  or the range of a potential  system is a 
valued act. For example,  choosing  “undisturbed  land ”as a baseline  ne- 
glects the thousands  of years of continued  sustainable  indigenous  soil 
and land stewardship  (Peña, 2017) . 
Soil health assessments  need expansion  to also focus on how the 
user of the soil health assessment  will use it to make decisions,  and 
their needs and motivators  for behavior  change ( Lobry de Bruyn and 
Abbey, 2003 ). For example,  indicators  that can show annual progress  of 
soil health improvement  ( Karlen et al., 2017, 2019 ). Other suggestions  
include  reformulating  soil health assessments  to ﬁt within the existing  
routine  of farmers  and require  minimal  paperwork  and limited training  
( Lobry de Bruyn and Abbey, 2003 ). Soil health measurements  are cur- 
rently an area of high research  activity,  so ways of involving  growers  in 
research  and co-innovation  activities  can serve to empower  them. 
1.2. Motivation  and adoption  of soil health 
Motivation  can be both intrinsically  and extrinsically  inﬂuenced  
( McClelland,  2005 ), and is aﬀected  by values ( Stern et al., 1999 ). Schol- 
arly literature  has examined  extrinsic  monetary  and policy determi-  nants for encouraging  pro-environmental  behavior.  There is limited 
widespread  adoption  of conservation  practices  with current  extrinsic  
motivation  leverage  tools ( Napier,  2010 ). However,  this lack of progress  
may be related to neoclassical  economics’  diﬃculty  in capturing  as- 
signed values related to non-material  human well-being  ( Wegner  and 
Pascual,  2011 ). More knowledge  is needed  to understand  soil health 
behavior  determinants  to increase  conservation  behavior  ( Baum and 
Gross, 2017 ). Several  frameworks  examine  the relationship  between  en- 
vironment,  assigned  values, behavior,  environmental  governance,  and 
management  ( Arias-Arévalo  et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2019; Schulz et al., 
2018; Stern et al., 1999 ). 
Humans  are intrinsically  motivated  by the pursuit of their own well- 
being and fulﬁllment  of their psychological  needs ( Deci and Ryan, 2008, 
2012, Maslow,  1943, 1954; Tay and Diener,  2011 ). The concept  of well- 
being varies across cultures  although  some patterns  of well-being  are 
cross-cultural  ( Blackstock,  2011; McCubbin  et al., 2013; Tov and Di- 
ener, 2009 ). Indigenous  peoples  perceive  a strong connection  between  
relational  values with mother  nature and their well-being  ( Gould et al., 
2019; Peña, 2017 ). The non-indigenous  conceptualization  of intrinsic  
motivation  has been dimensionalized  as autonomy,  competency,  and 
relatedness  ( Deci and Ryan, 2008, 2012 ). Diﬀering  frameworks  of well- 
being provide  variants  on the broad typologies.  For example,  the in- 
digenous  derived  Breadth  of Life Theory recognizes  cognitive,  physi- 
cal, spiritual  and emotional  dimensions  ( Blackstock,  2011 ). The mil- 
lennium  assessment  (MA) framework  of ecosystem  services  and human 
well-being  recognizes  ﬁve components  of well-being  beyond  material  
need: freedom,  choice, health, personal  security,  and social relations  
( Alcamo  et al., 2003 ). Maslow’s  hierarchy  of needs uses ﬁve broad cat- 
egories that motivate  behavior:  physiological,  safety, love and belong-  
ing, esteem,  and self-actualization  ( Maslow,  1954, 1943 ). Needs and 
motivations  are not hierarchical  as related to pursuing  well-being,  and 
multiple  needs can motivate  a single behavior,  depending  upon the in- 
dividual,  culture,  and context  ( Maslow  and Frager, 1987; Paavola  and 
Adger, 2005; Tay and Diener,  2011 ). 
The management  of agricultural  soil is determined  by the farmer 
and/or landowner  assigned  values. The determination  of soil’s assigned  
value by farmers  beyond  economic  proﬁtability  remains  under-explored  
in the literature  ( Himanen  et al., 2016 ). Ecosystem  valuation  by farm- 
ers is determined  by culture,  context,  and perceived  nature connections  
( Allen et al., 2018 ; Vignola  et al., 2010 ; Wuepper,  2020 ). Eﬃcacy  of soil 
health hinges on identifying  and understanding  the plurality  of assigned  
values of soil, as well as how the power of agency relates to the expres-  
sion of valuing  soil by marginalized  communities  ( Allen et al., 2018; 
Arias-Arévalo  et al., 2017; Braito et al., 2020 ). 
Farmers  have diverse  values that motivate  their soil health man- 
agement  behavior,  ranging  from connectedness  to soil, freedom,  and 
authority  ( Braito et al., 2020 ). Limited  research  has examined  motiva-  
tors in under-represented  farmer groups,  such as women  and beginning  
farmers  ( Barnes and Bendixsen,  2017 ). The prioritization  of values and 
how they are applied  varies by group ( Ellis et al., 2019; Schulz et al., 
2019 ) . Care, often attributed  to women,  is a motivator  for community  
and pro-environmental  oriented  farming  practices  ( Jarosz, 2011; Wells 
and Gradwell,  2001 ). Women  play an important  role in determining  the 
adoption  of pro-environmental  soil health practices  in the United States 
( Bridges  and Napier,  2003 ). A case study with urban African  Ameri- 
can farmers  in the southern  United States documented  the pursuit of 
well-being,  the embodiment  of femineity,  and the nurturing  of Mother  
Earth as critical motivators  for women  to pursue farming  ( Barnes and 
Bendixsen,  2017 ). More research  is needed  to understand  the prioritiza-  
tion of values across farmers  related to the assigned  value of soil health 
and its relationship  with human well-being.  
This research  has a transdisciplinary  objective  by working  between  
the social and soil sciences  to identify  additional  assigned  values of soil 
health by commodity  wheat farmers  and crop advisors  in the inland Pa- 
ciﬁc Northwest  (iPNW).  This research  aims to advance  soil science  the- 
ory and paradigm  surrounding  how soil health is deﬁned  and therefore  
2 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
assessed  using social science  theory and methodology.  We argue that 
soil health needs to be contextually  deﬁned  and assessed  by the user of 
the soil health data and that solely relying on predetermined  soil biolog- 
ical, chemical  and physical  characteristics  do not holistically  evaluate  
the plurality  of value types soil health provides  to human well-being.  
Additionally,  this work seeks to ﬁll the knowledge  gap of relational  val- 
ues associated  with soil health. Currently,  soil science  focuses  on in- 
strumental  values of soil for human well-being.  By developing  a greater 
understanding  of the plurality  of the soil health’s  value has across con- 
texts, we can more eﬀectively  improve  human well-being  through  soil 
science  innovation.  Radical  change in the soil science  paradigm  is nec- 
essary to advance  our goals of sustainable  food systems.  The research  
presented  here includes  equal representation  of female farmers  within 
the study sample to gain a representative  understanding  of soil health 
and its connection  with well-being.  Speciﬁcally,  our research  question  
is: What does the concept  of soil health mean for farmers  as it relates to 
the pursuit of their own well-being?  
2. Methods  
Qualitative  research  provides  a critical methodological  gap to un- 
derstanding  adoption  and the barriers  to the adoption  of soil man- 
agement  strategies  ( Lobry de Bruyn, 1999; Prokopy,  2011 ) ( Lobry de 
Bruyn, 1999 ). Qualitative  research  is founded  on epistemological  and 
ontological  diﬀerences  from natural  science  that have limited past trans- 
disciplinary  research  for solving  societal  challenges  related to soil man- 
agement  ( Howard  and Lawson,  2015 ). Integration  of multiple  stake- 
holder knowledges  may create trust with science,  create meaning  for 
science  across society and contextualize  scientiﬁc  results.  The integra-  
tion of multiple  stakeholders’  knowledge  may be limited by epistemo-  
logical and ontological  diﬀerences,  giving privilege  to the dominant  ma- 
jority or scientiﬁc  perspective  due to a power diﬀerential  and poor best 
management  practices  in stakeholder  engagement  ( Reed, 2008 ). Quali- 
tative research  collects  non-numerical  data sources  in systematic  ways. 
One aim of qualitative  research  is to understand  and explore  the phe- 
nomenon  in question.  The aim is not to understand  the degree that the 
phenomenon  exists in society or if it is generalizable  ( Charmaz,  2014 ). 
Best management  practices  in qualitative  research  ensure rigorous  sci- 
ence ( Bernard,  2000 ). Qualitative  research  uses several diﬀerent  tech- 
niques to indicate  the quality or rigor of the research,  including  triangu-  
lation, prolonged  engagement  with the population,  member  checking,  
peer reﬂection,  rich thick description,  discrepant  information,  and clar- 
ifying researcher  bias ( Patton,  1999 ). 
2.1. Context  
The iPNW spans across the western  portion  of Washington  State, 
northern  Idaho, and the northwestern  corner of Oregon.  Wheat is the 
dominant  crop on more than 5 million  dryland  acres in the iPNW 
( Schillinger  and Young, 2004 ). Both winter and spring wheat varieties  
are grown in the iPNW in diverse  cropping  systems  across a large va- 
riety of soil types and precipitation  zones that vary over a steep gradi- 
ent (150–640  mm annual precipitation)  due to the rain-shadow  of the 
Cascade  mountains.  Soil health practices  in the region include  reducing  
or eliminating  tillage, planting  cover crops, using crop rotations  to en- 
hance soil fertility,  and suppressing  weeds and disease.  In 2017, 25% of 
all farm operations  in Washington  over 500 acres practiced  no-till, and 
43% practiced  conservation  tillage ( USDA, 2017 ). 
2.2. Design 
A case study research  design aims to develop  a holistic  understand-  
ing of a particular  outcome  of a context  ( Bernard,  2011 ). This research  is 
designed  to understand  the meaning  underlying  innovator  wheat farm- 
ers in the iPNW adoption  of the concept  of soil health. The aim is not 
to have generalizable  results that can be replicated.  Rather,  this design aims to develop  an understanding  of why innovator  farmers  adopted  the 
concept  of soil health. This may give insight into the missing  intrinsic  
motivators  behind soil health and provide  a holistic  understanding  of 
soil health outcomes  that may assist soil health assessment  across en- 
vironmental  and social indicators.  Innovator  farmers  in the context  of 
this study are those who recognize  the importance  of soil health and 
are exploring  and implementing  various  new practices  to enhance  the 
health of their soils despite the potential  ﬁnancial  risk ( Rogers,  2010 ). 
Data were collected  through  two forms: two work sessions  (ﬁve hours 
each) and 11 semi-structured  interviews.  
2.3. Data Collection  and Analysis  
Two ﬁve-hour  work sessions,  a format with elements  of both a work- 
shop and focus group, with 23 and 20 participants,  respectively,  were 
conducted  using the liberating  structures  methodology.  The work ses- 
sions explored  self-motivation  related to soil health, soil health inno- 
vation opportunities,  and identiﬁed  social capital within the region to 
promote  soil health innovation.  The work sessions’  aim was to create 
an innovation  platform  to spur future research  directions  and oppor- 
tunities.  The work sessions  were funded by the Washington  State Soil 
Health Initiative  Seed Grant. All participants  granted  informed  consent.  
A mixture  of farmers,  state agencies,  researchers,  and private companies  
were represented.  The workshops  were audio recorded.  Notecards  from 
the activities,  synthesis  conclusions  by the groups,  and evaluations  were 
collected.  Audio-recordings  were spot-transcribed  during pertinent  dis- 
cussion  moments  due to audio quality.  
Selected  workshop  participants  were contacted  to ask if they would 
like to participate  in follow-up  interviews  to discuss the social dimen- 
sions of soil health. Selected  participants  were asked to participate  based 
on expressing  non-economic  and non-external  motivators  for pursuing  
soil health, for example,  the importance  of creativity  and the embodi-  
ment of Christian  behavior  in managing  soil health. Snowball  sampling  
was used to identify  women  commodity  wheat producers  to participate  
in the research  ( Bernard,  2011 ). Women  producers  are often excluded  
from social science  research  surveys  ( Rosenfeld,  2017 ). It became  clear 
from initial interviews  that their missing  perspective  was essential  to 
pursue and explore.  All participants  granted  informed  consent.  In to- 
tal, 11 semi-structured  1-2 hour interviews  were conducted  with white 
farmers  and consultants  —ﬁve female producers,  four male producers,  
and two male crop consultants.  All participants  self-identiﬁed  with soil 
health. Two of the female producers  were beginning  farmers  in their ﬁrst 
year of production  as an operator.  All other participants  had been in- 
volved with wheat production  for several decades.  Sampling  ended due 
to identiﬁable  women  producers  during the onset of COVID-19  lock- 
downs and the beginning  of the spring season.  Interviews  were con- 
ducted via phone, Zoom, at producers’  homes, or in public spaces, with 
the audio being recorded  and then transcribed.  Transcript  quality was 
checked  and corrected  by the interviewer.  
The semi-structured  interviews  were an inductive  process  during 
which the interview  guide evolved  as the data were preliminarily  an- 
alyzed before the next interview  ( Charmaz,  2014 ). Data collection  and 
analysis  happened  hand-in-hand  and evolved  to explore  new, emergent  
themes from the participants.  The semi-structured  interviews  were fo- 
cused on understanding  how and why farmers  attribute  meaning  to the 
concept  of soil health. There was a focus in the interview  guide to under- 
standing  meaningfulness  of soil health to the producer.  Meaningfulness  
is understood  to be a form of deep intrinsic  motivation  ( Chalofsky  and 
Krishna,  2009; Ward and King, 2017 ). Questions  such as, “What does 
soil health mean to you? ”a n d “What does soil health mean to your 
community?  ”w e r e asked to probe into the intangible  well-being  and 
intrinsic  motivators  for adopting  the concept  of soil health. 
Transcripts  were coded in MaxQDA  20.2.2 with content  analysis  
(Bernard  and Ryan, 2010). All coding and data analysis  occurred  by the 
ﬁrst author.  Data derived  emergent  codes from the interview  transcripts  
were inductively  categorized  under themes and then super themes re- 
3 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
Table 1 
Data analysis  codebook.  
Super themes Themes Codes 
Self-actualization  Fulﬁlling  potential  and objective  Goal, passion, hope, tool for measuring  progress  toward a goal, self-challenging,  important,  
motivation,  morale, enthusiastic,  excited, hope, interesting,  fulﬁlling,  hope, identity, feels good, 
happy, rewarding  
Learning  and creativity  Learning,  reﬂection,  creativity,  smarter, experimentation,  fascinating,  risk, search for knowledge,  
new innovations,  awareness,  knowledge,  ignorance,  out of the box, systems thinking,  
mindfulness,  growing,  skill, boredom,  new challenges,  fun 
Esteem Dignity and pride for livelihood  Social status, gratitude,  trust, world citizen, pride, transparency,  social symbol of crop valuation,  
arrogance,  conﬁdence,  humbling  
Respect in the farming community  Landlord  acceptance,  role model for behavior  change, social norm, neighbor  cooperation,  
generational  conﬂict, social value, farmer community,  reputation,  leadership,  social symbol, 
good farmer, stigma 
Connectedness  Social learning and peer belonging  Inclusive,  farmer support group, collaboration,  encouragement  by peers, inﬂuence  by peers, no 
social community,  social connection,  social capital, social learning 
Rebuilding  rural communities  and 
food systems Rebuilding  food system, food security,  repopulating  rural communities,  rural social capital, 
change agent for the food system, helping the community,  part of the community,  
communities  not commodities,  societal well-being,  rebuilding  rural communities,  reengaging  
public in agriculture  
Stewardship,  nurture, and care Stewardship,  care, nurture, consciousness,  connectedness  to soil, family safe, gender 
discrimination,  reverence  for intrinsic  soil value, femineity  suppressed,  love for the soil, 
two-way  relationship  with soil, serving soil, healer, apologizing  to soil, scared duty, greed, 
mimicking  nature, the value of soil 
Self-determination  Gaining control by working with 
nature Control over production,  reducing  synthetic  inputs, supporting  natural systems,  utilizing  natural 
systems,  resiliency  of production  system, harmony  with nature, domination  and control over 
nature, killing nature, foundation,  holistic interconnectedness  with nature, regenerative  
Freedom,  autonomy,  and ﬂexibility  Autonomy,  control over product price valuation,  change agent, land tenure, self-suﬃciency,  
ﬂexibility,  control over product value, resiliency,  control over production,  enslaving,  freedom,  
liberating,  control over inputs, balance 
Farm viability Risk, costs, labor, future potential,  soil is livelihood,  income, policy support, productivity,  
eﬃciency,  debt, marketability  
Physical and mental health Mental health, pesticide  residues,  physical health, quality of life, stress 
lated to dimensions  of well-being  ( Table 1 ) ( Deci and Ryan, 2012; 
Maslow,  1943, 1954 ). One participant  provided  a member  check by pro- 
viding feedback  on the accuracy  of representing  their lived experience  of 
the results ( Bernard,  2011 ). Indicators  of quality used in this research  
include  community  engagement,  triangulation  of workshop  and inter- 
view data, member  checking,  the inclusion  of codebook,  peer reﬂection,  
rich thick description  with the use of quotes,  and discrepant  informa-  
tion of when themes were not unanimously  expressed  by all participants  
( Patton,  1999 ). 
3. Results  
The results are divided  into four dominant  well-being  themes that 
emerged  from the workshops  and interviews  expressing  how soil health 
provides  them relational  values and meaning:  self-actualization,  esteem,  
connectedness,  and self-determination.  Farmers  saw soil as an essential  
part of supporting  their well-being  and the well-being  of their commu-  
nities. The results explore  intrinsic  motivation  and the meaning  of soil 
health. 
3.1. Self-actualization  
The farmers  expressed  self-actualization  through  the adoption  of 
soil health. Two themes emerged  that expressed  the farmers’  self- 
actualization  through  soil health: fulﬁlling  potential  and objectives,  
learning,  and creativity  solving  problems.  
3.1.1. Fulﬁlling  potential  and objective  
Soil health provided  a goal for the farmers  to work toward.  “Soil 
health is an important  thing that we’re trying to foster and achieve,  as 
much as it is an objective,  and it’s a goal, ”said participant  2. Farmers  
embodied  these goals and objectives  so much that it became  part of their 
identity.  
It (soil health)  is very important  to me, probably  more than to some 
of my neighbors  or friends.  Something  that I’ve been interested  in and have developed  a passion  for. So it (soil health)  is just part of 
who I am, that I want to do that. Participant  10 
Furthermore,  fulﬁlling  this potential  and reaching  these goals and 
objectives  made farmers  feel good. “Being able to focus and feel good 
about what you’re doing, ”said participant  9. 
3.1.2. Learning  and creativity  
Farmers  noted that it was fun and exciting  to learn about how to 
improve  soil health by experimenting  and problem-solving  in their ﬁeld, 
as well as by observing  and mimicking  nature. The progress  they saw 
in improved  soil health gave them motivation  to continue  farming  and 
continue  learning  and experimenting.  Participant  1 said, “It is exciting  
and makes farming  fun. ”
I think seeing it (soil health)  progress  from what it was to what it’s 
becoming  is really motivating.  And seeing I have some part in the 
transformation,  I think it’s really cool to see the progression.  And that 
really motivates  me, and I’ve been wanting  to ﬁgure out a better 
metric where I can, like, kind of establish  this baseline  and then 
you know, measure  how far it’s (soil health)  come. I haven’t  really 
ﬁgured  that out yet. I think the growth  and transformation  is really 
motivating.  Participant  2 
Farmers  perceived  problem-solving  as an essential  part of achieving  
their goals and that they were solving  larger societal,  wicked,  or diﬃcult  
to solve problems  of the food system.  Participant  3 explains  how solving  
the problem  of soil health is about embracing  a diﬀerent  perspective  and 
a new way of tackling  day-to-day  challenges.  
Instead  of waking  up every day and going, what am I going to kill 
today? What am I going to spray?...  Instead,  you say, what am I going 
to plant today? To feed my soil? Whole diﬀerent  thing. It really is a 
whole diﬀerent  thing. It’s fun. It’s fun to think about it. And it’s, you 
know, I mean, there is a piece that’s kind of nerve-wracking  about 
what did we set in motion with what we did last year? I don’t know. 
I’ve been walking.  I have my suspicions.  Yeah. And nothing  seems 
4 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
too insigniﬁcant,  but we’re still learning.  And so, you know, there’s 
a piece where it’s like that’s a challenge  because  it’s like what do I 
need to learn today so that I can understand  this a little bit better? 
Participant  3 
Farmers  saw they could change the food system that they are part of 
and become  a leverage  agent for positive  change.  Further,  the ability to 
be that leverage  agent was important  for self-fulﬁllment.  
So really diversifying  our systems  and looking  at other ways of really 
making  that system work. That is what’s got me excited  right now is 
I think we had a breakthrough  in our understanding  of what needs 
to be done. Participant  9 
Most participants  expressed  that the current  soil testing options  did 
not enable them to measure  progress  or reﬂect upon changes  they were 
experiencing  in their soil, which perpetuates  the power and knowledge  
gap between  scientists  and farmers’  practices  in their ﬁelds. After one 
workshop,  one farmer and consultant  pulled out their soil test results of 
phospholipid  fatty acid (PLFA) proﬁling  of ﬁelds that have been in cover 
crops and examined  the results with researchers.  After examining  and 
discussing  the test results’ inconsistency,  they collaboratively  concluded  
that the expensive  test results were not scientiﬁcally  advanced  enough  
to accurately  represent  the changes  in the farmer’s  soil resulting  from 
his adoption  of cover crops. 
For farmers,  farming  is more than a career. Farming  is a livelihood  
and lifestyle.  Soil health gives them a focus, goal, target to aim towards,  
be curious  about, and continuously  learn about. Soil health provides  a 
means to self-actualization  for the farmers  to make advancements  and 
progress  throughout  their lifetimes.  
However,  not all learning  always ended in positive  results that built 
motivation.  “These young bucks they get in there, and they get on all 
enthusiastic  over it (soil health),  but when the results don’t show up 
right, then it’s dampening  their enthusiasm  a little bit, ”said Participant  
1. 
3.2. Esteem 
Soil health is a means for farmers  to improve  their esteem through  
improving  their perceived  dignity in society,  their respect within the 
farming  community,  and to give them the freedom  and ﬂexibility  to 
take control of their farm. 
3.2.1. Dignity and pride for livelihood  
Negative  messaging  surrounding  food quality,  pesticide  use, and en- 
vironmental  impacts  of farming  have impacted  the perceived  dignity 
and respect farmers  receive  from society.  Soil health provides  a means 
of communicating  and receiving  respect for their choices  in livelihood  
and hard work. 
I actually  had a very good friend that just really oﬀended  me. So bad. 
I was so mortiﬁed.  I couldn’t  believe  it. It is really hard to ﬁnd help 
[to work on the farm]. My friends and I had gone to Mexico  for a girl 
trip, and we were in the airport.  Getting  ready to leave. And there 
was this really nice bartender,  he was younger,  and I just said, oh 
my gosh, I would love to bring you home and have him work on the 
farm for us, or with us. She [friend]  looked at me [and said] ‘Well, 
that job is below him.’ And I wanted  to just smack her. Because  I 
thought  that is what I do every day, and it’s below him? So what do 
you think of being a farmer?  It made me so sad and so upset. What 
I do for a living is looked down upon by people… People  actually  
think that farmers,  you’re dumb, or demeaning  job. Little do they 
realize that that’s the food they put in their mouth.  I mean, we feed 
them. Participant  8 
At the end of the day, these [farmers]  are the people that probably  
care most about that (environmental  protection)… It  is important  
to have recognition.  The recognition  that we’re providing  a better 
product  to them. Participant  9 However,  farmers  are currently  limited in their ability to receive  re- 
spect and dignity from society because  there is little available  scientiﬁc  
evidence  to support  that healthier  soils result in a higher quality of food. 
If I can get our soils turned around to where we’re actually  producing  
a healthier,  denser product  and have a way of proving  that or show- 
casing that. I don’t know, I think the sky’s the limit. I mean, I really 
personally  believes  that that’s what the consumer  wants. It’s just how 
can we get it there? How can we prove it to them? Participant  4 
3.2.2. Respect in the farming  community  
In addition  to gaining  dignity in society for their livelihoods,  soil 
health is a means for farmers  to gain respect within their peer farming  
community.  
My husband’s  family’s  reputation,  they’re known as good farmers.  
And they haven’t  done anything  necessarily  like, you know, out- 
standing  or like noteworthy.  They don’t get awards  for it, right. 
[However,]  You go to conferences,  and people say, ‘I know you guys. 
You are really good farmers.’  And that’s humbling  and nice to see and 
nice to hear. Legacy probably  means diﬀerent  things to diﬀerent  peo- 
ple, but I think like if it can mean like good stewardship,  if it reﬂects  
your good stewardship  of that land, I think that’s a noble thing to go 
after. Participant  2 
Esteem  is built by how we perceive  being respected  and our ability 
to control our own destiny.  
Soil health supported  and gave farmers  esteem.  By adopting  soil 
health, the farmers  perceived  dignity within the food system,  conﬁdence  
that they were making  the right decisions,  recognition  of value by the 
public and by other farmers,  an increase  in their social status within 
the innovator  farmer social group, and power to make changes  in their 
livelihood.  Soil health gave them the conﬁdence  to continue  adopting  
new agronomic  practices  and empowerment  to make positive  changes  
that improve  their livelihood.  
3.3. Connectedness  
Social learning  and the potential  to support  and regrow rural com- 
munities  enable farmers  to ﬁnd belonging  within their peer groups and 
in their larger communities.  Soil health is a way for farmers  to connect  
to their land and show their love for the resource,  and as a result, they 
feel positive  reciprocity  for their stewardship.  Finally,  allowing  for the 
nurturing  aspects  of agriculture  provides  balance  to the domination  of 
conventional  agriculture.  
3.3.1. Social learning  and peer belonging  
Soil health provides  a crucial non-competitive  topic to foster social 
learning  and provide  a sense of belonging  for farmers  by drawing  them 
together  in peer learning  groups.  
There’s  a lot of collaboration  among farmers…it  just kind of helps 
you feel like you’re part of a larger group with similar values. That 
always makes you feel good…To  be able to share information  and 
experience  reaﬃrms  that we’re going after similar things, and we 
can contribute  to that greater knowledge  and experience  pool. Par- 
ticipant  2 
In addition,  Participant  2, 4, and 9 belong to an invitation-only  
farmer group that supports  self-funded,  self-run  research  across mul- 
tiple farms for exploring  alternative  agricultural  inputs and soil health 
practices.  The goal of the group is to learn about bio-farming.  
3.3.2. Rebuilding  rural communities  and food systems 
There is considerable  hope that soil health and improving  soil health 
can be a critical leverage  point for rebuilding  rural communities  and 
being a food system change agent. Being part of a larger, stronger  rural 
5 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
community  also provides  a sense of belonging  in the agricultural  land- 
scape. Participant  9 said, “People  are starting  to do this type of agri- 
culture,  regenerative  Ag., and they’re rebuilding  a community.  They’re  
getting people reengaged  in agriculture.  ”
And by maintaining  the health of the soil, we hope to leave it more 
productive  for future generations…Farm  sizes have increased.  And 
so it takes a bigger farm under current  farming  conditions;  it takes a 
bigger farm to sustain a family. The same farm size once sustained  
several families.  And so if we could get to a point, it kind of almost 
going backward  in time. If we could make each farm healthier,  more 
sustainable,  we could bring more families  back to the community.  
Participant  6 
There is hope that soil health can help farms be more economically  
proﬁtable,  support  more family farms, and repopulate  the rural agrar- 
ian landscape.  However,  participant  1 did not see hope: “So how is it 
going to aﬀect our communities?  Not quickly.  It is gonna be a contin- 
uing erosion  of the communities  as all I can see. ”The farmer saw that 
the community’s  strength  and vitality  had already  dissolved  beyond  the 
capacity  to repair. 
3.3.3. Stewardship,  nurture,  and care 
Farmers  have a reciprocal  relationship  with their soil. Stewardship  
drives farmers’care  for the soil, and as a result, soil provides  the farmer 
with natural  capital.  Participant  5 said, “I think that there’s just some 
people that love land and being stewards  of the land. ”Farmers  feel that 
their relationship  with the soil is two-directional.  That both the farmer 
and the soil serve and take care of one another.  
I don’t really own this land. I am here as a steward  to serve it. It is 
a relationship.  It [soil] will serve if I serve it well, it will serve me…
It is two way. It is a giving on both sides. It’s giving and accepting.  
Participant  3 
Other than stewardship,  some participants  expressed  they had a car- 
ing relationship  with the soil that they compared  to the relationship  they 
have with their children.  
It is mostly suppressed,  the feminine  aspects...  I just do truly believe  
that we’re seeing the quintessential  symbol  of that imbalances,  is the 
kind of the old white male culture.  It is emblematic  of that 50s and 
60s and 70s…It  is about domination  and control…I’ve  always felt 
like you know as a female,  I am connected.  I am connected  in a way 
because  my mother  is a part of me. I am a part of my daughters.  
My mother’s  part of my grandmother.  So there’s this line, you know, 
in connection.  And a beingness.  Whereas,  if you’re a male, you’re a 
part of your mother,  but there’s not that physical  giving birth. Males 
are physically  and biologically  isolated.  They have physically  ‘I came 
from this being’, but they don’t give birth. So there’s not that unbro- 
ken connection  of ‘I came, I was born from this being I give birth to 
this’. And that’s the piece that I think is missing.  It’s that deep, deep 
understanding  of connection,  and it is not revered,  and it is really 
not respected.  Participant  3 
Soil degradation  is seen as linked to a mindset  of dominance  over 
the soil. In contrast,  soil health is perceived  as the balance  between  
production  and nurturing  of soil. 
Soil health provided  an outlook  for the farmers  to increase  their con- 
nectedness  to nature, as well as a sense of belonging.  Soil health gave 
farmers  a reason to congregate  and form a peer group to learn with. The 
farmers  perceived  that hopefully,  by increasing  soil health, they could 
also improve  the well-being  of their rural communities.  They perceived  
that soil health would give their rural communities  additional  opportu-  
nities that would hopefully  foster the reversal  of farmers  leaving  the area 
by demonstrating  viability  in farming  once again, resulting  in increased  
retention  of the next generation  of farmers,  increased  viability  for fu- 
ture generations  to live in rural areas, and improving  rural community  
economics  and food systems.  3.4. Self-determination  
Farmers  perceived  soil health as a means to gain control over their 
livelihood  as they lost their sense of control by being locked into an 
explorative  agronomic  and food system.  They perceived  that by adopt- 
ing the concept  of soil health and accompanying  practices,  they would 
be able to gain control of their livelihoods  by working  in balance  with 
mother  nature, which enables  them to increase  the viability  of their 
farms and improve  their physical  and mental health. 
3.4.1. Gaining  control by working  with nature 
Farmers  feel trapped  by the food system of which they are an es- 
sential foundation.  The food system demands  they produce  more food 
despite extensive  externalities,  such as soil degradation  and loss of proﬁt 
in farming.  Participant  4 said, “We’ve tried to raise more, more bushels,  
more produce,  more pounds  quicker,  faster, and easier. Throw this at it. 
It’ll be better. Well, that is not ending out to be the true story. ”Farmers  
felt like they did not know how they were being controlled  because  of 
the lack of ﬂexibility  and freedom  of available  agricultural  inputs. 
There are certain herbicides  that are just like meth. You get on it, you 
get used to live in this certain way of life and treating  your weeds a 
certain way. And you get trapped  in that system…It  is hard to break 
out of that system.  …T h r o w i n g  all of these chemicals  out there is 
not. Not good from a human health perspective  and not good for the 
environment.  So I asked our guys a couple of years ago if in their 
seed treatments  if they had insecticides  on them. And they all said 
yes. And I asked them why? And they said, Well, that’s how it comes 
from the seed dealer. Participant  5 
Soil health means to them that they are able to gain control over 
their farming  operation  and their livelihood  by working  with nature 
and by facilitating  nature’s  natural  processes.  Participant  3 said, “You’re  
working  with nature. You’re not trying to, you know, overcome  it or 
ﬁght it or do battle or be in a war, so just feels better. ”
Working  with nature would free the farmers  from being reliant on 
synthetic  inputs. “It would be wonderful  if we just had no synthetic,  no 
need for synthetic  fertilizer  use. No need for herbicide.  Yeah, that would 
be my perfect.  Yeah, yes. Then that takes care of itself, “said Participant  
6. And that would allow them to gain control over not just how they 
produce  but also the quality of the products  they produce.  
That opportunity  to really take a little control over what kind of 
products  come oﬀof their farm —the food quality.  I think we’re much 
more focused  on building  a much more nutrient-dense  product…We  
can impact the real quality of the food that we produce  by regener-  
ating our soil. Participant  9 
Soil health is the piece that empowers  farmers  to restore the broken 
food system and return it into synergy  with nature. 
3.4.2. Freedom,  autonomy,  and ﬂexibility  
Achieving  soil health and adopting  new agronomic  practices  that 
promote  soil health gives farmers  a sense of freedom,  autonomy,  and 
ﬂexibility  from the conventional  agronomic  system that led to their lim- 
ited proﬁtability  and the degradation  of resources  to which they are 
bound. Participant  3 said, “It’s been liberating  to farm this way. It’s 
been very liberating.  ”
That freedom  from [synthetic  input applications],  we can change 
our workﬂow,  spread the workload,  potentially  based on timing of 
our crops. If you have a cover crop, maybe you don’t need to go out 
and spray. You don’t need to be there. That is taken care of for you. 
So certainly  from a labor standpoint.  Freedom  from outside  inputs 
would be great…there  would be an economic  beneﬁt and then the 
time savings,  so more family time, less time tied to the farm, greater 
ﬂexibility.  Participant  6 
6 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
Farmers  perceived  soil health liberated  them from the restrictive  
dominant  food system to which they are accustomed.  Soil health pro- 
vides them the sovereignty  and autonomy  to choose how they want to 
produce  their crops. It means they are no longer as reliant on deliveries  
of agricultural  inputs or tractor repairmen.  
3.4.3. Farm viability  
Viability  to be a farmer,  viability  to make a livelihood,  and viability  
to be able to pass this lifestyle  on to the next generation  of farmers  is 
the hope that farmers  see in soil health, and the potential  soil health has 
to bring to agriculture.  Soil health is the hope of bringing  back owner- 
ship of the land to farmers,  improving  their product  quality,  becoming  
adaptable  to climate  change,  and creating  sustainability.  “I think that 
the people in our bio-farming  group, or at least some of them, have the 
hope for them is that that they get back to owning  their farms, ”s a i d 
participant  9. 
Even if progress  towards  healthy  soils is slow, the hope for future 
viability  is enough  to pursue soil health. 
I don’t know if we will see the huge diﬀerence.  But generations  to 
come that there is soil there. That can produce  healthy  food as well 
as keeping  all wildlife  strong. Participant  10 
There is hope and pride that there is farm viability  security  in the 
future, and that is essential  for driving  farmer motivation.  
It is great pride. It makes you feel good, and it’s like, you know, a 
breath of fresh air. I mean, it’s exciting.  There’s  potential  out there 
now…It’s  like a big weight has been partially  lifted oﬀof our shoul- 
ders. Participant  4 
Farmers  perceived  soil health as an integral  and foundational  part of 
securing  the viability  of their farms by liberating  them from a restrictive,  
dominant  food system.  
3.4.4. Physical  and mental health 
Farmers  see a threat to their own and their families’  physical  health 
due to the reliance  on synthetic  fertilizers  by conventional  agriculture.  
It was probably  the seed treatments  and in the fungicides  and the her- 
bicides and the witch’s brew that you basically  mix. You put those 
in a tank mix. You don’t know how they interact  with themselves  
and each other and with you. The way we farm is not healthy.  It 
is compromising  people’s  health, physical  well-being,  because  [Hus- 
band] either he had such a load that his brain just cannot clean it- 
self… They  think people with Parkinson’s  and Alzheimer’s  literally  
the brain just cannot ﬂush out toxins. A lot of farmers  suﬀer from 
it… Paraquat  that’s one of the worst chemicals  for you, you know, 
contributing  to Parkinson’s.  Participant  3 
Finally , soil health provides  the security  that supports  emotional  
well-being  and reduces  stress in farming  by reducing  stress related to 
extreme  climate  events, ﬁnancial  burden,  connectedness  to the land, 
and the functionality  of working  in a family business.  
If your soil is in good shape. Then you don’t wake up in the 
middle of the night when there’s a rainstorm,  and you know the 
ground’s  frozen, you know that you’re gonna have horrendous  ero- 
sion events...A  healthy  farmer,  as far as just emotional  well-being  
and reducing  the stress as far as just physical,  you’re not having to 
borrow  the money.  You’re not burning  through.  You’re not spending  
all this money on inputs and trying to ﬁgure out where you’re gonna 
come up with the money next time. You can get yourself  out from 
under the debt trap. Participant  3 
In addition,  control and reliance  on others by increasing  soil health 
would lead to healthier  farms, farmers,  wildlife,  and people.  
Increase  time to do other things, less inputs, less having to rely on 
your tractors,  or the equipment  you use, less break downs, less stress. I think that our health would be better. People live longer, maybe be- 
cause they’re not so stressed  out. I guess there’s probably  thousands  
of beneﬁts  to it [soil health].  Better wildlife.  Wildlife  will be health- 
ier. Insects will be healthier.  Our water be healthier,  people will be. 
It is that big old circle again. It’ll help to hopefully  complete  that cir- 
cle a little bit without  having so many little breaks in it. Participant  
8 
Soil health and soil health practices  provide  a means to create se- 
curity for farmers  that their own health and the health of their future 
generations  are not at risk for the promise  of proﬁt that isn’t there. 
The most important  thing, feeling comfortable  to have my baby out 
in the ﬁeld with me, crawling  on the ﬂoor, eating the dirt, and not 
feeling like, oh my god, there’s chemicals  in there. But thinking,  oh, 
this is an inoculation.  That’s totally ﬁne. Yeah, and it’s healthy.  Soil 
health equals human health…I  mean, soil health to me means I can 
let my baby crawl in it and eat the dirt. That’s what soil health means 
to me. Participant  7 
Soil health provides  a means for farmers  to protect and promote  their 
physical  and mental security.  
Farmers  emphasized  soil health was about mimicking  mother  na- 
ture’s natural  processes  through  soil biology  for supporting  a self- 
sustaining  system that limits or eliminates  synthetic  inputs for crop pro- 
duction.  Farmers  expressed  they were re-examining  how they perceived  
economics  by embracing  this autonomy  and lack of reliance  on input 
suppliers  as essential  requirements  for having a viable, sustainable  farm 
plan. Additionally,  farmers  sensed an increase  in self-determination  by 
reducing  the risk of toxic chemical  exposure  and emotional  stress. 
4. Discussion  
The dominant  agro-innovation  eﬃciency  paradigm  frames soil 
health as the solution  to environmental  degradation  and increasing  the 
economic  viability  of agriculture.  However,  this remains  a simpliﬁed  
perspective.  Soil health has value to society and farmers  beyond  instru- 
mental value in the form of relational  values that emerged  from farm- 
ers’ narratives  about their motivations  and incentives.  The soil health 
research  agenda  needs to focus on innovations  that promote  a plurality  
of values across the food system to address  the dynamic,  complex  chal- 
lenges facing the food system.  These data document  relational  values 
derived  from soil health by innovator  commodity  wheat farmers  in the 
iPNW. However,  more data and research  is needed  to understand  the 
plurality  of values across the diversity  of farmers,  regions,  agricultural  
practices,  cultures,  and societies  ( Braito et al., 2020 ). 
Farmers  are intrinsically  motivated  by relational  values associated  
with soil health through  self-actualization,  esteem,  connectedness,  and 
self-determination  to fulﬁll their well-being.  Relational  values of soils 
expands  our knowledge  of values previously  identiﬁed  as cultural  
ecosystem  services,  such as spiritual  meaning,  heritage,  recreation,  
community  food sovereignty,  culturally  appropriate  food production,  
and aesthetic  provide  value from soil health ( Brevik and Sauer, 2015 ; 
Friedrichsen  et al., 2018 ; Jónsson  et al., 2017 ; Robinson  et al., 2012 ). 
The new term relational  values recognizes  the important  two-directional  
ﬂow of beneﬁt derived  from the soil and the soil steward  through  soil 
management  ( Tironi et al., 2020 ). 
In particular,  these perceived  relational  values may play large roles 
in farmer decision-making  when it comes to changing  management  prac- 
tices in ways that enhance  soil health. Farmers  perceive  soil health pro- 
vides them: 
1) a goal to work towards,  
2) enjoyment  and excitement  for what they do, 
3) conﬁdence  and dignity as important  contributors  to society,  
4) belonging  and support  through  improved  social capital,  
5) the sense of hope forfor the revitalization  of rural communities,  and 
7 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
6) an improved  sense of self-determination  in the viability  of their farm 
and their own health. 
Refocusing  soil health research  and assessments  to acknowledge  the 
role of intrinsic  motivation  surrounding  the adoption  of conservation  
behaviors  may facilitate  innovation  that is more easily adoptable.  The 
following  sections  discuss how to advance  change within the dominant  
agro-innovation  paradigm  to include  the plurality  of soil health values 
and includes  an example  of how the plurality  of values can be incorpo-  
rated into soil health assessments  to support  a sustainable  food system.  
4.1. Adding relational  values to the soil science paradigm  
To actualize  a sustainable  food system requires  breaking  out of the 
current  soil science  paradigm  that exclusively  focuses  on the instrumen-  
tal values of soil ( Vanloqueren  and Baret, 2009 ). Widening  the breadths  
of possible  outcomes  of soil health to include  solutions  that address  the 
multiple  negative  social outcomes  that agriculture  has on human well- 
being ( Stefanovic  et al., 2020 ). To do this, farmers  and indigenous  stew- 
ards need to be recognized  as scientists  who systematical  create and 
transmit  knowledge  ( Peña, 2017 ). 
Integrating  the diversity  of intrinsic  motivation  and relational  val- 
ues of soil health may shed light on how to foster human well-being  
associated  with agriculture.  For example,  how will this soil health prac- 
tice support  community  food sovereignty?  Leverage  points for causing  
a shift in the soil science  paradigm  include  (1) capital support  for the 
fostering  of niche innovations  of radical solutions,  (2) increasing  diver- 
sity and supporting  inclusiveness  of who and what ﬁelds can collaborate  
and conduct  soil science  research,  (3) increasing  support  within profes- 
sional societies  and research  institutions  for inclusiveness  and interdis-  
ciplinarity,  (4) supporting  an education  system around soil science  to in- 
clude multiple,  diverse  knowledge  systems,  (5) increasing  professional  
awards  for transformative  and interdisciplinary  soil science  research,  
and (6) implementing  widespread  fair forecasting  of future impacts  of 
innovations  on multiple  societal  indicators  as part of the research  pro- 
cess ( Vanloqueren  and Baret, 2009 ). 
Identiﬁcation  and recognition  of soil’s plurality  values will help ef- 
fectively  govern soil to provide  the diverse  public goods it provides  
( Juerges  and Hansjürgens,  2018 ). Eﬀective,  eﬃcient  soil governance  to 
promote  and protect soil security  cannot occur if the social beneﬁts  and 
values of soil are unknown  and incomplete  ( Helming  et al., 2018 ). Ad- 
ditional  research  needs to be conducted  to understand  the diversity  of 
values, cultural  ecosystem  services,  and intrinsic  motivations  that farm- 
ers have globally,  contributing  to their choice of livelihood  in farming  
and pro-environmental  behavior.  
4.2. Soil health assessments  
More speciﬁcally,  in this section,  it is discussed  how an example  of 
what the shift in the soil science  paradigm  might look like if a plu- 
rality of values were recognized  and integrated.  Currently,  soil health 
assessments  are designed  to help mostly privileged  commodity  farm- 
ers and land managers  understand  the impact their decisions  have on 
soil function  and the instrumental  values soils provide  for mostly priv- 
ileged communities.  However,  soil health has additional  values and so- 
cial outcomes  that need to be accounted  for within land management  
decisions  —relational  values. Exclusively  evaluating  soil health by a list 
of predetermined  biological,  chemical  and physical  properties  obscures  
that the term is valued and associated  with valued behaviors.  And there- 
fore, the plurality  of values soil health holds should be integrated  within 
the conceptualization  of the term and its assessment.  
Including  these additional  values into more diverse  versions  of soil 
health assessments  may increase  their eﬀectiveness  as decision  support  
tools and motivate  the adoption  of diverse  soil health practices.  For ex- 
ample, identifying  baseline  datasets  from land stewarded  from multiple  
cultural  perspectives.  Support  and change are needed  from the govern-  
mental regimes  to adjust conservation  policy to account  for a plurality  of values, but so far, this has had limited success  in the United States. 
For example,  currently,  there is limited support  in the United States 
within cost-share  programs  to ﬁnancially  support  indigenous  soil and 
water conservation  techniques  ( Peña, 2017 ) or culturally  appropriate  
soil management  to support  diverse  foodways,  such as inter-cropping  
( Minkoﬀ-Zern,  2019 ). More research  is needed  on how to eﬀectively  
and culturally  appropriately  integrate  the plurality  of values soil health 
has across individuals,  communities,  contexts,  and cultures.  
These data provide  insight into developing  more eﬀective  soil health 
assessments  that are goal-oriented,  create attainable  benchmarks  to 
indicate  observable  and measurable  progression  toward meeting  the 
farmer’s  goal, and are more holistic  (e.g., supports  farm diversiﬁcation).  
Soil health assessments  need to go beyond  the paradigm  that soil health 
can be assessed  with a soil sample removed  from its context,  culture,  
farming  system,  soil stewards,  and ecosystem  and shift toward evaluat-  
ing soil within the larger cultural  context  of which it is a piece. 
5. Conclusion  
This research  study provides  data on the connection  between  soil 
health and human well-being.  Some intrinsic  motivators  for innovator  
farmers  in the iPNW to adopt soil health induce self-actualization,  es- 
teem, connectedness,  and self-determination.  These themes provide  im- 
portant  insight into the relational  values that contribute  to the farmers’  
well-being  that have been neglected  in the current  dominant  paradigm,  
which emphasizes  soil’s instrumental  valuation.  A qualitative  methodol-  
ogy provided  a way to collect data from various  stakeholders  in a man- 
ner for understanding  a larger breadth  of how they value soil. Improved  
valuation  of all assigned  values that soil provides  society can help lead 
the way to create a sustainable  food system.  However,  to do so requires  
a transformation  of the current  soil science  paradigm  to include  the plu- 
rality of values of soil health. A change in the soil science  paradigm  
will require  an institutional  and social change to support  radical inno- 
vations.  Reﬂecting  on underlying  values that have shaped the soil health 
dialogue  and widening  soil health innovations  outcomes  to include  re- 
lational  values as desired  outcomes  is necessary  for transformation.  Soil 
health assessments  need to take into consideration  the potential  larger 
holistic  plurality  of values soil health and its outcomes  on human well- 
being, which may help facilitate  the transformation  of the food system 
to be equitable,  just, healthy,  and sustainable.  
Funding  
This work was supported  by the Washington  State Soil Health Initia- 
tive, the USDA National  Institute  of Food and Agriculture,  Hatch project 
1014527  and by United States Department  of Agriculture  (USDA-ARS  
NACA # 58-3064-8-002  ), an agreement  with the University  of Idaho . 
This research  was a contribution  from the Long-Term  Agro-ecosystem  
Research  (LTAR)  network.  LTAR is supported  by the United States De- 
partment  of Agriculture.  The funding  agencies  had no involvement  with 
the research.  
Declaration  of Competing  Interests  
The authors  declare  that they have no known competing  ﬁnancial  
interests  or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to inﬂuence  
the work reported  in this paper. 
The authors  declare  the following  ﬁnancial  interests/personal  rela- 
tionships  which may be considered  as potential  competing  interests.  
Acknowledgements  
We would like to acknowledge  Carol McFarland  and Dr. Haiying  Tao 
for their enthusiasm  and leadership  in facilitating  and running  the Soil 
Health work sessions.  
8 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
References  
Alcamo, J. , Ash, N.J. , Butler, C.D. , Callicott,  J.B. , Capistrano,  D. , Carpenter,  S.R. , 
Castilla, J.C. , Chambers,  R. , Chopra, K. , Cropper, A. , Daily, G.C. , Dasgupta,  P. , de 
Groot, R. , Dietz, T. , Kumar Duraiappah,  A. , Gadgil, M. , Hamilton,  K. , Hassan, R. , 
Lambin, E.F. , Lebel, L. , Leemans,  R. , Jiyuan, L. , Malingreau,  J.-P. , May, R.M. , 
McCalla, A.F. , McMichael,  T. , Moldan, B. , Mooney, H. , Naeem, S. , Nelson, G.C. , 
Wen-Yuan,  N. , Noble, I. , Zhiyun, O. , Pagiola, S. , Pauly, D. , Percy, S. , Pin- 
gali, P. , Prescott-Allen,  R. , Reid, W.V. , Ricketts, T.H. , Samper, C. , Scholes, R. , 
Simons, H. , Toth, F. , Turpie, J.K. , Watson, R.T. , Wilbanks,  T.J. , Williams,  M. , 
Wood, S. , Shidong, Z. , Zurek, M.B. , 2003. Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment:  Ecosys- 
tems and human well-being:  a framework  for assessment.  Island Press, Washing-  
ton/Covelo/London  . 
Allen, K.E., Quinn, C.E., English, C., Quinn, J.E., 2018. Relational  values in agroecosystem  
governance.  Current opinion in environmental  sustainability.  Sustain. Challenges  35, 
108–115.  doi: 10.1016/j.cosust.2018.10.026  . 
Arias-Arévalo,  P., Martín-López,  B., Gómez-Baggethun,  E., 2017. Exploring  intrinsic, in- 
strumental,  and relational  values for sustainable  management  of social-ecological  sys- 
tems. Ecology and Society 22. https://doi.org/10.2307/26799016  . 
Bernard, H.R. , 2011. Research  Methods in Anthropology:  Qualitative  and Quantitative  
Approaches,  5th ed. AltaMira,  Lanham, Md . 
Barnes, K.L., Bendixsen,  C.G.and Safety, 2017. When This Breaks Down, It’s Black 
Gold ”: Race and Gender in Agricultural  Health. Journal of Agromedicine  22, 56–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/1059924X.2016.1251368  . 
Baum, C.M., Gross, C., 2017. Sustainability  policy as if people mattered:  developing  a 
framework  for environmentally  signiﬁcant  behavioral  change. J Bioecon 19, 53–95. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10818-016-9238-3  . 
Bernard, H.R. , 2000. Social Research  methods:  Qualitative  and Quantitative  Approaches.  
Sage Publications,  Inc., Thousand  Oaks . 
Blackstock,  C. , 2011. The emergence  of the breadth of life theory. Journal of Social Work 
Values and Ethics 8 . 
Braito, M., Leonhardt,  H., Penker, M., Schauppenlehner-Kloyber,  E., Thaler, G., Flint, C.G., 
2020. The plurality of farmers’ views on soil management  calls for a policy mix. Land 
Use Policy 99, 104876. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104876  . 
Brevik, E.C. , Sauer, T.J. , 2015. The past, present, and future of soils and human health 
studies. Soil 1, 35–46 . 
Brevik, E.C., Slaughter,  L., Singh, B.R., Steﬀan, J.J., Collier, D., Barnhart,  P., Pereira, P., 
2020. Soil and Human Health: Current Status and Future Needs. Air, Soil and Water 
Research  13. https://doi.org/10.1177/1178622120934441  . 
Bridges, T.R., Napier, T.L., 2003. Factors that inﬂuence  farm women to advocate  
the adoption of environmentally  benign agricultural  production  practices.  Inter- 
national Journal of Agricultural  Resources,  Governance  and Ecology 2, 201–219.  
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJARGE.2003.002087  . 
Chalofsky,  N., Krishna, V., 2009. Meaningfulness,  Commitment,  and Engagement:  The 
Intersection  of a Deeper Level of Intrinsic Motivation.  Advances  in Developing  Human 
Resources  11, 189–203.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1523422309333147  . 
Chan, K.M.A., Balvanera,  P., Benessaiah,  K., Chapman,  M., Díaz, S., Gómez-Baggethun,  E., 
Gould, R., Hannahs,  N., Jax, K., Klain, S., Luck, G.W., Martín-López,  B., Muraca, B., 
Norton, B., Ott, K., Pascual, U., Satterﬁeld,  T., Tadaki, M., Taggart, J., Turner, N., 
2016. Opinion: Why protect nature? Rethinking  values and the environment.  PNAS 
113, 1462–1465.  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1525002113  . 
Charmaz,  K. , 2014. Constructing  Grounded  Theory, 2nd Ed. SAGE, Los Angeles . 
Daniel, T.C., Muhar, A., Aznar, O., Boyd, J.W., Chan, K.M.A., Costanza,  R., Flint, C.G., 
Gobster, P.H., Grêt-Regamey,  A., Penker, M., Ribe, R.G., Spierenburg,  M., 2012. Con- 
tributions  of cultural services to the ecosystem  services agenda. PNAS 109. E3147- 
E3147. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1213520109  . 
Deci, E.L., Ryan, R.M., 2008. Self-determination  theory: A macrotheory  of human moti- 
vation, development,  and health. Canadian  Psychology/Psychologie  canadienne  49, 
182–185.  https://doi.org/10.1037/a0012801  . 
Deci, E.L., Ryan, R.M., 2012. Self-determination  theory. In: Handbook  of Theories of 
Social Psychology,  1. Sage Publications  Ltd, Thousand  Oaks, CA, pp. 416–436 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446249215.n21  . 
Díaz, S., Pascual, U., Stenseke,  M., Martín-López,  B., Watson, R.T., Molnár, Z., Hill, R., 
Chan, K.M.A., Baste, I.A., Brauman,  K.A., Polasky, S., Church, A., Lonsdale,  M., Lar- 
igauderie,  A., Leadley, P.W., Oudenhovenvan,  A.P.E., Plaatvan der, F., Schröter,  M., 
Lavorel, S., Aumeeruddy-Thomas,  Y., Bukvareva,  E., Davies, K., Demissew,  S., 
Erpul, G., Failler, P., Guerra, C.A., Hewitt, C.L., Keune, H., Lindley, S., Shi- 
rayama, Y., 2018. Assessing  nature’s contributions  to people. Science 359, 270–272.  
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap8826  . 
El Bilali, H., Callenius,  C., Strassner,  C., Probst, L., 2019. Food and nutrition security 
and sustainability  transitions  in food systems. Food and Energy Security 8, e00154. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/fes3.154  . 
Ellis, E.C., Pascual, U., Mertz, O., 2019. Ecosystem  services and nature’s contribution  to 
people: negotiating  diverse values and trade-oﬀs  in land systems. Current Opinion in 
Environmental  Sustainability,  Sustainability  governance  and transformation  38, 86–
94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2019.05.001  . 
Friedrichsen,  C.N., Daroub, S.H., Monroe, M.C., Stepp, J.R., Wani, S.P., 2018. Mental mod- 
els of soil management  for food security in peri-urban  India. Urban Agricult. Regional 
Food Syst. 3. doi: 10.2134/urbanag2017.08.0002  . 
Gould, R.K., Pai, M., Muraca, B., Chan, K.M.A., 2019. He ʻike ʻana ia i ka 
pono (it is a recognizing  of the right thing): how one indigenous  world- 
view informs relational  values and social values. Sustain Sci 14, 1213–1232.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-019-00721-9  . 
Helming,  K., Daedlow,  K., Paul, C., Techen, A.-K., Bartke, S., Bartkowski,  B., Kaiser, D., 
Wollschläger,  U., Vogel, H.-J., 2018. Managing  soil functions  for a sustainable  bioe- conomy —assessment  framework  and state of the art. Land Degradat.  Devel. 29, 3112–
3126. doi: 10.1002/ldr.3066  . 
Himanen,  S.J., Mäkinen,  H., Rimhanen,  K., Savikko, R., 2016. Engaging  farmers in cli- 
mate change adaptation  planning:  assessing  intercropping  as a means to support farm 
adaptive capacity.  Agriculture  6, 34. doi: 10.3390/agriculture6030034  . 
Himes, A., Muraca, B., 2018. Relational  values: the key to pluralistic  valuation  of ecosys- 
tem services. Current Opinion in Environmental  Sustainability,  Sustainability  Chal- 
lenges: Relational  Values 35, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2018.09.005  . 
Howard, T.M., Lawson, A., 2015. Soil governance:  accessing  cross-disciplinary  perspec- 
tives. Int. J. Rural Law Policy 1–8. doi: 10.5130/ijrlp.i1.2015.3776  . 
Jarosz, L., 2011. Nourishing  women: toward a feminist political ecology of community  
supported  agriculture  in the United States. Gender, Place & Culture 18, 307–326.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369X.2011.565871  . 
Jónsson, J.Ö.G., Davíðsdóttir,  B., Nikolaidis,  N.P., 2017. Chapter twelve - valuation  of 
soil ecosystem  services. In: Banwart,  S.A., Sparks, D.L. (Eds.), Advances  in Agronomy,  
Quantifying  and Managing  Soil Functions  in Earth’s Critical Zone. Academic  Press, 
pp. 353–384.  doi: 10.1016/bs.agron.2016.10.011  . 
Juerges, N., Hansjürgens,  B., 2018. Soil governance  in the transition  towards 
a sustainable  bioeconomy  –a review. J. Cleaner Prod. 170, 1628–1639.  
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.143  . 
Karlen, D.L., Goeser, N.J., Veum, K.S., Yost, M.A., 2017. On-farm soil health evaluations:  
Challenges  and opportunities.  Journal of Soil and Water Conservation  72, 26A–31A.  
https://doi.org/10.2489/jswc.72.2.26A  . 
Karlen, D.L., Veum, K.S., Sudduth,  K.A., Obrycki, J.F., Nunes, M.R., 2019. Soil health 
assessment:  Past accomplishments,  current activities,  and future opportunities.  Soil 
and Tillage Research  195, 104365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2019.104365  . 
Keith, A.M., Schmidt, O., McMahon,  B.J., 2016. Soil stewardship  as a nexus 
between ecosystem  services and one health. Ecosyst. Serv. 17, 40–42. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ecoser.2015.11.008  . 
Kenter, J.O., Raymond,  C.M., van Riper, C.J., Azzopardi,  E., Brear, M.R., Calcagni,  F., 
Christie, I., Christie, M., Fordham,  A., Gould, R.K., Ives, C.D., Hejnow- 
icz, A.P., Gunton, R., Horcea-Milcu,  A.-I., Kendal, D., Kronenberg,  J., Massen- 
berg, J.R., O’Connor,  S., Ravenscroft,  N., Rawluk, A., Raymond,  I.J., Rodríguez-  
Morales, J., Thankappan,  S., 2019. Loving the mess: navigating  diversity 
and conﬂict in social values for sustainability.  Sustain Sci 14, 1439–1461.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-019-00726-4  . 
Kibblewhiteg,  M., Ritz, K., Swiftj, M., 2008. Soil health in agricultural  systems. Philo- 
sophical Transactions  of the Royal Society B: Biological  Sciences 363, 685–701.  
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2178  . 
Lobry de Bruyn, L. , 1999. Farmers’ perspectives  on soil health: Capturing  and adapting 
intuitive understanding  of soil health to monitor land condition.  Presented  at the. 
Proceedings  of the “Country  Matters ”Social Sciences …. 
Lobry de Bruyn, L. , Abbey, J. , 2003. Characterisation  of farmers’ soil sense and the im- 
plications  for on-farm monitoring  of soil health.. Australian  Journal of Experimental  
Agriculture  43, 285–305 . 
Maslow, A.H. , 1954. Motivation  and Personality.  Harper and Row, New York . 
Maharjan,  B., Das, S., Acharya, B.S., 2020. Soil Health Gap: A concept to establish a 
benchmark  for soil health management.  Global Ecology and Conservation  23, e01116. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2020.e01116  . 
Maslow, A.H. , 1943. A theory of human motivation.  Psychol. Rev. 50, 370–396 . 
Maslow, A.H. , Frager, R. , 1987. Motivation  and personality.  Harper and Row, New York . 
McClelland,  D. , 2005. Achievement  motivation  theory. In: Organizational  Behavior:  Es- 
sential Theories of Motivation  and Leadership.  M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, pp. 46–60 . 
McCubbin,  L.D., McCubbin,  H.I., Zhang, W., Kehl, L., Strom, I., 2013. Relational  Well- 
being: An Indigenous  Perspective  and Measure.  Family Relations  62, 354–365.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/fare.12007  . 
Minkoﬀ-Zern,  L.-A. , 2019. The new American  farmer: immigration,  race, and the strug- 
gle for sustainability,  Food, health, and the environment.  The MIT Press, Cambridge,  
Massachusetts  . 
Napier, T.L. , 2010. Conclusion.  In: Human Dimensions  of Soil and Water Conservation.  
Nova Science Publishers,  pp. 373–379 . 
National Research  Council , 2003. Frontiers  in Agricultural  Research:  Food, Health, En- 
vironment,  and Communities,  Committee  on Opportunities  in Agriculture.  National 
Academies  Press, Washington  DC . 
Niles, M.T., Ahuja, R., Barker, T., Esquivel,  J., Gutterman,  S., Heller, M.C., 
Mango, N., Portner, D., Raimond,  R., Tirado, C., Vermeulen,  S., 2018. Cli- 
mate change mitigation  beyond agriculture:  a review of food system opportu- 
nities and implications.  Renewable  Agriculture  and Food Systems 33, 297–308.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1742170518000029  . 
Nunes, M.R., van Es, H.M., Schindelbeck,  R., Ristow, A.J., Ryan, M., 2018. No-till and 
cropping system diversiﬁcation  improve soil health and crop yield. Geoderma  328, 
30–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2018.04.031  . 
Paavola, J., Adger, W.N., 2005. Institutional  ecological  economics.  Ecological  Economics  
53, 353–368.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.09.017  . 
Pascual, U., Balvanera,  P., Díaz, S., Pataki, G., Roth, E., Stenseke,  M., Watson, R.T., 
Ba ş ak Dessane, E., Islar, M., Kelemen,  E., Maris, V., Quaas, M., Subrama-  
nian, S.M., Wittmer, H., Adlan, A., Ahn, S., Al-Hafedh,  Y.S., Amankwah,  E., 
Asah, S.T., Berry, P., Bilgin, A., Breslow, S.J., Bullock, C., Cáceres, D., Daly- 
Hassen, H., Figueroa,  E., Golden, C.D., Gómez-Baggethun,  E., González-Jiménez,  D., 
Houdet, J., Keune, H., Kumar, R., Ma, K., May, P.H., Mead, A., O’Farrell,  P., Pan- 
dit, R., Pengue, W., Pichis-Madruga,  R., Popa, F., Preston, S., Pacheco-Balanza,  D., 
Saarikoski,  H., Strassburg,  B.B., van den Belt, M., Verma, M., Wickson,  F., 
Yagi, N., 2017. Valuing nature’s contributions  to people: the IPBES approach.  Cur- 
rent Opinion in Environmental  Sustainability,  Open issue, part II 26–27, 7–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2016.12.006  . 
9 
C.N. Friedrichsen,  S. Hagen-Zakarison,  M.L. Friesen et al. Soil Security 2 (2021) 100004 
Patton, M. , 1999. Enhancing  the quality and credibility  of qualitative  analysis. Health 
Services Research  34, 1189–1208  . 
Peña, D.G. , 2017. Sodbusters  and the “Native Gaze ”: Soil governance  and indigenous  
knowledge.  In: Peña, D.G., Calvo, L., McFarland,  P., Valle, G.R. (Eds.), Mexican-Ori-  
gin Foods, Foodways,  and Social Movements.  The University  of Arkansas,  Fayetteville,  
pp. 343–364 . 
Prokopy,  L.S., 2011. Agricultural  human dimensions  research:  The role of qualitative  re- 
search methods.  J. Soil Water Conserv. 66, 9A–12A. doi: 10.2489/jswc.66.1.9A  . 
Puig de la Bellacasa,  M., 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientiﬁc  futurity and the pace 
of care. Soc Stud Sci 45, 691–716.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851  . 
Reed, M.S., 2008. Stakeholder  participation  for environmental  management:  a literature  
review. Biol. Conserv. 141, 2417–2431.  doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2008.07.014  . 
Robinson,  D.A., Hockley, N., Dominati,  E., Lebron, I., Scow, K.M., Reynolds,  B., 
Emmett, B.A., Keith, A.M., Jonge, L.W., de, Schjønning,  P., Moldrup,  P., 
Jones, S.B., Tuller, M., 2012. Natural capital, ecosystem  services, and soil change: 
why soil science must embrace an ecosystems  approach.  Vadose Zone J. 11. 
doi: 10.2136/vzj2011.0051  . 
Rogers, E.M. , 2010. Diﬀusion  of Innovations,  4th Ed. Simon and Schuster . 
Rosenfeld,  R.A. , 2017. Farm Women: Work, Farm, and Family in the United States. UNC 
Press Books . 
Schillinger,  W.F., Young, D.L., 2004. Cropping  Systems Research  in the 
World’s Driest Rainfed Wheat Region. Agronomy  Journal 96, 1182–1187.  
https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2004.1182  . 
Schulz, C., Martin-Ortega,  J., Glenk, K., 2018. Value landscapes  and their impact 
on public water policy preferences.  Global Environmental  Change 53, 209–224.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.09.015  . 
Schulz, C., Martin-Ortega,  J., Glenk, K., 2019. Understanding  Public Views on a Dam 
Construction  Boom: the Role of Values. Water Resour Manage 33, 4687–4700.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11269-019-02383-9  . 
Stefanovic,  L., Freytag-Leyer,  B., Kahl, J., 2020. Food System Outcomes:  An Overview  
and the Contribution  to Food Systems Transformation.  Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 4. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2020.546167  . 
Stern, P. , Dietz, T. , Abel, T. , Guagnano,  G. , Kalof, L. , 1999. A Value-Belief-Norm  Theory 
of Support for Social Movements:  The Case of Environmentalism.  Human Ecology 
Review 81–97 . Stewart, R.D., Jian, J., Gyawali, A.J., Thomason,  W.E., Badgley, B.D., Reiter, M.S., Strick- 
land, M.S., 2018. What We Talk about When We Talk about Soil Health. Agricultural  
& Environmental  Letters 3, 180033. https://doi.org/10.2134/ael2018.06.0033  . 
Tay, L., Diener, E., 2011. Needs and subjective  well-being  around the 
world. Journal of Personality  and Social Psychology  101, 354–365.  
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023779  . 
Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., Befort, B.L., 2011. Global food demand and the sustainable  
intensiﬁcation  of agriculture.  PROC. NAT. ACAD. OF SCI. (U.S.A.) 108, 20260–20264.  
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1116437108  . 
Tironi, M. , Kearnes, M. , Krzywoszynska,  A. , Granjou, C. , Salazar, J.F. , 2020. Soil Theories:  
Relationa,  Decolonial,  Inhuman.  In: Thinking  with Soils: Material Politics and Social 
Theory. Bloomsbury  Publishing,  pp. 15–38 . 
Tov, W., Diener, E., 2009. Culture and Subjective  Well-Being,  in: Diener, E. 
(Ed.), Culture and Well-Being:  The Collected  Works of Ed Diener, So- 
cial Indicators  Research  Series. Springer Netherlands,  Dordrecht,  pp. 9–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2352-0_2  
USDA, NASS , 2017. 2017 Census of Agriculture.  United States Department  of Agriculture  
Agricultural  Statistics Service . 
Vanloqueren,  G., Baret, P.V., 2009. How agricultural  research systems shape a technologi-  
cal regime that develops genetic engineering  but locks out agroecological  innovations.  
Res. Policy 38, 971–983.  doi: 10.1016/j.respol.2009.02.008  . 
Vignola, R., Koellner,  T., Scholz, R.W., McDaniels,  T.L., 2010. Decision-making  by farmers 
regarding  ecosystem  services: factors aﬀecting soil conservation  eﬀorts in Costa Rica. 
Land Use Policy 27, 1132–1142.  doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2010.03.003  . 
Ward, S.J., King, L.A., 2017. Work and the good life: how work contributes  to meaning in 
life. Res. Org. Behav. 37, 59–82. doi: 10.1016/j.riob.2017.10.001  . 
Wegner, G., Pascual, U., 2011. Cost-beneﬁt  analysis in the context of ecosystem  services 
for human well-being:  A multidisciplinary  critique. Global Environmental  Change, 
Special Issue on The Politics and Policy of Carbon Capture and Storage 21, 492–504.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.12.008  . 
Wells, B.L., Gradwell,  S., 2001. Gender and resource management:  Community  sup- 
ported agriculture  as caring-practice.  Agriculture  and Human Values 18, 107–119.  
doi: 10.1023/A:1007686617087  . 
Wuepper,  D., 2020. Does culture aﬀect soil erosion? Empirical  evidence from Europe. Eur. 
Rev. Agric. Econ. 47, 619–653.  doi: 10.1093/erae/jbz029  . 
10 
