Landscape Research
ISSN: 0142-6397 (Print) 1469-9710 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/clar20
Soils in motion: the metabolism of New York City’s
urban grounds
Luke Harris
To cite this article: Luke Harris (15 Jul 2025): Soils in motion: the metabolism of New York City’s
urban grounds, Landscape Research, DOI: 10.1080/01426397.2025.2526498
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2025.2526498
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 15 Jul 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 307
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=clar20
Landscape ReseaRch
Soils in motion: the metabolism of New York City’s urban 
grounds
Luke Harris
Institute for Landscape and Urban s tudies, d epartment of a rchitecture, e Th Zurich, Zurich, s witzerland
ABSTRACT
This article examines the socioecological metabolism of soils in New 
York City, tracing their production, circulation, and transformation within 
the dynamics of extended urbanisation. It explores how soil, as both a 
biophysical and socio-political entity, alternates between being treated 
as lively or inert in response to the demands of capital. The study 
explores three cases: a soil mixing facility in New Jersey, the regional 
extraction of sand, and the municipal Clean Soil Bank program. By inte -
grating scholarship on urban metabolism and the metabolic rift, the 
article challenges reductionist and technocratic perspectives framing soil 
as a passive substrate, emphasising instead its dynamic role in urban 
life and agrarian urbanism. The findings reveal how soils, shaped by 
socioecological histories, resist simplistic binaries of life and nonlife, 
offering new possibilities for understanding the interplay between urban -
isation, ecological relations, and political economy.
Introduction
Urbanisation profoundly alters agrarian landscapes and their soils through two interrelated 
processes: the in-situ transformation of the ground as urban areas expand and the mobilisation 
of soils and sediments during development. Germain Meulemans ( 2020a ) illustrates the former 
by describing the emergence of the ‘hard-surfaced city’ in 19th-century Paris, where agrarian 
soils—once enriched through continuous additions of organic matter and nutrients—were 
regularised and sanitised to support urban growth. The introduction of new paving technologies 
enabled draining, compacting, and sealing; creating a predominantly abiotic environment that 
disrupted traditional soil-forming processes. Yet, novel dynamics emerged, transforming these 
soils into essential components of urban space. The second process involves the large-scale 
mobilisation of soil and sediment (Kourmouli & Lesniewska, 2024 ). Soil is excavated for foun -
dations, dumped as fill, shipped as ballast, and eroded through runoff, meaning that the urban 
ground is composed of a mosaic of soils sourced from surrounding territories and shaped by 
histories of circulation and transformation (Kourmouli & Lesniewska, 2024 ; Leguédois et al., 2016 ).
Although these urban soils differ significantly from their agrarian predecessors, they retain 
vital connections to the environments that shaped them. Agrarian practices and the 
more-than-human communities they supported persist in these soils as sources of ongoing, 
lively potential (Barua, 2023 ), forming a constitutive part of urban life (Gururani, 2023 ). In the 
© 2025 The a uthor(s). p ublished by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.CONTACT Luke harris  lharris@ethz.ch
This is an Open a ccess article distributed under the terms of the c reative c ommons a ttribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/ ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms 
on which this article has been published allow the posting of the a ccepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 3 January 2025
Accepted 28 May 2025
KEYWORDS
Landscape architecture; 
metabolism; soil; 
planetary urbanisation; 
circular economy; urban 
soilhttps://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2025.2526498
2 L. HARRIS
context of planetary urbanisation (Brenner & Schmid, 2015 ), agrarian landscapes are increasingly 
shaped by urban dynamics (Katsikis, 2023 ), blurring the boundary between rural and urban. 
One manifestation of this is the displacement of unwanted urban soils to peripheral areas for 
recycling and disposal (Hale et  al., 2021 ).
Tracing how soil formation continues through urbanisation (Vialle & Giampieri, 2020 ), this article 
contributes to an agrarian urbanism that resists grounding itself in the perceived naturalness of 
certain soils and associated conservative narratives of belonging and loss. It is necessary to carefully 
articulate the relationship between soil and urbanisation in order to avoid inadvertently reproducing 
these conservative framings. For example, efforts to protect certain fertile soils from the harms of 
urbanisation—typically understood in an ahistorical and undifferentiated manner—intersect with 
a strain of agrarian conservatism animated by concerns for traditional values, private property, and 
anti-urban sentiment (e.g., Berry, 1977 ; Hanson, 1996 ; see also Conford, 2001 , on links between 
soil conservation, organic agriculture, and far-right politics). Soil functions as a persistent metaphor 
for rootedness and belonging—one that has been mobilised by conservative and fascist movements 
to naturalise racialised relationships between people and place, from the Nazi slogan Blut und 
Boden  (Blood and Soil) to what Andreas Malm and the Zetkin Collective (2021) describe as ‘green 
nationalism’ , a conservative fusion of environmentalism and anti-migrant politics.
In response, as part of the special issue ‘Agrarian Urbanism: Beyond the Urban Rural Divide’ , 
this article develops a metabolic analysis (Bathla & Lazzarini, 2025 ) of soil production and cir -
culation in New York City (NYC) to offer more precise understandings of how urbanisation 
transforms soil. It brings together scholarship on soil as a component of urban metabolism 
(Hale et  al., 2021 ; Magnusson et  al., 2015 ) with recent debates on the metabolic rift (Moore, 
2017 ; Saitō, 2022 ) to trace how soil shifts from environment to commodity to waste. This framing 
allows for a broader engagement with overlooked urban soils and the roles they play in con -
temporary urban life.
The article begins by highlighting the unique potential of soil as an analytic, focusing on the 
regulation of the boundary between life and nonlife as a critical issue in contemporary urbani -
sation. It then reviews recent literature on the relationship between urbanisation and soil move -
ment, which reveals a paradox: while the liveliness of soil is often acknowledged, the conceptual 
framework of urban metabolism tends to reduce it to an inert and apolitical material. Re-engaging 
with Karl Marx’s analysis of the metabolic rift in light of recent scholarship provides a way to 
trace how the socioecological formation of urban soils becomes entangled with capitalist urban -
isation. To this end, the article explores three stages of soil making and movement in and around 
NYC. First, visits to a soil mixing facility in New Jersey illustrate how surplus soil is transformed 
into a valuable commodity. Second, the text examines how sand—essential for the predictable 
performance of designed soils and substrates—is embedded within regional geographies of 
extraction. Lastly, it presents the Clean Soil Bank, a municipal initiative designed to promote the 
reuse of excavated sediment. The conclusion reflects on how understanding soil as a dynamic 
entity shaped by socioecological histories and relations opens new possibilities for agrarian urban -
ism. As development continues apace, this perspective—grounded in agrarian urbanism—can 
reveal richer forms of soil-making that move beyond narrowly technical perspectives.
This article draws on two periods of fieldwork conducted in January and June 2024. The 
methodologies employed included participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and 
walking interviews. The author engaged with a diverse group of stakeholders—including soil 
scientists, contractors, designers, activists, and soil manufacturers—to capture a range of per -
spectives on soil circulation. This approach complements existing literature, which has predom -
inantly relied on quantitative methods (Hale et  al., 2021 ; Walsh et  al., 2018 ). While it provides 
situated insights, this methodology comes with limitations related to access and time constraints. 
Additional interviews and extended fieldwork would undoubtedly yield further insights and a 
more nuanced understanding. These qualitative methods were further supported by an analysis 
of municipal reports, technical specifications, geospatial data, and other relevant documents.
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 3
Engineering a lively ground
In recent years, soil has garnered growing scholarly attention, driven in part by its critical role 
in debates on food production and climate change (Food & Agriculture Organization, 2022 ). 
Beyond these topical concerns, soil also offers a uniquely generative lens for examining the 
intricate entanglements of capital and more-than-human nature that characterise the 
Anthropocene (Salazar et  al., 2020 ). Not only does soil internalise the biotic and abiotic agents 
of an ecological system, but also anthropogenic elements such as debris and contaminants. 
Soil is best understood as a process rather than as an object (Meulemans, 2020a ), requiring 
researchers to dialectically analyse the ‘emergent biophysical agency of soil ecosystems, their 
sociocultural constitution, and the dynamic interactions between those factors’ (Krzywoszynska 
& Marchesi, 2020 , p. 194).
Such an approach is productive for tracking the uneven attribution of soil liveliness in con -
temporary urbanisation. Retrofitting urban areas with tree planting and green infrastructure is 
widely recognised as a crucial strategy for mitigating climate change (United Nations environment 
Programme (UNeP), 2011 ), with soil playing an essential role in this process. The success of 
such initiatives hinges on the survival of ecological agents. For instance, trees that die shortly 
after planting—a frequent occurrence in urban environments (Dümpelmann, 2019 )—fail to 
deliver the ecosystem services and cultural capital they are intended to provide. Consequently, 
green development imposes new demands on the soils that provide the necessary nutrients 
and habitats for the more visible flora and fauna. These soils must perform predictably and 
align with the accelerated timelines of urban development projects. To meet these demands, 
engineered soils are carefully designed to meet established standards for fertility, texture, and 
nutrient content (Craul & Craul, 2006 ).
These constraints foster a perception of soil as a malleable entity, assembled from disparate 
components that can be independently sourced and combined. In this process of production, soil 
is alternately treated as lively or inert. e va-Maria Swidler ( 2009 , p. 6) argues that ‘it matters where 
on the gradient between living thing and mineral that soil is located, whether we see, “soil as a 
substrate acted upon, rather than soil as alive’ . ’ At times, soil is understood as a living entity, with 
care taken to limit compaction and desiccation. At other moments, it is treated like dirt—that is, 
as an inert, abiotic substance. And yet, emphasising the liveliness of soil in order to resist its 
exploitation reflects the persistent belief that life has greater value than nonlife (Tironi, 2020 ). 
Kathryn Yusoff ( 2018 ) has drawn attention to how the shifting attribution of qualities associated 
with life, such as sentience and agency, serve as both the precursor and legitimation of exploita -
tion. For elizabeth Povinelli ( 2016 ), attending to the distinction between the living (bios) and its 
constitutive outside, the inert (geos), opens analytical possibilities that a focus on biopower 
forecloses. Both perspectives can be enlisted into the service of capital. On the one hand, as we 
will see below, the understanding of soil as passive and abiotic underpinned the development 
of chemical fertilisers (Marchesi, 2020 ). On the other hand, advances in soil genomics cast soil 
life as a form of biocapital, making living soils the new frontier of agricultural research (Granjou 
& Phillips, 2019 ). Thus, rather than investing the soil’s liveliness with redemptive potential, this 
article identifies the shifting boundary between the mineral and the biotic as soil circulates as a 
site of investigation. Attending to the differential application of liveliness and its resulting political 
economic effects offers valuable insights into urban dynamics (Barua, 2023 ).
Metabolism of soils in motion
Greenfield urbanisation and its critiques
Greenfield development—the transformation of relatively undisturbed sites, such as agricultural 
land or forests—sets in motion a steady supply of fertile soils. Depending on the depth of 
4 L. HARRIS
excavation and local conditions, various layers of the soil profile are unearthed, ranging from 
the biologically active, organic-rich A-horizon near the surface to increasingly abiotic sediments 
closer to the bedrock. If sufficient nearby construction projects require such material, it can be 
traded as a commodity for use in earthworks or as horticultural soil (Magnusson et  al., 2015 ). 
If the market shifts and development stalls, then the soil that could otherwise be reused becomes 
a solid waste material that must be disposed of in a landfill or used as fill in a context with 
more permissive regulatory thresholds (Hale et  al., 2021 ). Such market shifts affect whether the 
donor or receiver of the soil pays, and the price of the material.
This form of urbanisation has come under increasing scrutiny due to its unsustainability 
(United Nations environment Programme (UNeP), 2011 ). Soil plays a central role in these cri -
tiques. Recent policies restricting land take—which is defined by the e uropean environmental 
Agency as ‘the conversion of land to artificial surfaces’—are justified by emphasising the cultural 
and ecological importance of healthy soils (e uropean Commission, 2011 ). This is typically sub -
stantiated by enumerating the ecosystem services such soils provide, such as carbon seques -
tration, flood mitigation, and the filtration of toxins (e uropean Commission, 2021 , Meulemans, 
2023 ). These policies frame certain forms of soil, typically marked by their fertility or ‘naturalness’ , 
as valuable resources in need of protection.
These critiques of greenfield development often draw on the framework of urban metabolism 
(UM) to reveal the inefficiency of status-quo soil management. As developed by Abel Wolman 
(1965 ), UM quantifies the streams of matter and energy flowing into and out of the city, influ -
encing Material Flow Analysis (Decker et  al., 2000 ) and contemporary concepts like the circular 
economy. For example, several studies identify the problem of ‘surplus soil’ , that is, excavated 
material not reused onsite (Cavanagh et  al., 2023 ; Walsh et  al., 2019 ). As agricultural land take 
is restricted, new construction increasingly occurs in already urbanised areas where the soil is 
typically heterogenous and potentially contaminated. The fate of these surplus soils depends 
on the construction market and regulatory environment. In many contexts, removing soil from 
a site without an immediate use classifies it as waste material (Hale et  al., 2021 ; Kourmouli & 
Lesniewska, 2024 ). But even if regulations permit reuse, the variability and uncertainty that 
characterise urban soils often cause landowners and developers to dispose of the surplus soils 
that cannot be reused onsite to be freed of future liability (Hale et  al., 2021 ).
These issues lead many authors to call for the increased reuse of the excavated material, 
but such reforms face challenges. For instance, the stockpiling and sorting of surplus soil requires 
space, which is typically limited in urban construction projects (Magnusson et  al., 2015 ). Likewise, 
reuse requires that the temporality of donor and recipients align, which is difficult to synchronise 
given the complexities of shifting project timelines (Hale et  al., 2021 ). Lastly, if both the cost 
of newly extracted material and landfilling is low, there is limited incentive for reuse (ibid.). 
Nevertheless, policy reforms and pilot programs provide indications of alternatives. Direct 
exchange programs on a national or regional scale match donor and recipient sites (Blanc et  al., 
2012 ); so-called soil hubs or earthbanks enable the temporary staging and sorting of material 
that would otherwise be wasted (CL:AIRe , 2024 , Walsh et  al., 2018 ); and soil hospitals remediate 
lightly contaminated material (Guibert & Tostevin, 2022 ). Not only would reusing surplus soils 
lead to less material in landfills, but it also reduces emissions associated with transportation 
and lowers the demand for freshly extracted material (Walsh et  al., 2019 ). Despite these suc -
cessful interventions, much further innovation is needed.
Towards a broader metabolism
Although these reforms are commendable, their scope and focus can be constrained by the UM 
framework. Two key limitations stand out. First, the emphasis on quantifying material flows creates 
a ‘conception of the city as a metabolic system which can be examined in isolation from wider 
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 5
processes of historical change’ (Gandy, 2004 , p. 374). This reductive view often leads to technocratic 
solutions (Swyngedouw, 2015 ). For instance, Johansson et  al. ( 2013 ) advocate for ‘mining the 
technosphere’ by exploiting previously extracted materials, as traditional forms of extraction, such 
as quarrying, become environmentally untenable. This reveals how, by not engaging with the 
underlying drivers of soil mobilisation, a perspective grounded in UM can reproduce extractive 
dynamics in new contexts. The second limitation lies in the reduction of soil to a ‘stock’ akin to 
abiotic materials like gravel, sand, and construction debris (Magnusson et  al., 2015 ). This framing 
obscures the dynamic alternation between liveliness and inertness that characterises soil circulation. 
Reflecting this view, many proposed applications for surplus soil treat it as a purely geotechnical 
material, requiring the exclusion of components conducive to soil’s biological activity, such as clay 
particles and organic matter (Hale et  al., 2021 ; Magnusson et  al., 2015 ; Walsh et  al., 2019 ).
These limitations underscore the need for a broader conception of metabolism—one that 
situates material flows within their socio-political milieu while attending to soil’s ecological 
specificity. Considering his direct engagement with soil dynamics, revisiting Marx’s concept of 
the metabolic rift can provide a foundation for this more nuanced approach. Marx argued that 
capitalist production transformed British 19th-century agriculture and concentrated the popu -
lation in urban areas, preventing ‘the return to the soil of the constituent elements’ , which 
disrupted the nutrient cycle and led to a decline in soil fertility (Marx, 1993  [1867], p. 637).
Drawing on the available science of his time, Marx developed a model for analysing the 
interplay of social and ecological processes. He was particularly influenced by chemist Justus 
von Liebig’s theories of soil fertility and robbery agriculture (Saito, 2022 ). Greta Marchesi ( 2020 , 
p. 213) has shown that Liebig’s explicitly formulated his ‘mineralist’ understanding of soil fertility 
in opposition to the then-widespread humus theory, which argued that ‘it was the presence of 
humus and its ‘nutritive juices’ that was the limiting factor in plant growth’ . In contrast to this 
position, Liebig started from ‘the assumption that there was no meaningful difference between 
the constitutions of living and nonliving matter’ allowing for him to develop a theory of inter -
changeable chemical ‘building blocks’ that formed the basis of soil fertility (ibid., p. 212). His 
theory simplified soil dynamics to chemical processes, influencing the development of chemical 
fertilisers as well as Marx’s understanding of the metabolic rift.
The subsequent development of soil science—particularly the growing recognition of the 
importance of biological activity (Gobat et  al., 2004 )—along with recent historical studies of 
concrete labour processes in 19th-century e ngland (Schneider & McMichael, 2010 ), raises ques -
tions about the empirical basis of the original metabolic rift analysis (engel-Di Mauro, 2016 ; 
Moore, 2017 ). Thus, rather than generalising Marx’s historically specific analysis into a theory 
of capitalism’s environmental harms (Foster, 1999 ; Saito, 2022), it is more productive to build 
on his nuanced socio-ecological approach. Here Jason W. Moore’s contribution is generative. 
Moore ( 2017 , p. 29) argues that ‘capitalist relations move through, not upon, space, which is to 
say through, and not upon, nature as a whole’ , retaining Marx’s relational understanding of 
metabolism without reproducing a priori divisions of Nature and Society.
Moore’s non-dualistic conception of metabolism is valuable for examining urbanised soils, 
where the metabolic rift’s focus on soil fertility risks obscuring more than it illuminates. In fact, 
fertile soils are often considered undesirable in urban contexts, highlighting the need for more 
precise tools to trace how nonhumans are enrolled into capitalist dynamics (Barua, 2021 ). For 
example, Guibert and Tostevin ( 2022 ) analyse the Queen elizabeth Park soil strategy in the UK, 
which reused waste materials from sugar beet harvesting and lightly contaminated site soils. 
Despite its innovative approach, the project adhered to a narrowly technical understanding of 
soil, erasing the site’s socio-ecological history. The authors document how different understand -
ings of metabolism and sustainability could have led to other soil strategies, which would have 
required longer time scales and produced less marketable outcomes.
To trace the circulation of soil, the following section develops a partial and situated analysis 
of soil circulation in NYC. This attention to soil’s metabolic relations complements the existing 
6 L. HARRIS
literature by linking soil’s site-specific ecological dynamics to larger urbanisation processes. This 
section can be read alongside the map of NYC’s regional soil geography ( Figure 1 ), which rep -
resents the distribution of soil mixing facilities and sand mines in relation to desirable loam 
soils—shown in blue and corresponding to the texture classes represented in Figure 2 —and 
recent patterns of urbanisation—specifically, agricultural and forest lands developed between 
2003 and 2023 (shown in red). These soil movements are part of a long history of circulating 
soils and sediments in the region. This includes the widespread use of fill to create developable 
land (Walsh, 1991 ), the importation of fertile soils and nutrients for the city’s parks (e.g. Hutton, 
2019 ), the export of contaminated material to the region’s landfills, as well as the use of dredged 
sediments to replenish wetlands in Jamaica Bay and elsewhere in the region (Holmes et  al., 
2024 ; Sanderson et  al., 2016 ).
New Y ork City’s circulating soils
Mixing loam
South-central New Jersey (NJ) hosts numerous soil supply facilities. These operations blend soil, 
sediments, and materials to meet various site specifications, from baseball infields requiring 
Figure 1.  Map of regional soil geography. compiled by the author in QGIs using data from the Web soil survey (s oil 
survey s taff et  al., 2025 ), the national Land c over database (U.s. Geological survey (UsGs), 2024 ), sand and gravel mining 
datasets (nJdep , U.s. Geological survey (UsGs), 2001 ), and Opens treetMap c ontributors ( 2025 ). note: While this map was 
developed using the above data sources, this secondary product has not been verified and is not state-authorized.
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 7
limestone-derived clay soils to horticultural soil for planting beds. A walk through the mixing 
yard of a soil supplier in June 2024 revealed soil in various states of assembly (see Figure 3 ). 
Near the entrance were recently delivered raw materials, while further back were smooth and 
homogenous piles of different colours, mixed and ready to leave the yard. Some of these piles 
have little in common with what scientists would understand as soil. For example, one is an 
extra-light substrate for green roofs. It is composed of sand and compost mixed with expanded 
clay; a light, porous material formed by heating clay particles at high temperatures in rotary 
kilns, so they increase five times in volume. Mixtures such as these imply that soil can be 
completely controlled, a known and quantifiable entity that can be engineered with precision.
Other piles tell a different story. Unlike the smooth, homogeneous surfaces of engineered 
mixtures (such as those shown in Figure 4 ), one is rough, containing lumps, sticks, and anthro -
pogenic debris. Recently delivered from a nearby warehouse construction site, this material 
formed in situ as part of an unbroken soil profile, entangled with roots and home to diverse 
soil organisms (Gobat et  al., 2004 ). To arrive at the mixing facility, the top 20 to 50 cm of agri -
cultural soil was stripped and separated from deeper, less fertile layers. The division into separate 
layers merely reflects the greater value of the uppermost portion, or topsoil, due to the accu -
mulated organic matter and nutrients such as Nitrogen and Phosphorus, critical for supporting 
plant growth. The upper material, in this case characterised by a loamy texture (see Figure 4 ), 
provides a balance of drainage and water retention due to its mix of particle sizes, which include 
sufficient clay to retain nutrients (Craul, 1992 ). Its structure—made up of aggregates combining 
minerals and organic matter—creates microhabitats for soil fauna (Orgiazzi, 2016 ). Despite efforts 
Figure 2.  Usda soil texture triangle showing loam soils mapped in Figure 1  alongside representation of soil particle sizes.
8 L. HARRIS
Figure 3.  piles of mixed soils at the new Jersey facility. p hoto by author.
Figure 4.  detail of a mixed soil specified for planting showing the texture. p hoto by author.
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 9
to engineer soils for specific uses, the most vital component of these designed substrates 
remains soil formed over centuries through complex environmental interactions, escaping full 
human control.
After testing and research into the construction site’s history, the soil mixing facility approved 
the delivery of this particular soil. The contractor brought it free of charge because otherwise 
they would have had to pay for disposal. After arrival, workers removed large rocks, roots, and 
debris before processing it through a trommel screener, which filters the soil to create a uniform 
texture. This consistency allows the soil to be easily mixed with other components, such as 
sand and compost, to meet the desired specifications. However, the homogenisation of the 
material comes at a cost. The screener breaks up the larger soil aggregates that are hotbeds 
of biological activity, exposing their interiors to oxygen and reducing the soil biodiversity (Gobat 
et  al., 2004 ). This process also reflects a crucial paradox: on the one hand, living soil is seen as 
an essential component of successfully designed landscapes, but on the other hand, soil life 
must be regularised and regulated to create a consistent material that behaves predictably 
(Keefer, 2000 ). Such predictability is critical for development projects, which operate on tight 
timelines and depend on ready-made soil ecologies to support the designed vegetation.
The facility is strategically located in south-central NJ for two key reasons. First, much of the 
region around NYC is dominated by sandy soils, remnants of glacial till from the Wisconsin 
Glacier, which are unsuitable for loam-based mixtures (U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), n.d.). 
However, central NJ’s Piedmont and Inner Coastal Plain regions have the potential to produce 
desirable loam soils. Second, the area’s rapid development—including new housing, warehouses, 
and infrastructure—often occurs on previously undeveloped land (see Figure 1 ). This sets in 
motion a steady supply of soils formed below farmland or forests. According to the World 
Reference Base—the international soil classification system—such soils would be classified as 
Anthrosols, as they have been significantly shaped by agricultural practices like tilling and 
fertilisation (Food & Agriculture Organization, 2022 ). even seemingly natural soils below forests 
and wetlands are increasingly affected by human activity (Certini & Scalenghe, 2011 ). Thus, the 
soils that circulate through the mixing facility bear the marks of previous phases of urbanisation. 
The location of these facilities at the periphery of NYC responds to the region’s geology as well 
as to the geography of contemporary development, transforming what would otherwise become 
surplus soil into a valuable commodity.
Extracting sand
The piles of fine and coarse sand at the soil mixing facility provide a window into an intersecting 
but distinct flow of material circulation. These sands originate from mines located further south 
in NJ’s Outer Coastal Plain. Sand is a major mined resource in NJ. In 2019, the production of 
14,400 metric tons of sand and gravel for construction generated more than 110 million dollars 
in the state (U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2022 ). Depending on its source and quality, the sand 
is used in various industries, such as glass manufacturing, and as an essential component in 
construction for concrete, mortar, and road subbases. The Coastal Plain, shaped by sedimentary 
deposition during the Late Cretaceous to early Caenozoic eras, is rich in high-quality quartz sands. 
Fine sand is widespread, while coarse sand is available locally, depending on geological conditions 
(Bell et  al., 1991 ). Although of a different geologic origin, the sand deposits in Long Island are 
another historically important source of sand for NYC region. The thick sand layers left by retreating 
glaciers yield high-quality, angular sand that is ideal for making concrete. Sand from Long Island 
supported NYC’s 19th-century building boom (Shodell, 1985 ). Increasing development pressure, 
along with zoning regulations and environmental concerns, has gradually pushed Long Island’s 
sand mining eastward, reducing the number of active mines (Howard, 2023 ). In NJ, similar pres -
sures exist but are less intense due to lower population densities. Despite these constraints and 
a growing awareness that sand layers host important groundwater aquifers, local and global 
10 L. HARRIS
demand for sand continues to rise (United Nations environment Programme (UNeP), 2019 ). This 
demand has led to an increase in marine sand dredging, which has its own environmental con -
sequences and supplies lower-quality, rounded sand less suited for construction purposes.
Soil mixing intersects with these extractive flows, responding to material availability and 
demand. Sand is a critical component of many designed soils. For example, the specifications 
for NYC’s Green Infrastructure program dictate that ‘engineered Soil’ should consist of 80-85% 
sand (New York City Department of Design and Construction (NYC DDC), 2021 ). Similarly, com -
mon landscape design specifications often feature similar sand percentages in soil mixtures 
(Craul, 1999 ; Hopper, 2011 ). This is unsurprising, as sand offers many desirable properties. Its 
larger particle size, relative to clay and silt, enhances drainage and resists compaction—two 
common issues in urban environments. Angular sand grains, in particular, lock together to form 
a stable lattice that is resistant to compaction (Sports Turf Research Institute, 2020 ). Additionally, 
sand’s larger size makes it chemically less reactive than clay particles, which bond to nutrients 
and retain water. Sand is inert, which helps soils behave predictably. Soil specifications typically 
call for coarse, angular, or sub-angular particles, aligning with those mined in Long Island or 
locally occurring coarse sands in southern NJ (Urban, 2015 ). Some recent specifications for 
designed soils have become more accepting of rounded sand, which may increase the likelihood 
of compaction but is often cheaper due to the high demand for angular sands in construction 
(New York City Department of Design and Construction (NYC DDC), 2021 ).
Specifications explicitly state that sand is not soil. Acceptable material must consist of ‘clean, 
inert rounded grains of quartz or other durable rock, free of organic material, loam, surface 
coatings, mica, debris, frozen soil, or other deleterious material’ (NYC DDC, 2021 , p. 56). To 
achieve this purity, mined or dredged sand is washed and processed. Such a clear definition 
of sand as a mineral element, unencumbered by links to soil, allows for precise mixtures and 
control over behaviours like drainage. In fact, it has been argued that soil screening, as described 
above, necessitates the addition of sand because screening breaks up the soil structure that 
facilitates drainage, thus requiring sand to compensate for this loss (Urban, 2015 ). However, 
sand poses challenges in the mixed soil. It has limited ability to retain water and bond with 
nutrients essential for plant growth. This reveals the tension between the desire to create pre -
dictable soils, which are inert and geotechnically stable, and the requirements of vegetation 
for a biologically active habitat.
Reusing sediments
The scale and complexity of NYC means that the circulation of construction-related soils spans 
large distances, leading to costly and unsustainable transport. Soils and sediments must be 
transported from peripheral extraction sites to centres of development, and surplus materials 
from construction sites must be moved to distant recycling facilities and landfills. Walsh et  al. 
(2019 ) found that of the sediment excavated from 113 construction projects in NYC between 
January 2014 and June 2016, 95%—or 36,900 truckloads—was transported outside the city, 
primarily to NJ and Pennsylvania. New York State’s strict regulations further limited the reuse 
of this material within the city (Vera, 2018 ). In response to these financial, environmental, and 
regulatory issues, NYC’s Office of environmental Remediation (OeR) developed the Clean Soil 
Bank (CSB) in 2013, a project designed to retain clean, locally excavated material for reuse in 
both municipal and private projects. By 2018, the CSB had exchanged over 420,000 metric tons 
of sediment (Walsh et  al., 2018 ). This program challenges status quo soil and sediment man -
agement practices and creates an alternative material circulation circuit.
The CSB was created through a 2010 Memorandum of Agreement between the New York State 
Department of environmental Conservation and the Oe R, giving the latter authority to grant a 
Beneficial Use Determination to material that would otherwise be classified as solid waste (New 
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 11
York City Mayor’s Office of environmental Remediation, 2024 ). Construction projects participating 
in the city’s Voluntary Cleanup Program (VCP) can apply to transfer the material directly to a 
construction site requiring backfill or the stockpile yard in east New York, Brooklyn. During the 
CSB editorial review of proposed material, the OeR evaluates geologic borings, analyses the site’s 
environmental history, and conducts soil tests to determine whether the material meets geotech -
nical requirements and is free of contamination. If the material is deemed suitable, the landowner 
or contractor can transfer the material, paying only for testing and transportation (Walsh et  al., 
2018 ). Most clean material generated by NYC construction sites is glacial outwash left by the 
retreating glaciers and found at depths of 2-20 metres. Due to these depths, much of this material 
shows little to no signs of pedogenesis—or soil formation—and is instead classified as a sediment 
(egendorf et  al., 2018 ).
The restrictions on the material the CSB can accept prompt the need to identify new ways 
of making soil. Because the sediment contains little organic matter or nutrients, it must become 
soil through pedogenesis to support plant growth. This differs from the soil-making practices 
discussed above, which reproduce ideal, ready-made mixtures. Instead, the material at the CSB 
requires conceptualising soil as something that develops over time, unsettling conventional 
approaches to planting design and maintenance. One promising study showed the potential of 
mixing this sediment with compost to supply local urban agriculture (e gendorf et  al., 2018 ). 
While there have been attempts to use it in designed landscapes, the material does not align 
with typical soil specifications, which poses a challenge. Given this, the CSB is currently primarily 
oriented towards geotechnical uses and thus the stockpile primarily contains coarse sands 
containing gravel with limited clays, silts, and finer sands. The material is typically used as fill 
and for green infrastructure projects by various municipal departments (NYC Water Staff, 2021 ).
As a public entity compensating for inefficiencies and unsustainable practices in the private 
market, the CSB creates opportunities for more equitable soil distribution. Due to its municipal 
control, the CSB is more responsive to democratic oversight, which theoretically allows it to 
direct material flows towards public purposes such as coastal resiliency projects (Walsh et  al., 
2019 ) or community agriculture initiatives (e gendorf et  al., 2018 ). Thus, this regulatory and 
spatial infrastructure opens new ways of conceiving and producing soil, with unrealised poten -
tials for urban space.
Discussion: soil and agrarian urbanism
The three examples described above illustrate how soil production in NYC is shaped by the 
interplay between the territory’s biophysical conditions and the evolving dynamics of capitalist 
urbanisation. In this context, soil alternates between being treated as a resource or waste, a 
living ecosystem or inert material. As urbanisation continues and cities confront the challenges 
of climate change, soil will be produced and mobilised in novel ways. How should agrarian 
urbanism respond to these shifts? As the editors argue in the introduction (Bathla & Lazzarini, 
2025 ) agrarian urbanism is inherently projective, opening up ‘possibilities for alternative patterns 
of human-nature relationships and sustaining other-than-human life’ . To avoid becoming yet 
another version of green urbanism—with its managerial approach to human and more-than-
human life (Meulemans, 2023 )—it is crucial to articulate how socially necessary transformations 
can occur without perpetuating the extractive and alienating dynamics of capitalist urbanisation. 
This article argues that paying close attention to the socio-ecological metabolism of urban soils 
can build on the theoretical insights of UM and make a significant contribution to agrarian 
urbanism for three key reasons.
First, urban soils productively muddle the division of life and nonlife that underpins 
extraction. This binary serves as both a measure of value and a mechanism of exploitation 
(Povinelli, 2016 ). Soil’s status as inert or lively shifts according to the needs of capital: it is 
12 L. HARRIS
alternately treated as disposable material, moved and manipulated without care, or as a valu -
able ecological resource requiring attentive management. These multiple modes can be seen 
in the soil mixing process described above. To transcend this dynamic and discover alternative 
relationships between urban and more-than-human natures, it is necessary to develop ways 
of relating to soil beyond such simplistic categories. Fortunately, close attention to urban soils 
reveals a broader horizon of possibilities. They fuse abiotic and biotic elements in ways that 
cannot be reduced to their component parts and are inseparable from the social and ecological 
histories that shape them. By embracing the complexity of these soils, agrarian urbanism can 
prefigure alternative relations to urban nature, unsettling the extractive logics that undergird 
capitalist urbanisation.
Second, tracing this metabolic relationship reveals an unexpected intermingling of the agrarian 
and the urban. This interplay has a spatial dimension, where desirable soils and sands from NJ 
and Long Island are imported into NYC, while unwanted or contaminated materials are displaced 
to peripheral landfills, abandoned mines, or quarries. In a paradoxical twist, some of these 
landfills are now being covered with freshly sourced horticultural soils to support their trans -
formation into public parks, as in the case of Fresh Kills (Fresh Kills Park Alliance, 2020 ). It also 
involves a temporal dimension: soil, initially shaped by its surroundings, continues to evolve in 
new contexts, simultaneously responding to and influencing its environment. Through the cir -
culation described in this article, soil ecologies shaped by agricultural practices become integral 
parts of urban space. Likewise, urbanised soils continue to evolve after displacement, affecting 
and transforming agrarian landscapes. As a living archive (Botias, 2023 ), soil retains traces of 
its history—such as seeds, chemicals, and other markers—that may unexpectedly resurface, 
altered, in new contexts.
Third, by demonstrating how soil emerges through processes of circulation and metabolic 
exchange, this article challenges assumptions of soil’s naturalness and stability—assumptions 
that underpin conservative associations between land, property, and people (Williams, 1975 ). 
The framing of planetary urbanisation (Brenner & Schmid, 2015 ) unsettles notions of untouched 
or rural soils, revealing how even seemingly ‘natural’ soils are shaped by historically and geo -
graphically differentiated processes of urbanisation. Moreover, a closer examination of soil 
formation shows that its stability is a fiction. Scientific understandings of pedogenesis centre 
ongoing processes of erosion and deposition (Jenny, 2011  [1941]). The movements tracked in 
this article—importing fertile soils from the periphery, displacing unwanted urban soils, and 
staging sediments at the CSB—also influence pedogenesis. Soil scientist Wolfgang Burghardt 
(2025 , 381) describes these flows as ‘technic erosion’ , analogous to natural erosive processes. 
Attending to this circulation reveals soil not as a static ground for belonging, but as a mobile 
material in constant exchange with its environment.
These three contributions—destabilizing the notion of soil’s naturalness, highlighting how 
binary classifications of soil as either lively or inert facilitates extraction and biopolitical control, 
and revealing how soil indexes the metabolic entanglement of the agrarian and the urban—
extend and deepen the insights of urban metabolism (UM). They build on UM’s attention to 
metabolic flows between centre and periphery and its critique of spatially bounded notions of 
the city. Yet, as this article has shown, UM discourse often treats soil in a technocratic regis -
ter—as a quantifiable, inert material detached from the socioecological processes of its formation. 
This framing has real consequences. For instance, policies aimed at restricting land take often 
rest on the premise that rural soils are natural, and urbanisation is inherently destructive. Such 
simplifications obscure the fact that urbanisation has long been reshaping agricultural soils and 
landscapes in uneven and dynamic ways.
Recognising that urbanisation produces soil—transforming rather than erasing its agrarian 
and ecological origins—opens up more precise and generative pathways for analysis, policy, 
and design. This constitutes fertile ground for agrarian urbanism, which need not reduce these 
‘freak’ soils (Meulemans, 2020b ) to categories defined by naturalness, purity, or instrumental 
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 13
value. Instead, agrarian urbanism can engage creatively with how soil ‘moves and behaves’ 
(Barrera-Bassols & Zinck, 2003 ). This could mean studying the unique ecologies of soils formed 
through particular patterns of urbanisation, exploring the latent potential of the sediments 
stored at the CSB, or designing in dialogue with existing urban soils rather than replacing them 
with standardised mixtures reliant on continued extraction. This reconceptualization renders soil 
not as a passive substrate to manage or preserve, but as an active participant in the ongoing 
project of agrarian urbanism.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the many people who generously shared their experiences and knowledge throughout this 
project. I would like to thank Germain Meulemans and Ursula Münster, who convened a panel at the joint con -
ference of the e uropean Association for the Study of Science and Technology and the Society for Social Studies 
of Science where an early draft of this paper was presented, as well as the other panel presenters for their 
generative feedback. I would also like to thank the editors of this special issue, Nitin Bathla and Luca Lazzarini, 
for their insightful comments and support. Lastly, I want to acknowledge the role that conversations with Teresa 
Galí Izard, Cara Turett and Bonnie Kate Walker, among others, played in the development of the article.
Research ethics and consent
All participants were informed about the research in advance and granted either verbal or written consent to 
participate.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
No funding was received.
Data availability statement
There is no data available.
Notes on contributor
Luke Harris  is a landscape architect and doctoral candidate based at the Institute of Landscape and Urban Studies 
at the e TH Zurich. He is a founding member of the design research collective Office of Living Things. He currently 
lectures at the Chair of Being Alive at the e TH Zurich. Previously, he practiced at Michael Van Valkenburgh 
Associates in New York City.
References
Barrera-Bassols, N., & Zinck, A. ( 2003 ). ‘Land moves and behaves’: Indigenous discourse on sustainable land man -
agement in Pichataro, Patzcuaro Basin, Mexico. Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography , 85(3–4), 
229–245. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0435-3676.2003.00202.x
Barua, M. ( 2021 ). Infrastructure and non-human life: A wider ontology. Progress in Human Geography , 45(6), 
1467–1489. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132521991220
Barua, M. ( 2023 ). Lively cities: Reconfiguring urban ecology . University of Minnesota Press.
Bathla, N., & Lazzarini, L. ( 2025 ). Agrarian urbanism beyond the rural-urban divide. Landscape Research .
Bell, C., Simmons, R., & Behroozi, C. ( 1991 ). Inventory of active and abandoned sand and gravel mining operations 
in New Jersey. New Jersey, Department of environmental Protection.
14 L. HARRIS
Berry, W. ( 1977 ). The unsettling of America: Culture and agriculture . Sierra Club Books.
Blanc, C., Darmendrail, D., Rouvreau, L., Scamps, M., & Boissard, G. ( 2012 ). excavated soil reuse tools developed 
as part of the French soil management framework. Innovative Solutions for Revitalization of Degraded Areas 2012 . 
https://brgm.hal.science/hal-00794146
Botias, e. M. ( 2023 ). emergency spaces VI—Community networking spaces for action: The archive. In D. Bertschi, 
J. L. Carboni, & N. Bathla (e ds.), Unearthing traces: Dismantling imperialist entanglements of archives, landscapes, 
and the built environment  (pp. 269–280). e PFL Press.
Brenner, N., & Schmid, C. ( 2015 ). Towards a new epistemology of the urban? City, 19(2–3), 151–182. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13604813.2015.1014712
Burghardt, W. ( 2025 ). 25 years of SUITMAs: Urban soils - a new research field in soil science. What makes these 
soils and the interest in these soils so special? Journal of Soils and Sediments , 25(2), 374–389. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11368-024-03826-6
Cavanagh, J., Simcock, R., Thompson-Morrison, H., & Harmsworth, G. ( 2023 ). Guidance on the sustainable man -
agement of ‘surplus’ soil and subsoil: Consultation draft. Contaminated Land and Waste Special Interest Group, 
Land Monitoring Forum.
Certini, G., & Scalenghe, R. ( 2011 ). Anthropogenic soils are the golden spikes for the anthropocene. The Holocene , 
21(8), 1269–1274. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683611408454
CL:AIRe . (2024 ). Proof-of-Concept research and demonstration of soil management, storage and treatment facili -
ties. Retrieved October 14, 2024 from https://claire.co.uk/projects-and-initiatives/earthbanks
Conford, P . ( 2001 ). The origins of the organic movement . Floris Books.
Craul, P . J. ( 1992 ). Urban soil in landscape design . Wiley.
Craul, P . J. ( 1999 ). Urban soils: Applications and practices . Wiley.
Craul, T. A., & Craul, P . J. ( 2006 ). Soil design protocols for landscape architects and contractors . Wiley.
Decker, e . H., elliott, S., Smith, F. A., Blake, D. R., & Rowland, F. S. ( 2000 ). energy and material flow through the 
urban ecosystem. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment , 25(1), 685–740. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
energy.25.1.685
Dümpelmann, S. ( 2019 ). Seeing trees: A history of street trees in New York City and Berlin . Yale University Press.
egendorf, S. P ., Cheng, Z., Deeb, M., Flores, V., Paltseva, A., Walsh, D., Groffman, P ., & Mielke, H. W. ( 2018 ). Constructed 
soils for mitigating Lead (Pb) exposure and promoting urban community gardening: The New York City clean 
soil bank pilot study. Landscape and Urban Planning , 175(July), 184–194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurb -
plan.2018.03.012
engel-Di Mauro, S. ( 2016 ). Ecology, soils, and the left: An ecosocial approach . Palgrave MacMillan.
european Commission. ( 2011 ). Roadmap to a resource-efficient Europe . COM(2011) 571. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/eN/TXT/?uri=CeLeX:52011DC0571
european Commission. ( 2021 ). The new EU soil strategy for 2030 - Reaping the benefits of healthy soils for people, 
food, nature and climate  (COM/2021/699 final). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/eN/
TXT/?uri=CeLe X%3A52021DC0699
Food and Agriculture Organization. ( 2022 ). World reference base for soil resources: 4th edition . https://www.fao.org/
soils-portal/data-hub/soil-classification/world-reference-base/en/
Foster, J. B. ( 1999 ). Marx’s theory of metabolic rift: Classical foundations for environmental sociology. American 
Journal of Sociology , 105(2), 366–405. https://doi.org/10.1086/210315
Fresh Kills Park Alliance. ( 2020 ). The dirt” on soil at north park phase 1 . Freshkills Park. https://freshkillspark.org/
blog/the-dirt-on-soil-at-north-park-phase-1
Gandy, M. ( 2004 ). Rethinking urban metabolism: Water, space and the modern city. City, 8(3), 363–379. https://
doi.org/10.1080/1360481042000313509
Gobat, J. M., Aragno, M., & Matthey, W. ( 2004 ). The living soil: Fundamentals of soil science and soil biology . Translated 
by V. A. K. Sarma. Science Publishers.
Granjou, C., & Phillips, C. ( 2019 ). Living and labouring soils: Metagenomic ecology and a new agricultural revo -
lution? BioSocieties , 14(3), 393–415. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41292-018-0133-0
Guibert, e., & Tostevin, A. ( 2022 ). The fictional soils of a ‘sustainable’ anthropocene: A new materialist story of the 
soils of the Queen elizabeth Olympic Park. Journal of Landscape Architecture , 17(2), 76–89. https://doi.org/10.1
080/18626033.2022.2156104
Gururani, S. ( 2023 ). Cities in a world of villages: Agrarian urbanism and the making of India’s urbanizing frontiers. 
In F. Wu, & R. Keil (e ds.), Changing Asian urban geographies  (pp. 97–115). Routledge.
Hale, S. e ., Roque, A. J., Okkenhaug, G., Sørmo, e ., Lenoir, T., Carlsson, C., Kupryianchyk, D., Flyhammar, P ., & Žlender, 
B. (2021 ). The reuse of excavated soils from construction and demolition projects: Limitations and possibilities. 
Sustainability , 13(11, 11), 6083. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13116083
Hanson, V. D. ( 1996 ). Fields without dreams: Defending the agrarian idea . Free Press.
Holmes, R., Milligan, B., & Wirth, G. ( 2024 ). Silt sand slurry: Dredging, sediment, and the worlds we are making . Applied 
Research & Design.
Hopper, L. J. ( 2011 ). Graphic standards field guide to softscape . Wiley.
LANDSCAPe ReSeARCH 15
Howard, H. ( 2023 ). Sand mining threatens long island’s drinking water. Or does it? The New York Times . https://
www.nytimes.com/2023/12/07/nyregion/long-island-sand-land-mining-water.html
Hutton, J. ( 2019 ). Reciprocal landscapes; Stories of material movements. Routledge.
Jenny, H. ( 2011 ). Factors of soil formation: A system of quantitative pedology. (Original work published 1941) . Dover 
Publications.
Johansson, N., Krook, J., eklund, M., & Berglund, B. B. ( 2013 ). An integrated review of concepts and initiatives for 
mining the technosphere: Towards a new taxonomy. Journal of Cleaner Production, Special Volume: Urban and 
Landfill Mining , 55(September), 35–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.04.007
Katsikis, N. ( 2023 ). The horizontal factory: The operationalisation of the US corn and soy belt. In C. Schmid, & M. 
Topolavic (e ds.), Extended urbanisation: Tracing planetary struggles  (pp. 121–158). Birkhäuser.
Keefer, R. F. ( 2000 ). Handbook of soils for landscape architects . Oxford University Press.
Kourmouli, A., & Lesniewska, F. ( 2024 ). Losing ground: Targeting agricultural land take by enabling a circular 
economy in construction. Circular Economy and Sustainability , 4(1), 459–473. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s43615-023-00293-y
Krzywoszynska, A., & Marchesi, G. ( 2020 ). Toward a relational materiality of soils. Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 
190–204. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-8142297
Leguédois, S., Séré, G., Auclerc, A., Cortet, J., Huot, H., Ouvrard, S., Watteau, F., Schwartz, C., & Morel, J. L. ( 2016 ). 
Modelling pedogenesis of technosols. Geoderma , 262(January), 199–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoder -
ma.2015.08.008
Magnusson, S., Lundberg, K., Svedberg, K., & Knutsson, S. ( 2015 ). Sustainable management of excavated soil and 
rock in urban areas – A literature review. Journal of Cleaner Production , 93(April), 18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jclepro.2015.01.010
Malm, A., & The Zetkin Collective. (2021). White skin, black fuel: On the danger of fossil fascism . Verso.
Marchesi, G. ( 2020 ). Justus von Liebig Makes the World. Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 205–226. https://doi.
org/10.1215/22011919-8142308
Marx, K. ( 1993 ). Capital: A critique of political economy, Vol. 1 . (D. Fernbach, Trans.; Reprint edition). Penguin Classics. 
(Original work published 1867).
Meulemans, G. ( 2020a ). Urban pedogeneses: The making of city soils from hard surfacing to the urban soil sci -
ences. Environmental Humanities , 12(1), 250–266. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-8142330
Meulemans, G. ( 2020b ). Reclaiming freak soils: From conquering to journeying with urban soils. In J. F. Salazar, 
C. Granjou, K. Kearnes, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (e ds.), Thinking with soils: Material politics and social the -
ory (pp. 157–174). Bloomsbury Academic.
Meulemans, G. ( 2023 ). Of planners, workers, and activists: A short history of urban soil cultures (e urope and North 
America). In N. Patzel, S. Grunwald, e . C. Brevik, & C. Feller (e ds.), Cultural understanding of soils: The importance 
of cultural diversity and of the inner world  (pp. 283–300). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-13169-1_14
Moore, J. W. ( 2017 ). Metabolic rift or metabolic shift? Dialectics, nature, and the world-historical method. Theory 
and Society , 46(4), 285–318. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-017-9290-6
New York City Department of Design and Construction (NYC DDC). ( 2021 ). Standard green infrastructure specifica -
tions . New York City Department of environmental Protection.
New York City Mayor’s Office of environmental Remediation. ( 2024 ). Clean soil bank . Retrieved October 1, 2024, 
from https://www.nyc.gov/site/oer/safe-land/clean-soil-bank.page
NYC Water Staff. ( 2021 ). The clean soil bank. NYC Water . https://medium.com/nycwater/the-clean-soil-bank-
da5f7efefdff
OpenStreetMap Contributors. ( 2025 ). OpenStreetMap geospatial data . Retrieved February 25, 2025, from https://
www.openstreetmap.org
Orgiazzi, A. ( 2016 ). Global soil biodiversity atlas . Publications Office of the e uropean Union.
Povinelli, e . A. ( 2016 ). Geontologies: A requiem to late liberalism . Duke University Press.
Saitō, K. ( 2022 ). Marx in the Anthropocene: Towards the Idea of Degrowth Communism . Cambridge University Press.
Salazar, J. F., Granjou, C., Kearnes, K., Krzywoszynska, A., & Tironi, M. ( 2020 ). Thinking with soils: Material politics 
and social theory  (vol. 15). Bloomsbury Academic.
Sanderson, e ., Solecki, W., Waldman, J., & Parris, A. ( 2016 ). Prospects for resilience . Island Press.
Schneider, M., & McMichael, P . ( 2010 ). Deepening, and repairing, the metabolic rift. The Journal of Peasant Studies , 
37(3), 461–484. https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2010.494371
Shodell, e . (1985 ). Particles of the past: Sand mining on Long Island, 1870s-1980s . Port Washington Public Library.
Soil Survey Staff, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture. ( 2025 ). Web 
soil survey. Retrieved February 22, 2025, from https://websoilsurvey.sc.egov.usda.gov
Sports Turf Research Institute. ( 2020 ). Golf course aggregates: An overview for a sustainable future. R&A 2030 .
Swidler, e . (2009 ). The social production of soil. Soil Science , 174(1), 2–8. https://doi.org/10.1097/SS.0b013e318194274d
Swyngedouw, e . (2015 ). Urbanization and environmental futures: Politicizing urban political ecology. In T. Perreault, 
G. Bridge, & J. McCarthy (e ds.), The Routledge handbook of political ecology  (pp. 446–456). Routledge Handbooks. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315759289
16 L. HARRIS
Tironi, M. ( 2020 ). Soil refusal: Thinking earthly matters as radical alterity. In J. F. Salazar, C. Granjou, K. Kearnes, 
A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (e ds.), Thinking with soils: Material politics and social theory  (pp. 175–190). 
Bloomsbury Academic.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). ( 2001 ). Sand and gravel operations, New York State, 1998 [Vector digital data] . Retrieved 
February 25, 2025, from https://cugir.library.cornell.edu/catalog/cugir-007333
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). ( 2022 ). Mineral industry—New Jersey . https://www.usgs.gov/centers/national-mineral
s-information-center/mineral-industry-new-jersey
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). ( 2024 ). Annual NLCD Collection 1.0 Science Products . [Data release]. https://doi.
org/10.5066/P94UXNTS
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). (n.d.). Geology of the New York region . https://www.usgs.gov/geology-and-ecology-o
f-national-parks/geology-new-york-region
United Nations environment Programme (UNeP). ( 2011 ). Cities and climate change: Global report on human settle -
ments 2011 . UN-Habitat.
United Nations environment Programme (UNeP). ( 2019 ). Sand and sustainability: Finding new solutions for environ -
mental governance of global sand resources . United Nations environment Programme.
Urban, J. ( 2015 ). Search for the "Perfect" soil specification . DeepRoot Blog. https://www.deeproot.com/blog/
blog-entries/how-to-specify-soil-when-local-sources-do-not-support-standard-products/
Vera, L. I. ( 2018 ). Making dirty land clean: An analysis of New York City’s voluntary cleanup program . NYU Furman 
Center.
Vialle, A., & Giampieri, M. ( 2020 ). Mapping Urbanization as an Anthropedogenetic Process: A Section through the 
Times of Urban Soils. Urban Planning, 5 (2), 262–279. https://doi.org/10.17645/up.v5i2.2848
Walsh, D. C. ( 1991 ). The history of waste landfilling in New York City. Ground Water , 29(4), 591–593.
Walsh, D., Glass, K., Morris, S., Zhang, H., McRae, I., Anderson, N., Alfieri, A., egendorf, S. P ., Holberton, S., Owrang, 
S., & Cheng, Z. ( 2018 ). Sediment exchange to mitigate pollutant exposure in urban soil. Journal of Environmental 
Management , 214(May), 354–361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.03.013
Walsh, D., McRae, I., Zirngibl, R., Chawla, S., Zhang, H., Alfieri, A., Moore, H., Bailey, C., Brooks, A., Ostock, T., Pong, 
S., Hard, T., Sullivan, C., & Wilding, J. ( 2019 ). Generation rate and fate of surplus soil extracted in New York 
City. The Science of the Total Environment , 650(Pt 2), 3093–3100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.284
Williams, R. ( 1975 ). The country and the city . Oxford University Press.
Wolman, A. ( 1965 ). The metabolism of cities. Scientific American , 213(3), 178–190. https://doi.org/10.1038/
scientificamerican0965-178
Yusoff, K. ( 2018 ). A billion black anthropocenes or none . University of Minnesota Press.
