Article
Soil, territory, land: The
spatial politics of settler
organic farming in the WestBank, Israel/Palestine
Rafi Grosglik
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel
Ariel Handel
T el Aviv University, Israel
Daniel Monterescu
Central European University, Vienna
Abstract
In settler colonial settings, agriculture is a means of reclaiming territorial sovereignty and indig-
enous identity. T urning attention to the Jewish settlers in the West Bank and their multiple uses
and abuses of organic farming, this article explores epistemic and political spatial operations onthe colonial frontier. Applying a relational conceptualization of three spatial modalities—soil,
territory, and land—we explore the ways in which these modalities serve as political apparatuses:
Soildesignates the romantic perception of cultivable space, territory is concerned with borders
and political sovereignty, and land is seen as a space of economic value and as a means of
production. While agriculture is a well-known instrument of expansion and dispossession, organ-
ic farming contributes to the colonial operation by binding together affective attachment to theplace, and new economic singularity in relation to environmental and ethical claims. We argue
that organic farming practices converge claims for local authenticity, spatial appropriation, and
high economic values that are embedded in what we term the colonial quality turn . Ultimately,
organic farming in the West Bank normalizes the inherent violence of the colonial project and
strengthens the settlers’ claim for political privilege.
Keywords
Organic agriculture, settler colonialism, Israel/Palestine, Colonial Quality T urn, soil, land,
territory
Corresponding author:
Rafi Grosglik, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
Email: rafig@post.bgu.ac.ilEPD: Society and Space
2021, Vol. 39(5) 906–924
!The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/02637758211041121
journals.sagepub.com/home/epd

Introduction
Known as “the father figure of the outposts,” as well as “the sheriff of the hills,” Avri Ran,
the owner of Givo’t Olam farm, is one of the founders of the notorious hilltop youth—a
movement of radical Jewish settlers in the West Bank. Ran’s reputation is synonymous with
violent land grab of Palestinian property. He is, however, also one of the most prominent
organic farmers in Israel/Palestine. In the context of the West Bank, critical consumers oftenconsider organic farming by Jewish settlers as nothing short of greenwashing, meant to
conceal the violent land grab by the liberal means of ecological and alternative agriculture.
For Ran, however, organic farming is embedded in what he perceives to be religious the-
ology and law. “The entire Talmud [a central text in Jewish scriptures] is all about organic
farming. It’s a textbook for organic farming!” he told us when we met him in the summer of2018 at his farm. “Organic farming is preserved in the Jewish genes.” Nevertheless, Ran also
insisted on a different story of efficacy and quality-oriented agricultural production: “Don’t
look for slogans here, you shouldn’t seek messianic statements [ ...]. Conventional farming is
dangerous and poisonous. It would be a crime to use pesticides here. It’s suicidal. This farm
is about quantity and quality.”
1The intertwined meanings embedded in Ran’s narrative on
organic farming—environmentalism, religiosity and productivity—reflect the changing eco-nomic and cultural structures of Israeli settler colonialism in the Occupied Palestinian
Territories.
2
This article discusses how Jewish settlers in the West Bank utilize organic farming to
claim territorial sovereignty and indigenous identity. Against the common view of organic
farming as profoundly related to universal values such as sustainability, fairness, and eco-
logical responsibility (Barton, 2018; IFOAM, 2008), we contend that organic agriculture in
the West Bank is part of the broader political and exclusionary process. We point to the
multiple ways in which non-conventional (or alternative) agriculture and colonial spatiali-zation converge.
3
The article brings into conversation three conceptual fields: the territorial-geopolitical
aspects of colonial agriculture; the relations between capitalism and settler colonialism; andthe prominence of soil in the philosophical foundations of organic agriculture. It proposes a
relational conceptualization of colonial place-making based on three complementary spatial
modalities (i.e., three different ways whereby space and place-making are expressed, expe-rienced, and activated): soil, territory , and land. According to the suggested analytical frame-
work, soilis designated as a holistic and romantic perception of cultivable space; territory as
concerned with defensible borders and political sovereignty (Appadurai, 1996; Elden, 2010);
and land is conceptualized as a space of economic exchange which seeks to maximize
resources and instrumentalize production (Elden, 2010).
4
While we distinguish analytically between these spatial modalities, in practice they dis-
play continuities and are relationally intertwined (on relational geopolitics see Monterescu,
2013; Yiftachel, 2016). Building on these modalities, we show how the depoliticization ofland and the commodification of soil normalize the governmentality of territory, and how
quality-driven organic farming emerges as a gastro-political platform in settler-colonial
settings.
The polysemy of organic discourse and practice lends itself to highly diverse interpreta-
tions. From its inception in the early 1980s, organic farming among Jewish settlers in the
Occupied Territories has undergone several transformations. Initiated as a private Jewish
agricultural project, organic farming in the West Bank and Gaza Strip instantiated for over
three decades visions of “the redemption of the land.”
5The organic ethos has been embed-
ded in biblical mythology and used as a means to claim Jewish exclusionary autochthony, asGrosglik et al. 907
well as to appropriate material resources such as farming land and water (Etkes, 2013;
Grosglik, 2021; Kotef, 2020). As we demonstrate in this paper, organic agriculture in
West Bank settlements diversified and shifted to a hybrid discourse addressing quality,
politics, and philosophies of place-making, resulting in an ongoing normalization of the
settlement project and the commodification of its products. Furthermore, we identify a new
shift that we term the “colonial quality turn.” This turn stems from the global trend in
agriculture and food production known as “the quality turn,” which refers to the current
emphasis of food producers responding to the demand of affluent and reflexive consumers
(Galvin, 2011; Warner, 2007). We will show how discourses and practices related to the
symbolic value attributed to organic produce are inextricably related to place-making and
the commodification of settler products.
Based on ethnographic fieldwork which included visits to 11 organic farms in the West
Bank, 12 open-ended interviews with Jewish organic farmers, and content analysis of their
marketing materials, this article explores the connections between the violence of colonial
territoriality and the “quality space” (Monterescu and Handel, 2020) of organic farming.
The article starts by conceptually framing the three modalities of soil, territory, and land.
We then outline the contours of the field of organic farming as a historical and political
project in relation to Jewish expansion and Palestinian dispossession. Next, we describe the
discourses and practices employed by organic settler farmers to solidify their claims. We
conclude by arguing that the implementations of these spatial modalities through organic
farming normalize the inherent violence of the colonial project and strengthens the settlers’
claim for political privilege.
Between soulful soil and commodified land: Settler colonialism and
the political spatiality of organic agriculture
The relations between agriculture and settler-colonialism are nothing new. For the colonial
state, modernizing agriculture has been a major tool for land possession and dispossession,
for creating colonial subjectivities, and for regulating indigenous spaces (Anthias, 2019;
Wolfe, 2006). Using monocultural and industrialized farming practices, agriculture contrib-
uted directly to the spatial project of settler colonialism. As Rotz (2017) argues, “farmers
have played a specific role: the land and freedom their communities gained in the ‘new
world’ resulted directly from the dispossession of indigenous peoples.” Largely supported
by the state, “agriculture, with its life-sustaining connectedness to land, is a potent symbol of
settler-colonial identity” (Wolfe, 2006: 396). As a project of environmental development,
agriculture emerges as an enterprise of expansion through modernist economic, scientific,
and bureaucratic practices (Davis, 2007; Tesdell, 2017).6The case of the Jewish settlement of
Palestine can be seen as emblematic of the use of industrial agriculture for signifying moder-
nity in relation to native agricultural practices, as well as for spatial and societal domination
of new settler communities (Novick, 2014; Shafir, 1996; Tesdell, 2017). Conventional farm-
ing has always represented the contradictions of the Zionist project itself: a modernist
project of expansion and an identity work of autochthonous return to the land of the
forefathers at the same time.
Disavowing modernist-conventional agriculture, the rise of the organic movement
renewed a romantic connection between identity, space, and farming (Barton, 2018). It
emphasizes a renewed intimate connection with cultivated spaces, local, small-scale and
sustainable agricultural practices, thus reframing the Jewish relation with the land.908 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
The following sections will explore the special place organic agriculture holds in contem-
porary Jewish settlement in the West Bank.
We highlight the multiple uses and abuses of organic farming in a settler-colonial power
arrangement: land grabbing, capital accumulation, and “self-indigenizing” (Veracini, 2015).Veracini (2013) distinguishes between colonialism and settler colonialism, claiming that
in theoretical terms, one crucial distinction between colonialism and settler colonialism as sep-
arate formations is that the first aims to perpetuate itself whereas the latter aims to supersedeitself ...that is, when the settlers cease to be defined as such and become ‘natives,’ and their
position becomes normalized.
7
Normalization takes different forms: Jewish settlers in the West Bank draw on the longue
dur/C19eetemporality of soil and biblical mythology to argue that Jews inhabited the region long
before the Palestinians, thus substantiating their claim for exclusive autochthony. At thesame time, the settlers profess environmental care, as opposed to the irresponsible neglectthey attribute to the native ( inter alia repositioning Palestinian lands as terra nullius ; see also
Braverman, 2019). Concomitantly, a process of normalization via the colonial quality turn(namely, a process of depoliticization by means of a discourse on agricultural quality) istaking place. In the process, indigeneity is predicated on unapologetic spatial appropriation,which legitimizes the metamorphosis of a settler into a native by trivializing territorial
violence. These forms spell out different connections between identity, history, and space,
and by implication, the varying relationships between soil, land, and territory.
We argue that the three modalities of soil, territory, and land play a crucial part in the
settler-colonial place-making in Israel/Palestine. The first vertex in our model is soil, repre-
senting not only roots and belonging (Appadurai, 1996), but also ecology, materiality, andvisceral relationality between the human and non-human sphere (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2015;Salazar et al., 2020). The affective connection to soil stands against the “violence ofabstraction” (Lefebvre, 1991: 289) inherent to both the political production of territoryand the capitalist production of land. While the notions of territory andlandare predicated
on the “accumulation of space” (Latour, 1986), namely the emptying-out of a given spacefrom its materiality, historical context, and sociality (Blomley, 2003), the notion of soil
suggests an imagined return to the embodied passion of the place.
8As soil generation
and regeneration usually occurs at timescales well beyond the human life cycle (Puig de laBellacasa, 2015), it is not surprising that they are socially and politically imagined as naturaland timeless. This perception is congruent with the myths of autochthony—the idea thatpeople spring naturally from the earth and are directly linked to the soil of which they are
born (Elden, 2013)—but also with the desire for self-indigenization as a crucial characteristic
of settler-colonial identities (Veracini, 2013).
In the context of organic farming, soil has always been a basic pillar in the philosophical
foundations of the global organic movement. As the deepest concept of the philosophy oforganic farming, soil forms a holistic ecosystem that embodies relationships betweenhumans and non-humans. It includes all living creatures in a given space, undergroundand above, bound together in the longue dur /C19ee. In The Living Soil , one of the canonical
texts of the global organic agriculture movement, Eve Balfour (1943) argued that there is acausal link between human health and what she terms “soil vitality.” Following Balfour andher successors, “soil” assumed a central status in organic discourse: not as an object foreconomic exploitation but rather as a “living body,” where all constituents—minerals,microorganisms, insects, plants, animals, and humans—work in mutual harmony.Grosglik et al. 909
The complexity of the soil concept—including humanistic and inclusionary meanings, as
well as chauvinistic and exclusionary (“blood and soil”) meanings—is inherent to the phi-
losophy of organic farming. The relationships between soil and social health received specialpolitical attention early on, with the writings of botanist Albert Howard (1947), who point-
ed to connections between soil fertility and national resilience. Thus, the interlacing of
organic agriculture and parochialism (religiosity and right-wing nationalism) is not new,
and certainly not unique to the Israeli/Palestinian case. Looking at the political affiliations
of organic agriculture from a historical and global perspective, one notes that many of the
early practitioners and advocates of organic farming were associated with an anti-liberal
worldview affiliated with conservative groups and eco-fascism (Reed, 2001; Sayre, 2011).
As a political space produced by various state apparatuses, territory is long considered
the central concept in scholarly debates on the Occupied Territories (Handel, 2009;
Yiftachel, 2002). Prima facie , the struggle is always over territory as part of a constant
attempt to achieve the highest degree of control and sovereignty over the space at stake
(Kimmerling, 1989). In this case, territoriality is not only formally exercised by the state, but
also by the settler farmers, who function as private entrepreneurs claiming sovereignty over
the disputed territory. Thus, they sustain a long Zionist history of seizing land and settingboundaries through agriculture (Neumann, 2011; Novick, 2014). Nevertheless, as we dem-
onstrate below, the territorial struggle is not the sole determinant in the case of agriculture in
the West Bank, as the economic and the cultural aspects of settling the colonial frontier are
equally consequential.
Land , which embodies property relations and means of production is the third vertex in
our triadic analysis. The notion of land recalls that modern agriculture—organic or con-
ventional—is also an economic business in a competitive capitalist system. The rise of
“corporate organic” in the Global North beginning in the early 1990s is the result of pro-
cesses of industrialization and standardization of organic agriculture. Subsequently, con-
temporary organic agriculture—in Israel/Palestine and elsewhere—seeks to be profitable,
and therefore must reckon with land as a means of production, as well as with the exploi-
tation of labor for profit, marketing, and branding (Grosglik, 2021; Guthman, 2014;Johnston et al., 2009). As we describe below, pragmatic considerations of efficiency,
profit, and marketing strategies are also an important part of organic agriculture in the
West Bank. Like other settler economic initiatives in the West Bank, organic farming is
heavily subsidized by the state and the occupation authorities due to the strategic role of
agriculture in land grabbing (Etkes, 2013). Nevertheless, organic farmers in the West Bank
also compete in a segmented global neoliberal market for economic reasons and adjust
themselves to its logic.
The history of organic agriculture beyond the green line: Space and
national ideology
Since 1967, agriculture has increasingly served as a central tool by which the settlement
movement consolidated control over large areas in the Occupied Territories. Over 103,000
dunams (25,450 acres) in the West Bank are currently designated for Jewish agriculture. Thisarea is much larger than the actual built-up area of the settlements and outposts, which is
about 60,000 dunams (14,826 acres). Between Jewish agricultural expansion and sprawling
settlements, the last decades have seen a decline of about one-third in cultivated Palestinian
agricultural lands in the West Bank. Since 1997, settlers have taken over about 24,000
dunams of land through agricultural activity of which about 10,000 dunams are on privately910 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
owned Palestinian land (Etkes, 2013). These agricultural activities can be seen as motivated
by three interrelated factors: agro-religious ideology striving for an unmediated connection
between people and place, economic considerations striving to maximize revenues, and
territorial expansionism striving to extend Jewish control over Palestinian land. Organic
agriculture in the West Bank and Gaza Strip emerged in the late 1980s, and played a
relatively minor role in this broader project. However, due to its symbolic identificationwith locality and sustainability, as well as its commercial value in local and global markets,
it has become an important sector within the colonial project. The critical juncture in
incorporating organic agriculture in the settler movement was spearheaded by MarioLevi, known as “the pioneer of organic agriculture in Israel” (Grosglik, 2021). In 1983,
while serving as the CEO of the IBOAA (Israel Bio-Organic Agriculture Association),
Mario began to promote the project. The transformation of the Jewish settlements in theGaza Strip and West Bank into a hub of organic agriculture and a major force in the Israeli
agro-economy was accompanied by several discursive frameworks—most of which included
an agricultural–scientific perspective in relation to the quality of the soil. When we askedMario about the early days of organic agriculture in the Occupied Territories, he argued
that the development of organic agriculture was particularly suitable for these
“uncontaminated” soils:
[The soils] were cultivated [prior to the Jewish settlement] in primitive ways. Many of these lands
were ‘virgin soils’ [‘ adama betulit’ - uncultivated soil], these were soils that were not cultivated
using conventional methods. It is first and foremost a scientific matter.
Here, the scientific-agrarian and nationalist discourses converge. Echoing the old Zionist
slogan “a land without people to people without land” (and thus referring to the Palestinian
space as terra nullius ), Mario’s notion of “virgin soils” goes beyond its scientific-agrarian
meaning. The place is portrayed as empty and undeveloped, and thus should be redeemed bythe Jewish settlers, particularly by organic farmers.
9
Contemporary relational modalities of organic farming tie together material and non-
material components such as soil types, human labor, water regimes, agricultural practices,land regulations, ideological discourses, and local expertise. Understanding the mutual co-
constitution of soils, land regulations, and modes of territoriality in the West Bank requires
a brief introduction to the 1858 Ottoman Land Code that still guides the land regime in theWest Bank.
10Article 78 of the Ottoman Land Code states that the sovereign can seize
ownerless and uncultivated lands (Btselem, 2012). While the original purpose of Article
78 was to encourage agriculture in the areas that were distant from the center of theOttoman Empire and for the purpose of eliciting taxes, the state of Israel has largely used
it as a means of land expropriation. In its new apparatus, non-cultivated lands have been
declared “state lands,” an act that opened the path to use them for settlement expansion.
While the Ottoman Code states that anyone who has cultivated land for 10 consecutive
years without appeal is entitled to continue cultivating it, it does not specify what are the
exact types of cultivation that grant this right (Amara, 2013). The British Mandate author-ities, followed by the Jordanian ones, ruled that agricultural cultivation is “reasonable
cultivation” that complies with the conditions of the cultivated area (Amara, 2013). Also,
grazing was considered as a means of common cultivation, granting land rights to localfarmers (Btselem, 2012). However, the Israeli interpretation of the concept of “reasonable
cultivation” is much stricter, not recognizing grazing as cultivation and demanding a cumu-
lative cultivation of more than 50% of the entire area in question, regardless of the type ofsoil. Thus, areas that were perceived as uncultivable—or not cultivable enough—wereGrosglik et al. 911
declared “state lands,” including vast areas on the “desert threshold” (the line of 200 mm of
annual precipitation; see Weizman and Sheikh, 2015), as well as many hilltops in the West
Bank that have been traditionally less cultivated due to the rocky soil. These lands have
become easy prey for land grab (Kedar et al., 2018). Thus, the conditions of these terrains
and the ambiguities of legal property regime made it possible for Jewish settlers to extend
their claims on the space. Since 1967, 34% of the West Bank has been declared state land.
While 99.76% of state land allocations were given to the Jewish settlements, only 0.24%
were granted for Palestinian use and cultivation.11
Organic soil: Redeeming the lost roots
Har-Sinai Farm is an outpost located on the outskirts of Susya settlement in the south
Hebron hills (a region also known in Arabic as Masafer Yatta). The region is part of a semi-
arid area on the desert threshold, with an annual average precipitation of just above 200 mm
of rain. Due to the scarcity of natural springs, inhabitants of the region need to collect
rainwater in cistern hoardings. The soil in the area is rocky on the hilltops with shallow loess
and lithosol in the lower parts. Traditionally, agriculture in the area is based on dryland
farming of field crops (such as wheat and other grains) around the stream basins and grazing
in the rest of the area. Scarcity makes soil and water an integral part of the political conflict
in the area, not only in terms of material needs and land regulations, but also in the symbolic
narratives of authenticity and connection to the place.
Har-Sinai farm was founded by Dalia and her late husband Yair, to “put down roots in
the land [of Israel] and spiritual roots in heaven.”12While the farm itself is built on declared
“state land,” most of its agricultural lands are located outside the declared area. As many
other outposts, the farm was built without state authorization yet it receives de facto gov-
ernmental support with infrastructures, military protection, and direct and indirect budgets
(Tzfadia, 2017).
Over the years, Yair Har-Sinai became a revered figure among many Jewish settlers and
his persona was associated with the image of an unruly and independent settler who walks
freely in contested areas as if these are his own property. Murdered by Palestinians in 2001,
Yair remains a mythical figure among the Jewish settlers and their supporters. Dalia, for her
part, has continued to run the farm and advance its initial goals since Yair’s death. The story
of Har-Sinai farm, the legacy of Yair, and Dalia’s activities articulate the concept of soil by
portraying organic farming as a romantic mission of redemption. Raised in secular
Moshavim (cooperative agricultural communities) in the central district of Israel, Dalia
and Yair had strong connections to land and nature, but not necessarily to religious spir-
ituality. This changed after a crucial meeting with Mario Levi (the CEO of the IBOAA) who
was a religious charismatic figure. Dalia and Yair “discovered [their] Jewish roots,” as Dalia
put it. Subsequently, they moved to the Susya settlement, established in 1983 on the lands of
the Palestinian village of Susya.13Meeting with Dalia on the farm, she rationalized her life
project in terms of sustainability, tradition and modesty:
I have no interest in expansion. Other [Jewish settler organic] farmers want to be bigger, to show
presence. It is as if they say: ‘we want to display power, ability and control beyond what we can
actually produce, beyond our ability to cultivate the soil.’ While [those] farmers were focused on
growing crops, we wanted to learn the ancient methods of cultivating the soil, dryland farming,14
the methods used by our ancestors. We looked for ancient species of grapes and olives.912 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
However, the conversion to organic farming and the departure from industrial agricul-
tural technologies (as Dalia put it) were mediated by the couple’s complex relations with
their Palestinian neighbors. What Dalia described as a “return to the Jewish roots” was in
practice learnt through mimicking local Palestinian practices. Dalia reflects on their processof mimesis:
Yair learned a lot from Arab shepherds. He realized that the way to cultivate the soil and to
protect the land would be to raise goats. We were the first [Jewish shepherds] in Judea and
Samaria. At first, the [Jewish] residents of the settlement were surprised and told us ‘shepherding
is only for the Arabs’. But Yair did not give in and we bought a small herd. He even learned tospeak Arabic fluently. But later, they saw that [through herding] the soils have actually returned
to us, so the Arabs were less enthusiastic [ ...]. Yair went out every day with the herd to graze
around Susya, and slowly the Arabs withdrew.
Dalia’s narrative revolves around the claim that “soils have actually returned to us,” and
discursively elides violence and territorialization, as if giving the soil itself the agency overthe humans that cultivate it. Her narrative emphasizes that their main interest was not
territorial expansion, nor material profit, but rather authenticity, self-sufficiency and a
deep connection between Jewish identity and the soil. Nevertheless, what Dalia and Yair
have actually done was territorial expansion. In Yair’s memoir-cum-manifesto, practices of
“pushing out the Arabs” are entangled with folkish-nationalistic meanings of farming:
We have to train an army of Jewish warriors who will yield bread from the soil and occupy it
with their feet. The Arabs are about to finish their shift in the Land of Israel. They must be
displaced and abandon their grip on the sanctity of these lands [ ...] and return to their place.
(Har-Sinai, 2007: 43)
Accordingly, practices of working the soil ( avodat ha-adama ) embody a paradox: recog-
nizing Palestinian expertise and mimicking it, while maintaining radically antagonistic rela-
tions to the original owners of this knowledge (Braverman, 2019; Ram, 2014). This
differentiation is based on the valorization of Jewish organic farming, and explicitly blaming
the Palestinians for harming the environment. For example, Isaac, a settler farmer from Bat
Ayin (a settlement near Bethlehem) who shares a similar worldview to Dalia and Yair told
us in an interview:
We are organic farmers. They [the Palestinian farmers] use pesticides because they need to sell
huge amounts of produce, so they sell contaminated produce. It all starts with the philosophy of
Esau [referring to the biblical figure of the farmer who is ‘a man of the field,’ characterized by his
‘rough’ qualities and greediness]. Esau always wanted more and more profit. But for us [the
Jewish settler farmers], organic means ‘this is our produce, our soils and our way to get settled.’
My settlement is supposed to satisfy all my needs, not to maximize profits. We are settlers in thedeep sense of the word.
Organic territory: Violence and expansion
The notion of territory embeds the processes of place-making in a political system of active
bordering (Elden, 2010). Territory, as Mark Neocleous explains (Neocleous, 2003: 102), is
etymologically derived “from terra (of earth, and thus a domain) [ ...] but it also has linksGrosglik et al. 913
with terrere , meaning to frighten [ ...]. Territory is a land occupied and maintained through
terror. The secret of territoriality is thus violence.” In the context of Israel/Palestine, while
the settler project of “working the soil” operates within the framework of religious-utopian
nationalism and a folkish-romantic discourse of redemption, colonial territoriality hinges on
a variegated repertoire of strategies—ranging from violent land grab to a discourse of mass
production.
Arguably, one of the most prominent figures in that process would be Avri Ran of Givo’t
Olam. Similar to Dalia and Yair Har-Sinai, Avri was not “born” into radical religious
nationalism. He grew up in a secular and socialist kibbutz, converted to a religious wayof life, and moved to the settlement of Itamar—in the north part of the West Bank, between
Ramallah and Nablus. Soon after, he decided to take over one of the high hills, east of the
settlement of Itamar, and set up a new unauthorized outpost, “Givo’t Olam,” translatedliterally as the Eternal Hills.
Avri’s project departs from Har-Sinai’s vision of small-scale autarchic agriculture by
launching a business model of organic farming which is fully integrated in the colonialand capitalist economy. In the territorial modality, as represented by Avri, soil loses its
tangible and intangible qualities—as stressed in organic philosophy—and becomes subju-
gated to the logics of expansion, both spatial and economic. Avri’s farming is aimed atbordering, ordering, and othering (Van Houtum and Van Naerssen, 2002) by creating bor-
dered facts on the ground to mark the Jewish-settler territory and violently claim his right to
conquer and exclude.
Givo’t Olam is located in a relatively rainy region (with an annual average of around
600 mm), characterized by terra rosa : a well-drained reddish Mediterranean soil, that is
typical to karstic regions. Historically, most of the lands in this fertile region have beencultivated by Palestinian villagers (Doumani, 1995). Since soil thickness ranges from a few
centimeters on the rocky hilltops to a few meters in the stream basins, agriculture is tradi-
tionally limited to the lower slopes, while the hilltops serve mainly for grazing. After theoccupation of this area by the state of Israel in 1967, many lots around the hilltops were
declared “state lands,” paving the way to their grab by Jewish settlers.
From its inception, Givo’t Olam sought to become an organic farming power center. The
total area currently occupied by Avri is spread over 900 dunams, most of which was pri-
vately owned Palestinian area until Avri dispossessed it. These lands were rapidly converted
into a farm of 70,000 free-range, organically raised, chickens. The feed for these chickens (amixture of organic clover and oats processed in a mill Avri built) is grown organically in the
450 dunams of land around the outpost. Nowadays, Avri is by far the major producer of
organic eggs in Israel/Palestine. In addition to the organic egg business, he built a goat pen,raises thousands of goats, and produces a variety of organic dairy products. Currently, the
vast area that Givo’t Olam covers includes animal pens, olive groves, fields of organic
vegetables, a flour mill, a vineyard, offices for marketing, and a synagogue.
Avri refers to himself as a “self-made man,” insisting that he built his spacious organic
farm with his bare hands, with no support from governmental or regional authorities.
Despite this rhetoric, his organic enterprise was heavily subsidized by various state appa-ratuses. As part of a strategic plan carried out by Itamar settlers in the last two decades,
Avri’s actions endeavored to create territorial continuity between Itamar settlement and
Gitit settlement in the Jordan Valley, nearly 20 kilometers away. To this end, Itamar settlershave taken over more than 13,000 dunams of Palestinian lands adjacent the towns Akraba
and Beit Furik and Yanun village. The state has actively supported the project of expansion
by providing infrastructure such as roads, electricity, military protection and overlookingthe settlers’ violent attacks on Palestinians and recurrent legal violations (Handel, 2009;914 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
Kotef, 2020). Moreover, Avri receives governmental veterinary supervision and a
government-guaranteed price for eggs determined by the Ministry of Agriculture andRural Development. Finally, he receives organic certification services from Agrior—oneof the leading organic certification and inspection agencies authorized to operate in Israelaccording to the Law for the Regulation of Organic Produce in Israel (Grosglik, 2021).
When we visited Givo’t Olam and interviewed Avri, we realized that for him, organic
farming serves as an apparatus to distinguish between the Jewish legitimate dwellers of theplace and the illegitimate invaders—the Palestinians, to whom he often refers as “an invasivespecies.” The former, according to him, are traditionally gifted farmers, blessed by some sortof inherent efficacy. As he puts it:
Our Sages [ Hazal] speak about farmers who can take a lump of soil and know intuitively what
should grow in it [ ...]. And back then – it was organic farming, obviously! It was organic
farming that could carry the entire world! [ ...] We are the best farmers in the world, and the
most efficient in the world, [ ...] because of the ‘Jewish genius’.
For Avri, organic farming is not only an expression of inherited knowledge, but also of a
superior power of will attributed to Jewish farmers. His reasoning is based on bothpractical-instrumental considerations and environmental racism. Spatial development, envi-ronmental care, the creation of healthy agricultural ecosystems and productive ways offarming—all serve to compartmentalize Jews and non-Jews:
We live alongside the Arabs, so it’s very easy to see the difference: I always want more. I’m
Jewish! It’s a matter of genes [ ...], I would never agree that my yields will amount only to a
hundred kilo of wheat per acre. No way, that’s not enough for me! The gentile farmer— not onlythe Arab farmer, any non-Jewish gentile farmer—will ‘throw’ the seeds on to the ground and, asfar as he is concerned, ‘whatever will be, will be.’ He’s ok with it. But not me! We, as Jews, thinkdifferently and cannot accept that.
Contrary to the philosophical foundations of the organic idea that emphasize a discourse
of small-scale non-conventional farming and the cultivation of healthy soil, Avri emphasizes
mass production of organic foods and operates according to quantity and quality-drivenagricultural methods.
Over the years, hundreds of young settlers gathered around Avri, followed his path and
engaged in the hard labor of organic farming on remote hills. Sociologist Shlomo Fischernotes that
the outposts and the hilltop settlements [ ...] are spread horizontally over distances so that each
farmhouse merges with the rocks, soil and olive trees in its immediate vicinity [ ...]. Thus, they
interweave the themes of ecology and unmediated contact with nature, the earth, its elementsand violence (Fischer, 2011: 302; see also Tzfadia, 2017).
Indeed, violence is part and parcel of the organic enterprise Avri spearheaded along these
colonial frontiers. For the nearby Palestinian village of Yanun, Giv’ot Olam spelled disaster
(Feige, 2009: 236–237). Avri himself was convicted in court of assault four times, including
one case of aggravated assault. Describing Givo’t Olam’s land-grabbing, intimidation,harassment, and physical violence, political scientist Hagar Kotef specifies that Avri’s ded-ication to organic farming is consistent with his worldview. For him, brutality, aggression,Grosglik et al. 915
and territorial expansion are synonymous with being in nature, practicing agriculture
(Kotef, 2020).
Avri’s combination of working the terra while applying terror (Elden, 2009; Neocleous,
2003) points to the extent of his territorialization life-project. We should thus understand hisphilosophy of environmental racism as inseparable from his permanent quest for agricul-
tural quality and quantity (for the coproduction of colonialism and capitalism, see Ince,
2018). His attitude might seem at times instrumental and pragmatic, referring to produc-tivity, marketing, and health. However, his practices are fed by an urge for ongoing terri-torial expansion. In contrast to Har-Sinai who pushed aside his neighbors—the Palestinian
shepherds—while performing complex colonial mimicry and “going native” (Konopny-
Decleve, 2018), Avri does not see the Palestinians as a point of reference, but rathermerely territorial rivals. “I believe that this place is mine [ ...]. I don’t hate Arabs.
Absolutely not. I am indifferent to them. For me, they are merely dust” (Avri Ran, cited
in Kotes-Bar, 2005).
Organic land: The colonial quality turn
The third spatial modality we identified among organic farmer settlers reconfigures agricul-tural space as land, namely as a resource for producing high value produce targeting mostlyurban upper middle class consumers. Many of the Jewish settlers we met in the West Bank
are concerned not as much with ideologies—whether it is an organic ideology, a national-
political ideology, or religious ideology—but rather with market-driven strategies andprofit-making in a global neoliberal market.
15Clearly, all of the organic farmers we encoun-
tered operate within the economic field, yet the weight they attribute to each of the modal-
ities creates different balances in their actions. Thus, while Dalia Har-Sinai emphasizedself-sufficiency and Avri Ran oriented his actions towards territorial expansion, the follow-ing farmers seem to be more concerned with questions of quality and profit.
“Do you want to talk about organic agriculture or about ‘the territories’ ( ha-shtahim,
namely, ‘the occupied territories’)?”—Yoram, an organic poultry farmer from Shilo (north
of Ramallah) provoked us during our tour of his farm. “Organic [agriculture] has nothing to
do with [the politics of] the Territories. There is no ideology behind my decision to do that.This is simply what I do. Some produce donuts, and I produce organic eggs, as simple asthat.” Yoram, and many other settler farmers like him, reproduce a depoliticized discourse
of “quality,” a narrative that targets urban and secular clientele: “Our consumers have all
kinds of requirements,” says Yoram, “some of them are Leftists who prefer quality eggsfrom free range chickens, just like my chickens.”
Other food producers operating in this area confirm Yoram’s reading of the consumer
trends. For example, in our visit to Achia organic olive oil farm in Shilo, David, the mar-keting manager of the farm, told us: “There is a growing demand for healthy, high-quality
products in general. Consumption of olive oil is on the rise, including organic olive oil. We
had a certain piece of land that we converted to organic.”
In the case of Achia, the transition to organic olive oil production seems to be motivated
by the desire to strengthen their brand and by the attempt to cultivate a “niche” productwithin their marketing plan. In addition to the secular liberal market in metropolitan centers
in Israel, the framing of their operations in neutral terms of quality enables them to target
the global market. David, for example, boasted that Achia’s olive oil is also exported toChina. We asked him whether Chinese customers are interested in the Biblical story, inwhich Shilo features as the city of the Tabernacle, the Ark and the Prophet Samuel. His
reply was unequivocal:916 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
No, not at all! Quality, quality, quality! That’s what interests them. Once, I exported oil to
China without labeling it as ‘Israeli olive oil.’ They stopped the shipment at the port and sent itback. This Israeli brand signifies quality and without this label – the Chinese consumer willsimply not buy it.
The growing emphasis on global standards of quality among organic farmers in the West
Bank is compatible with broader processes that can be termed normalization by commod-
ification (Handel et al., 2015). The booming scene of agritourism and the economy ofsingularities (Karpik, 2010) divert attention from the colonial circumstances within whichfood is produced, and highlight instead its culinary and economic value. This approach waswell illustrated in Tekoa—a Jewish settlement built on lands belonging to the Palestinianvillage of Teqoa.
The settlement is located on the semi-arid outskirts of the Judean Desert. With thin and
rocky loess soil and a scarcity of water sources, Palestinian agriculture in the region is basedon barley, wheat, and olives as well as on goat and sheep grazing. Thus, it might come as asurprise to discover that despite these harsh conditions the settlement of Tekoa is a hub ofconventional and organic farming, where one can find exotic herbs, mushrooms, and North-European berries. All this is accomplished by a nearly complete detachment from the actualsoil and local climate in Tekoa, replacing both the socio-spatial philosophy of soiland
territory for the technology of land.
The colonial quality turn is well represented by Matanyah Freund—an organic farmer in
his 30s and the son of Gilad Freund, one of the first organic farmers in the West Bank.Matanyah produces both organic and conventional crops, including cultivars which areforeign to the region: raspberries, blackberries, and asparagus grown in climate controlledpots and greenhouses. Guiding us around his farm, he talked about efficient farming andabout the high-tech features of his work. Describing his cutting-edge technological green-house that he operates by remote control from his smartphone, he asserted with great pride:
It’s the Rolls Royce of agriculture [ ...] We have greenhouses with full climate control. When
humidity decreases the greenhouse will automatically launch a system that will increase the levelof humidity. If the crops get too cold, it will turn on the heating. Everything is automatic here.
In contradistinction to the romantic farmers who seek to “work the soil” with simplicity
and minimal intervention, the Freund farm endorses technology in the service of organicdistinction: “Organic farmers should use all possible science and technological knowledge.They should be more advanced than the conventional farmer” (Gilad Freund, quoted inHeiman, 2010).
Differentiating himself from farmers like Avri Ran who seek to maximize territorial
control, Freund openly prioritizes efficiency over territorial expansion. Recently, he reduced
his farmland from 17.5 dunams to 3.5 dunams of high-technology greenhouses. Tellingly,Matanyah’s spatial approach—which is associated with the search for the most efficientland use (rather than territory or soil) in terms of agricultural output—is congruent with hisuse of hydroponic soilless culture ( menutakey karka ).
Another land-related practice is related to Freund’s use of Red California Wiggler earth-
worms. These earthworms, which have been nicknamed “a proletariat of diggers” due to theirimportant contribution to land enrichment, are used for vermicomposting of both domesticand industrial waste (Meulemans, 2015). Earthworms are now used to produce soil (and,consequently, fertile land) in desert areas, urban rubbles and recently also in NASA’s experi-ments of human settlement on Mars (Bertoni, 2020). Their ability to create fertile soils literallyGrosglik et al. 917
everywhere suggests that Tekoa’s actual physical and cultural–political geographies are of
little significance to organic farmers operating according to the modality of land.
Agriculture always operates on the tension between nature and culture. While Dalia and
Yair Har-Sinai sanctified the given conditions of nature, and thus used dryland farming andtraditional practices of “working the soil” with minimal intervention, Matanyah, from the
other side of the spectrum, produces his own soil material using exogenous non-human
actants (Latour, 2005) and advanced technology. Thus, just like his hydroponic crops, hispolitical discourse seems as “soilless” as his distance from the discourse of the sanctity ofsoil. Here, worms and high-tech highlight the dialectic relations between place-making and
dis-place-ment. The political attachment to space is thus made not on a presumed natural
basis of an imagined autochthony, but rather on an apolitical normalization that concealsthe traces of violence and appropriation.
Matanyah and other organic farmers of the second generation of Jewish settlers in the West
Bank whom we met express the logic of progress and technologically based organic farming
(also known as “conventionalized organic” Guthman, 2014). At the same time, they easily
dismiss the political implications of these practices in that specific territory. “I’m fed up withthe Jewish-Palestinian conflict,” Matanyah concludes. Similarly, Gil, a certified agronomist,and manager of Tekoa Farms, replied to our query about the divergence between the founders
and the second-generation organic farmers, to which he belongs: “We care for this place. We
always think ‘what would it be in 100 years?’ But politics is desperation, so we are just dealingwith much more basic things required for production – land, water and air.”
The neoliberal-pragmatic discourse endorsed by Matanyah, Gil, Yoram, and David from
Achia farm reflects the main spatial perception of these farmers: the spatial modality ofland. As such, they place notions such as quality and profitability at the center of their
discourse and de-politicize their practices by removing them from geography in order to
introduce their produce to the culinary fields in Israel and beyond. Importantly, the dis-course of land—rather than soil and territory—marks the peak of the normalization process
of the settlement project, which banalizes the agents of the occupation and renders them into
entrepreneurial actors in an ostensibly free market.
Conclusions
Using the lens of organic farming in the West Bank, we trace the political spatialization ofthe contemporary colonial settler movement. As a category of practice, organic farmingdraws on three modalities of political-cultural spatialization: the intimate connection to the
place (soil), political entitlement (territory), and property management (land). While we
distinguish analytically between these modalities, they often intersect in practice. Thesespatial modalities form different repertoires which allow settlers to activate the appropriatediscourse and logic of action in multiple contexts. Thus, Har-Sinai Farm and the martyrdom
legacy of the late Yair Har-Sinai feature within a narrative of redemption; the narrative of
Avri Ran positions the organic project between territorial expansion and practical-commer-cial rationality; and Matanyah Freund’s economic enterprise invokes the pragmatic and
instrumental logic of the land.
Amidst the challenging conditions of the semi-arid desert-frontier and realities of the
colonial settlement project, a set of oppositional farming philosophies and practices are
cultivated by Jewish settler organic farmers. Local agricultural practices—such as drylandfarming—are “revived,” on the one hand, and high-technology climate-controlled green-house and soilless agriculture are thriving, on the other hand. While traditionalized crops
index the biblical-symbolic references of “grain, wine, oil and cattle” (Chronicles 2, 32: 28)918 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
in Susya, other crops, such as North-European berries cultivated in Tekoa, are destined for
global markets and secular organic food consumers.
In addition to the main crop cultivated by each one of these actors, the livestock in each
modality can be seen as emblems of the different agricultural philosophies and eco-theological
principles employed by them (cf. Gutkowski, 2020). In this regard, goats symbolize the con-
nection to the soil and holding onto the land; free range chicken, whose cultivation requires anarea seven times larger than a conventional chicken coop accommodate the logic of territorial
expansion (Kotef, 2020); and earthworms, which operate as “soil engineers” in any given land,
embody the placeless detachment from the specificities of local soil.
The three spatial modalities discussed above also reveal the variegated colonial forma-
tions linking the Jewish settlers and the Palestinian inhabitants. For Dalia Har-Sinai, the
insistence on dryland farming and goat herding is concomitant with the principle of localauthenticity and an ambivalent colonial imitation of the local Palestinian farmers. Avri
Ran’s project, however, instantiates colonial violent territorialization. The aggressive and
confrontational position he takes vis-a-vis the Palestinians reflects his interpretation of ter-ritory as defensible space and his view of “the Arabs” as mere “dust.” Finally, Matanyah
Freund and Yoram, who are primarily interested in economic success and quality produc-
tion, see no problem with employing Palestinian workers in their organic farms (and in apeculiar manner, describe their relationship with their Palestinian neighbors and workers as
a form of “co-existence”).
It should be noted that each of the actors described above is not a pure ideal-type of
place-making in a colonial context, but rather an actor who integrates and stresses different
aspects of the triad “soil-land-territory.” Altogether, they display the complexity of diverse
positionalities, which make up the Jewish settler organic (sub)field in the West Bank.Furthermore, by means of demonstrating economic resilience in a highly competitive
global market, the combined agricultural and spatial activities of these settler organic farm-
ers invigorate the colonial settlement project at large in Palestine. As such, organic foodgrown in these places can be seen as an ethno-quality commodity that generates comple-
mentary layers of value: it strengthens the alleged timeless connection between “blood and
soil”; it produces economic profit via the branding of organic quality; and it raises the valueof national ownership by promoting agricultural development and progress.
Sociologist Michael Feige argued that “the greatest challenge ever faced by the [Jewish]
settlements [ ...] is the challenge of normalization” (Feige, 2002: 119). In the same vein,
Veracini (2015) recognized the settler-colonizer’s drive for self-indigenizing as a desire for
unproblematic normality. The analysis of the discourses and practices of Jewish settler organic
farmers reveals the multiple workings of self-indigeneity and place-making—the imaginationof a harmonious relationship between humans and places, whether this relationship is under-
stood as cultivating the soil, claiming territorial ownership, or benefiting from the fruit of the
land. All of these approaches combined enable the settlers-turned-natives to imagine them-selves as legitimate cultivators of their ancestral lands and thus inseparable from “the soil of
which they are born” (Elden, 2013: 51). Thus, while soil comes to represent the imagined
timeless connection between people and place, territory provides the political framework ofsovereignty, and land seals ultimate normalization by concealing politics altogether.
The slippery term “organic”—that connotes both a return to pre-modern life-style
(Caldwell, 2011) as well as a strict set of regulated codes (Guthman, 2014)—is revealed asan effective instrument of place-making. It is used as a socio-political apparatus (for self-
indigenization, territorial expansion, and capital accumulation); it serves as a platform to
convey different cultural meanings (religiosity, environmentalism, and economic efficacy);and, respectively, it serves as the basis of the constitution of different spatial modalities.Grosglik et al. 919
Altogether, the representation of a colonized region as a place of high-end products banal-
izes the occupation, normalizes its inherent violence, and strengths the settlers’ claim forpolitical privilege (Allegra et al., 2017; Handel et al., 2015; Tzfadia, 2017). The relationalframing of the organic agricultural space exposes the connections between soil types, stateland regulations, farming practices, eco-theological narratives, and economic interests andlays bare the relations between colonizers and colonized subjects in the West Bank. Echoing
Wolfe’s argument that agriculture is “a potent symbol of settler-colonial identity” (Wolfe,
2006: 396), the case of Jewish organic farming in the West Bank demonstrates how differentagro-spatial constructions—such as soil, territory and land—work concertedly as a powerfulregime of placement and displacement.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Hagar Kotef, Irus Braverman, Erez Tzfadia, Charlotte Glennie,Matan Kaminer and Gadi Algazi for commenting on preliminary drafts of this article. Theywould also like to thank Dror Etkes, Laura J. Miller, Nir Avieli, Andr /C19e Levy, Azri Amram,
Dafna Hirsch, Aeyal Gross, Uri Ram, Jad Kadan, Vered Shimshi, Orphee Senouf Pilpoul and
Ido Fuchs for their useful suggestions. Special thanks are due to Yehudit Shoham. The authors
also thank the three anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and helpful suggestions.The research for this paper was made possible thanks to generous funding by Gerda HenkelFoundation (“Cities Lost and Found: Ruins and Ruination in Israel/Palestine”).
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/
or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
ORCID iD
Rafi Grosglik https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3510-1656
Notes
1. This article draws on a qualitative methodology which includes semi-structured interviews and
published sources from public media. While most of our interlocutors are public spokesmen of
organic agriculture, we also acquired their informed consent. All interviews were recorded, tran-
scribed and thematically analyzed (Strauss and Corbin, 1997). Pseudonyms were used for all
individuals mentioned in the article who are not public figures.
2. On the variety of the different Jewish settler groups in the West Bank, see Allegra et al. (2017).3. We use the terms non-conventional and alternative agriculture to denote food production systems
and networks that oppose intensive farming and share common values such as sustainable agri-
culture, fair trade, integrated agriculture, agroforestry, permanent agriculture, and particularly
organic agriculture (Goodman et al., 2012; Magdelaine et al., 2019).
4. We are aware that different languages ascribe varied meanings to the notions of land, soil, and
territory. We use them here as analytical categories rather than emic discursive locutions.
5. Organic farming is a relatively recent development in a long history of agriculture in the Zionist
project. From its inception in the late 19th century, the narrative of redemption of the land has
been coupled by the effort to physically seize Palestinian lands (Neumann, 2011; Novick, 2014).920 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
The specific case of organic farming in the West Bank stems from these processes, with two
additional frames of justification: the organic philosophy of soil and land (Balfour, 1943;Howard, 1947) and the theological–political project of the Jewish settlements.
6. While colonial agriculture has typically represented “natives as unsettled, nomadic, rootless”
(Wolfe, 2006), in recent years, several studies have described the use of farming for reclaiming
indigenous identity in settler colonial settings. Studies focus on agro-activism as a means ofresilience used by the colonized subject, and the ways in which local identity frames the resis-tance against colonial attempts to erase indige nous iden tity (Grey and Patel, 2015; Kepkiewicz
and Dale, 2019). For an analysis of Palestinian farming initiatives, see Meneley (2020) andJoronen (2019).
7. Recent scholarship has seen a surge of major publications on settler subjectivities and relations to
land. See, for example, Rifkin (2013) and de Leeuw and Hunt (2018).
8. On the “blood and soil” ethos of Zionism, originating from German romanticism, see Bloom
(2011).
9. Another example of framing Palestinian agriculture as “ancient” and “wild” can be seen in the
case of cultivating wheat in Palestine. As Tesdell (2017:43) shows, working through settler materialand discursive networks “served to remake Palestine as a biophysical region in need of improve-
ment and colonization.”
10. The Israeli land and property regime in the Occupied Territories is an ad-hoc amalgam of
Ottoman, British and military regulations. According to Israel, since the Ottoman Code was inforce at the time Israel occupied the West Bank, its authorities were required to respect it underinternational law. Israel admits, however, that the fact that “the Ottoman land laws constitute thebroad foundation of the land laws in Judea and Samaria” creates “an anachronistic situation that
is almost without precedent” (Btselem, 2012: 6).
11. See https://peacenow.org.il/en/state-land-allocation-west-bank-israelis.12. See www.harsinai.co.il/index.php?module=BizMiniste&id=421&pname=about [in Hebrew].13. For a chronicle of the ongoing dispossession in Palestinian Susya, see https://www.btselem.org/
south_hebron_hills/201507_facts_on_susiya
14. For more on dryland farming (ba’al in Arabic), see Tesdell (2015).15. For more about neoliberal Zionism, see Getzoff (2020).
References
Allegra M, Handel A and Maggor E (eds) (2017) Normalizing Occupation: The Politics of Everyday
Life in the West Bank Settlements . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Amara A (2013) The Negev land question: Between denial and recognition. Journal of Palestine
Studies 42(4): 27–47.
Anthias P (2019) Rethinking territory and property in indigenous land claims. Geoforum 119: 268–278.
Appadurai A (1996) Sovereignty without territoriality: Notes for a postnational geography. In: Yager
P (ed.) The Geography of Identity . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, pp. 40–58.
Balfour EB (1943) The Living Soil . London: Faber and Faber.
Barton GA (2018) The Global History of Organic Farming . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bertoni F (2020) Soiling Mars: ‘To boldly grow where no plant has grown before’? In: Salazar JF,
Granjou C, Kearnes MB, et al. (eds) Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social Theory .
London: Bloomsbury, pp. 107–122.
Blomley N (2003) Law, property, and the geography of violence: The frontier, the survey, and the grid.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93(1): 121–141.
Bloom E (2011) Arthur Ruppin and the Production of Pre-Israeli Culture . Boston: Brill.
Braverman I (2019) Nof Kdumim: Remaking the ancient landscape in East Jerusalem’s national parks.
Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 4(1): 109–134.
Btselem (2012) Under the Guise of Legality: Israel’s Declarations of State Land in the West Bank .
Available at: www.btselem.org/publications/summaries/201203_under_the_guise_of_legality
(accessed 9 September 2020).Grosglik et al. 921
Caldwell M (2011) Dacha Idylls: Living Organically in Russia’s Countryside . Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Davis D (2007) Resurrecting the Granary of Rome: environmental History and French Colonial
Expansion in North Africa . Athens: Ohio University Press.
De Leeuw S and Hunt S (2018) Unsettling decolonizing geographies. Geography Compass 12(7):
e12376.
Doumani B (1995) Rediscovering Palestine: Merchants and Peasants in Jabal Nablus, 1700–1900 .
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Elden S (2009) Terror and Territory: The Spatial Extent of Sovereignty . Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Elden S (2010) Land, terrain, territory. Progress in Human Geography 34(6): 799–817.
Elden S (2013) The Birth of Territory . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Etkes D (2013) Israeli Settler Agriculture as a Means of Land Takeover in the West Bank . Jerusalem:
Kerem Navot Report [in Hebrew].
Feige M (2002) Being more normal than everyone: Identity issues in Gush Emunim Settlement.
Alpayim 24: 119–149.
Feige M (2009) Settling in the Hearts: Jewish Fundamentalism in the Occupied Territories . Detroit:
Wayne State University Press.
Fischer S (2011) Radical religious Zionism from the collective to the Individual. In: Huss B (ed.)
Kabbalah and Contemporary Spiritual Revival . Be’er Sheva: Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
pp. 285–309.
Galvin S (2011) Nature’s market?: A review of organic certification. Environment and Society 2(1):
48–67.
Getzoff JF (2020) Start-up nationalism: The rationalities of neoliberal Zionism. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 38(5): 811–828.
Goodman D, DuPuis M and Goodman MK (2012) Alternative Food Networks: Knowledge ,Practice,
and Politics. New York: Routledge.
Grey S and Patel R (2015) Food sovereignty as decolonization: Some contributions from Indigenous
movements to food system and development politics. Agriculture and Human Values 32(3): 431–444.
Grosglik R (2021) Globalizing Organic: Nationalism, Neoliberalism, and Alternative Food in Israel .
Albany: SUNY Press.
Guthman J (2014) Agrarian Dreams: The Paradox of Organic Farming in California . Oakland:
University of California Press.
Gutkowski N (2020) Bodies that count: Administering multispecies in Palestine/Israel’s borderlands.
Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space 4(1): 135–157.
Handel A (2009) Where, where to, and when in the occupied territories: An introduction to geography
of disaster. In: Ophir A, Givoni M and Hanafi S (eds) The Power of Inclusive Exclusion: Anatomy of
Israeli Rule in the Occupied Palestinian Territories . New York: Zone Books, pp. 179–222.
Handel A, Rand G and Allegra M (2015) Wine-washing: Colonization, normalization, and the geo-
politics of terroir in the West Bank’s settlements. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space
47(6): 1351–1367.
Har-Sinai Y (2007) Kt’avim . Israel: Dalia Har-Sinai (private publication) [in Hebrew].
Heiman Y (2010) Judea and Samaria: An organic superpower. NRG , February 2 [in Hebrew].
Available at: www.makorrishon.co.il/nrg/online/54/ART2/048/094.html (accessed 31 August2020).
Howard A (1947) The Soil and Health: A Study of Organic Agriculture . New York: Devin-Adair.
IFOAM (2008) Definition of Organic Agriculture . Available at: www.ifoam.bio/en/organic-landmarks/
definition-organic-agriculture (accessed 15 April 2021).
Ince OU (2018) Colonial Capitalism and the Dilemmas of Liberalism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnston J, Biro A and MacKendrick N (2009) Lost in the supermarket: The corporate-organic
foodscape and the struggle for food democracy. Antipode 41(3): 509–532.
Joronen M (2019) Negotiating colonial violence: Spaces of precarisation in Palestine.
Antipode 51(3):
838–857.922 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
Karpik L (2010) Valuing the Unique: The Economics of Singularities . Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Kedar A, Amara A and Yiftachel O (2018) Emptied Lands: A Legal Geography of Bedouin Rights in the
Negev . Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Kepkiewicz L and Dale B (2019) Keeping ‘our’ land: Property, agriculture and tensions between
Indigenous and settler visions of food sovereignty in Canada. The Journal of Peasant Studies
46(5): 983–1002.
Kimmerling B (ed.) (1989) The Israeli State and Society: Boundaries and Frontiers . Albany: SUNY
Press, pp. 265–284.
Konopny-Decleve L (2018) Colonial mimicry. Mafte’akh 13: 25–42 [in Hebrew].
Kotef H (2020) Colonizing Self: Or, Home and Homelessness in Israel/Palestine . Durham: Duke
University Press.
Kotes-Bar C (2005) Are the Arabs afraid of me? They adore me!. NRG, September 16 [in Hebrew].
Available at: www.makorrishon.co.il/nrg/online/1/ART/983/927.html (accessed 31 August 2020).
Latour B (1986) Visualization and cognition. Knowledge and Society 6(6): 1–40.
Latour B (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lefebvre H (1991) The Production of Space . Blackwell: Oxford.
Magdelaine B, Ribard C and Sarthou J (2019) Alternative agriculture: Definition. Dictionary of
Agroecology . Available at: https://dicoagroecologie.fr/en/encyclopedia/alternative-agriculture/
(accessed 14 April 2021).
Meneley A (2020) Hope in the ruins: Seeds, plants, and possibilities of regeneration. Environment and
Planning E: Nature and Space 4(1): 158–172.
Meulemans G (2015) A proletariat of diggers. Worms as engineers in practices of soil construction.
Paper presented at ASA 15: Symbiotic anthropologies: Theoretical commensalities and methodolog-
ical mutualisms , Exeter, UK.
Monterescu D (2013) Spatial relationality and the fallacies of methodological nationalism: Theorizing
urban space and binational sociality in Jewish-Arab “mixed towns.” In: D /C19epelteau F and Powell C
(eds) Applying Relational Sociology . New York: Palgrave, pp. 25–50.
Monterescu D and Handel A (2020) Terroir and territory on the colonial frontier: Making new-old
world wine in the holy land. Comparative Studies in Society and History 62(2): 222–261.
Neocleous M (2003) Off the map: On violence and cartography. European Journal of Social Theory
6(4): 409–425.
Neumann B (2011) Land and Desire in Early Zionism . Waltham: Brandeis University Press.
Novick T (2014) Milk & honey: Technologies of plenty in the making of a Holy Land, 1880–1960 . PhD
Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care.
Social Studies of Science 45(5): 691–716.
Ram M (2014) White but not quite: Normalizing colonial conquests through spatial mimicry. Antipode
46(3): 736–753.
Reed M (2001) Fight the future! How the contemporary campaigns of the UK organic movement have
arisen from their composting of the past. Sociologia Ruralis 41(1): 131–145.
Rifkin M (2013) Settler common sense. Settler Colonial Studies 3(3-4): 322–340.
Rotz S (2017) ‘They took our beads, it was a fair trade, get over it’: Settler colonial logics, racial
hierarchies and material dominance in Canadian agriculture. Geoforum 82: 158–169.
Salazar JF, Granjou C, Kearnes MB, et al. (2020) Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social
Theory . London: Bloomsbury.
Sayre L (2011) The politics of organic farming: Populists, evangelicals, and the agriculture of the
middle. Gastronomica 11(2): 38–47.
Shafir G (1996) Land, Labor and the Origins of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict, 1882–1914 . Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Strauss, AL and Corbin, JM (eds) (1997) Grounded Theory in Practice . Thousand Oaks: Sage.Grosglik et al. 923
Tesdell O (2015) Territoriality and the technics of drylands science in Palestine and North America.
International Journal of Middle East Studies 47(3): 570–573.
Tesdell O (2017) Wild wheat to productive drylands: Global scientific practice and the agroecological
remaking of Palestine. Geoforum 78: 43–51.
Tzfadia E (2017) “Informal outposts in the West Bank.” In Allegra M, Handel A and Maggor E (eds)
Normalizing Occupation: The Politics of Everyday Life in the West Bank Settlements . Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Van Houtum H and Van Naerssen T (2002) Bordering, ordering and othering. Tijdschrift Voor
Economische en Sociale Geografie 93(2): 125–136.
Veracini L (2013) The other shift: Settler colonialism, Israel, and the occupation. Journal of Palestine
Studies 42(2): 26–42.
Veracini L (2015) What can Settler colonial studies offer to an interpretation of the conflict in Israel-
Palestine? Settler Colonial Studies 5(3): 268–271.
Warner KD (2007) The quality of sustainability: Agroecological partnerships and the geographic
branding of California winegrapes. Journal of Rural Studies 23(2): 142–155.
Weizman E and Sheikh F (2015) The Conflict Shoreline: Colonization as Climate Change in the Negev
Desert .G€ottingen: Steidl.
Wolfe P (2006) Settler colonialism and the elimination of the native. Journal of Genocide Research 8(4):
387–409.
Yiftachel O (2002) Territory as the kernel of the nation: Space, time and nationalism in Israel/
Palestine. Geopolitics 7(2): 215–248.
Yiftachel O (2016) The Aleph—Jerusalem as critical learning. City 20(3): 483–494.
Rafi Grosglik is a lecturer at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel. His areas of
interest include anthropology and sociology of food and environmental sociology. Hisarticles have been published in Journal of Consumer Culture ,Food, Culture & Society , and
European Journal of Cultural Studies among others. He is a co-editor of a special issue in
Food, Culture & Society and a special issue on environment and society in Israeli Sociology .
He is the author of Organic Food in Israel (Resling Press, 2017, in Hebrew) and of
Globalizing Organic (2021, SUNY Press). He is an incoming Assistant Professor at the
Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev.
Ariel Handel is director of the Lexicon for Political Theory project, and academic co-
director of Minerva Humanities Center at Tel Aviv University. His research focuses onhuman mobilities in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the politics of housing and urbanfrontiers, gastropolitics, and the political philosophy of geography. Handel is the editor-in-chief of The Political Lexicon of the Social Protest (Hakibutz Hameuchad, 2012), and co-
editor of Normalizing Occupation: The Politics of Everyday Life in the West Bank
Settlements (Indiana University Press, 2017).
Daniel Monterescu is associate professor of anthropology at the Central European
University, Vienna. He holds a PhD from the University of Chicago and a Sommeliercertificate in Italy. His research focuses on gastronationalism and border wines in Europeand the Middle East through the concepts of terroir and territory. He is the author of Jaffa
Shared and Shattered: Contrived Coexistence in Israel/Palestine (Indiana UP, 2015). His
article “Liquid Indigeneity: Wine, Science and Colonial Politics in Israel/Palestine” waspublished by American Ethnologist (with Ariel Handel, 2019). Monterescu is the PI forthe project Cities Lost and Found: The Social Life of Ruins in Israel/Palestine, 1882 to thePresent funded by the Gerda Henkel Stiftung.924 EPD: Society and Space 39(5)
