ENVIRONMENTAL HUMANITIES IN PRACTICE
Soilkin
Relational Exercises with Soil and Stones
ALEXANDRA REGAN TOLAND
Bauhaus-Universität Weimar, Germany
Abstract Drawing on ideas from the history and philosophy of soil science, Fluxus perfor-
mance, and queer-feminist STS, this article responds to a question posed by environmentalresearcher Hugo Reinert: “What modes of passionate immersion —or love, or intimacy —
could a stone afford? ”Situated in a ﬂuid space between environmental humanities and
artistic research, the Soilkin project develops a series of relational exercises to frame three
basic propositions: (1) a non-normative, anim istic understanding of geologic subjectivity
could trouble accepted criteria for life on earth, leading to kinship with geogenic entities; (2)
soil formation (pedogenesis) could be interpreted as a performative process of learning andbecoming, rather than simply weathering and ag ing, with appreciable ontological implica-
tions; and (3) soil kinship is situated within a dynamic interplay of resistance and consent,
demanding that the terms of reciprocity between humans and soils be mutually bene ﬁcial
and appropriate to the slowed-down timescale of events in which soil-beings live and oper-
ate. The article integrates theoretical provoc ations with performative scores to expand and
sensitize soil-scienti ﬁc knowledge while, at the same time, contributing to multispecies schol-
arship on kin-making with geogenic and pedogenic others.
Keywords soils, performativity, geologic subjectivity, pedontology, Fluxus
One way to stop seeing trees and rivers and hills only
as natural resources is to class them as fellow beings, kinfolk.—Ursula K. Le Guin, Late in the Day: Poems, 2010 –2014
In the essay “About a Stone: Some Notes on Geologic Conviviality, ”Hugo Reinert poses
the question “What modes of passionate immersion —or love, or intimacy —could a
stone afford? ”1Reinert ’s provocation entertains the possibility of subjectivity —and
1. See Reinert, “About a Stone, ”96.
Environmental Humanities 15:3 (November 2023)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-10746023 © 2023 Alexandra Regan Toland
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

with it vulnerability —of geogenic entities within a larger context of “Northern resource
extraction and capitalist modernization. ”2In the following, I engage with Reinert ’s work
on“geologic conviviality ”by tracing the glacial journey of kindred stones from Sámpi
lands in Norway to a terminal moraine north of Berlin. Looking at soils and rocks
through the multifaceted lenses of relational, geomorphic, and multispecies aesthet-
ics, the Soilkin project picks up where Reinert leaves off —namely, with the above sug-
gestion by science ﬁction writer Ursula K. Le Guin that natural resources may be seen
as kin.
The article responds to Reinert ’s invitation for experimental scholarship in “rela-
tional landscape practices ”3through the employment of performative methodologies
for geo- and pedologic (soil) study.4Drawing on ideas from the history and philosophy
of soil science, performance research, and queer-feminist science and technology stud-ies (STS), I introduce a series of relational exercises and reenactments that invite re ﬂec-
tion on the individual and collective agency of more-than-mineral entities and the
boundaries of what it means to be alive. In particular, I turn to the instructional prac-
tices of the (anti)art movement Fluxus, a group of artists, designers, architects, engineers,
musicians, and theorists from the late 1960s onward known for their process-based work,
which conceptually challenged established aesthetic, political, and social paradigms.
5
Methodologically, the Soilkin exercises can be seen as a playful approach to citation be-
yond footnotes. They reinterpret speci ﬁc event scores penned by Fluxus artists George
Brecht and Yoko Ono, among others, while thinking with later forms of artistic inquiry
and referencing examples of environmental art, speculative design, and ecosexual per-
formance.6The Soilkin exercises are envisaged as embodied thought-experiments, to be
tested and developed in different ecologies with different actors, seeking kinships acrossspheres, knowledge-cultures, generations, and communities of practice. Furthermore, the
exercises trouble neoliberal expectations of the performativity of soils and agricultural
landscapes through the lens of performance art. With a critical view toward the expec-
tation of soils to perform in terms of yield and the delivery of ecosystem services and
nature-based solutions, the project asks, what other performative acts engender kinship-
oriented human-soil relations?
More than anything else, the Soilkin exercises are an invitation to take action along
more-than-human timescales: on the one hand, to expand and sensitize bodies of expert
knowledge held by soil scientists and land managers; and, on the other hand, to contrib-
ute to existing multispecies scholarship on kin-making with and through geogenic and
2. Reinert, “About a Stone, ”96.
3. Reinert, “About a Stone, ”97.
4.Ped,a si n pedogeneis (soil formation), pedology (the study of soils), and pedontology (the study of soil
subjectivity), comes from the Greek word pedon , meaning “ground ”or“earth. ”
5. See George Maciunas ’sFluxus Manifesto (1963); Friedman, Smith, and Sawchyn, Fluxus Performance
Workbook . See also an analysis of “instructional art ”in Dezeuze, “Origins of the Fluxus Score. ”
6. See references in the exercises.120 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

pedogenic entities. Situated in a ﬂuid space between environmental humanities and
artistic research, the Soilkin exercises are used as a performative framework for develop-
ing three basic propositions, which are built up like horizontal layers in the soil to form
the article ’s structure:
1. a non-normative understanding of geologic subjectivity and (post-)Anthro-
pocenic animism could trouble accepted criteria for life on earth, leading
to kinship with geogenic entities;
2. in consideration of the familial bonds between soils and their parent mate-
rials, soil formation (pedogenesis) could be interpreted as a performative
process of learning and becoming, rather than simply weathering andaging, with appreciable ontological implications; and
3. soil kinship is situated within a dynamic interplay of resistance and con-
sent, demanding that the terms of reciprocity between humans and soils
be mutually bene ﬁcial and appropriate to the slowed-down timescale of
events in which soil-beings live and operate.
7
Geologic Subjectivity —On Bringing Soilkin to Lyfe
Let’s begin with a camp ﬁre. A small bright ﬂicker in a ring of stones rests on the surface
of aﬁne aeolic sand bed about six meters deep in the middle of forested lands north of
Berlin. Settled by winds after the last ice age before vegetation took hold, the sand is
now held by a patchwork of Baltic pines and sessile oaks in the remains of a native
woodrush-beech community with remnant plantings of Douglas ﬁr and random wild-
ings of black locust and black cherry. At the end of a cool evening, on the recommen-
dation of a wildcrafter friend, I remove a hot stone from the edge of the camp ﬁre and
place it in my sleeping bag ( ﬁg. 1). This simple act marks the transformation of some-
thing perpetually cold, hard, and inaccessible into something warm, comforting, and
familiar. For a brief moment in time, this stone is a source of solace, a friend. In this
exercise, I am interested in tracing the lines of agency etched into the crystalline sur-
face of the granite cobble worn smooth by ice from another era. Its very shape and topo-graphic and geographic position stir forgotten doubts of what is now taken for granted
as (Western) natural history. Only two hundred years ago, Plutonists and Neptunists
passionately debated the nature and origins of such geologic entities. Boulders many
times larger than this now memorialize the ice-age landscape of the Biosphere Schorf-
heide Chorin as the very site where Pleistocene glaciation was “discovered. ”While one
theory favored the forces of water, the other favored the forces of ﬁre. Neptunists, most
famously championed by Abraham Gottlob Werner (1749 –1817), followed by the poet/
naturalist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749 –1832), believed that rocks formed in the
7. Cf. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil. ”Toland / Soilkin 121Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

earth ’s primordial oceans as a result of sedimentation and precipitation processes. In
contrast, Plutonists such as Anton Moro (1687 –1750) and later James Hutton (1726 –97),
the so-called father of modern geology, argued that the origin of rocks was to be foundin the planet ’sﬁery depths.
8
It was during Goethe and Hutton ’s time of geologic contemplation that brutal
forces of colonialism were at work making capital and conquest out of geologic dis-
covery. Plutonic-Vulcanic debates were inevitably tied to larger projects of imperial
nation-building and extractive practices that set the stage for the rapid unfolding of theAnthropocene and its parallel, critical iterations as Capitalocene, Plantationocene, and
Chthulucene.
9The stone in my hands thus poses as witness to both modern theorization
on glaciation processes and processes of colonial violence, dispossession, and extraction.
Following Kathryn Yusoff and Elizabeth Povinelli, the birth of geology as a ﬁeld of knowl-
edge creation is historically linked to the silencing of Indigenous knowledge creation,
while progress in modern geological engineering has contributed to the delegitimiza-
tion of Indigenous and artisanal technologies.10Povinelli argues for a political agency
Figure 1. Soilkin exercise
#1:Stone heat transfer
event (2020). Fluxus-
inspired instructions asmeme, dimensions and
media variable. In reference
to Ken Friedman, Heat
Transfer Event , 1970,
reproduced in Friedman,
Smith, and Sawchyn,Fluxus Performance
Workbook , 42.
8. Cf. Knebel, Maul, and Schmuck, Abenteuer der Vernunft (Adventures in Reason ).
9. Haraway, Staying with the Trouble .
10. Yusoff ( Billion Black Anthropocenes ) and Povinelli ( “Geontologies ”) have argued that geology is insep-
arable from the systematic racism and genocide implicit in extractive practices of mining, suggesting that under-standing settler colonialism is essential to understanding the Anthropocene.122 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

of the geologic, suggesting that stones can be understood by humans to be either crea-
tures of the desert, a space “where life was, is not now, but could be if knowledges, tech-
niques, and resources were properly managed, ”or creatures of the imagination with
animating, affecting forces.11For our purposes here, the latter is noteworthy. Largely ab-
sent in Goethe and Hutton ’s geologic worldviews and the emergence of contemporary
geo-engineering practices that followed are the affective forces of the more-than-human
world, which have been variously described as “animism. ”12Key to kinship with soil and
stones in the Anthropocene is a rekindled belief in animism, as it has been upheld by
Indigenous peoples around the planet for millennia. Citing a song by the Sámi artist Nils-
Aslak Valkeapää, Reinert retells the story of climate activists passing stones from hand to
hand as they run to take part in the COP 15 protests: “Take a stone in your hand and
close your ﬁst around it —until it starts to beat, live, speak and move. ”13This kind of
animism implies both that stones may be seen by us as lively and having livelihoods
and that we can become enlivened by stones to act urgently and politically. This stone
in my hands is not only a historical witness but also a catalyst for change.
The cobbles lining my ﬁrepit are igneous in origin, surrounded by a sea of sandy
sediment. Their sharp crystalline faces formed slowly deep underground, only later to
be softened and rounded by their glacial journey from north to south. They are known
in German as Geschiebe , literally translated into English as “that which is pushed, ”and
commonly referred to in geologic terminology as “glacial erratic. ”I pull the stone to my
body in recognition of its enlivening, animating capacities and then push it back into
the sand, “You were born of ﬁre, grew up in ice, and were pushed until your edges are
no longer edgy. Can you push us back and teach us how to soften our edges too? ”In this
simple exchange ( ﬁg. 2) the stone offers an alternative imaginary to push the Anthropo-
cene aside, just as Plutonism once pushed aside Neptunism and Indigenous storytelling
now pushes the edges of Western scienti ﬁc knowledge creation.14Starting to beat, live,
and speak, the rock cries out: “Soften your edges with offerings: rituals of legal protec-
tion and postcolonial reconciliation and reparations, of grand but also small, simple acts
that can be performed at different times by different people. ”This exercise envisions a
(post)anthropocenic animism in the cultivation of kinship with stones, or the idea that
11. Povinelli, “Geontologies. ”
12. See, e.g., Brian Massumi ’s reinterpretation (in Ontopower ) of Charles Sanders Peirce ’s semiotics to in-
clude the nonliving; Jane Bennett ’s living matter of “vital materialisms ”(“A Vitalist Stopover on the Way to a New
Materialism ”); Nils Bubandt ’s“Haunted Geologies ”; Chris Salter ’s multiscaled mechanical and computational
entanglements ( Entangled Technology ); Jens Hauser and Lucie Strecker ’s“On Microperformativity ”; Tim In-
gold ’s“Rethinking the Animate ”; Eben Kirksey ’sMultispecies Salon ; Neera M. Singh ’s“The Nonhuman Turn ”;
Donna Haraway ’s conception of composting posthumanism ( Staying with the Trouble ); Jennifer Hamilton and
Astrida Neimanis ’s“Composting Feminisms and Environmental Humanities ”; Robin Wall Kimmerer ’s beautiful
gift of Braiding Sweetgrass ; Tsing et al., Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet ; Harvey, Handbook of Contemporary
Animism ; and Deborah Bird Rose ’s engagement with Val Plumwood ’sa r t i c l e “Philosophical Animism. ”
13. See Reinert, “About a Stone, ”110.
14. See, e.g., Little Bear, “Naturalizing Indigenous Knowledge, ”especially the linking of critical thinking to
the practice of storytelling in Blackfoot (and other) Native traditions.Toland / Soilkin 123Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Figure 3. Soilkin exercise
#3:Become a stone
observing itself (2020).
Fluxus-inspired instructionsas meme, dimensions and
media variable. In reference
to Tomás Saraceno ’s
Aerocene Project ,2 0 1 5 ,
and Julius Schoppe ’s
Margrave Stone ofFürstenwalde, 1827.
Figure 2. Soilkin exercise
#2:Observe a stone (2020).
Fluxus-inspired instructions
as meme, dimensions andmedia variable. In reference
to Milan Knizak, Ceremony ,
1977: “5. breaking a stone
(toﬁnd its soul) ”;a n dY o k o
Ono, Stone Piece , 1963:
“Take the sound of the
stone aging, ”both
reproduced in Friedman,
Smith, and Sawchyn,Fluxus Performance
Workbook , 67 and 86,
respectively.124 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

glacial erratic may eventually be replaced with a kind of glacial kinship, even now as the
last vast bodies of glacial ice mourn the passing of the Holocene with melting spectacle.
Stone, are you alive?
Reinert retells the stories of particular stones with cultural heritage status who,
through their relationship with human neighbors, become alive: “In their time, sieidi
stones were recognized as powerful entities —capable not just of transacting with hu-
mans but of forming bonds and entering relations. ”15Compare these capacities with
the biological capacities for life. NASA sci entists Stuart Bartlett and Michael L. Wong
coined the term lyfeto describe a more generative concept of what life is and what it
could be, arguing that “standard de ﬁnitions of life are restri ctive and may blind future
astrobiological research from life that is hiding in plain sight. ”16Liberated from the
carbon-based “organometallic molecular toolbox ”of life on earth as we know it, “lyfe
is deﬁned as any system that ful ﬁlls all four processes of the living state, namely: dis-
sipation, autocatalysis, homeostasis, and learning. ”17With a stretch of the mind, my
new felsic-faced friend exhibits these and other traits, suggesting that astrobiological
liveliness could begin right here on earth, in this end moraine. I feel the dissipation of
heat from the ﬁre, to the stone, to my own body, to a ﬁnal state of coolness in the morn-
ing. Given its once Neptunistic appearance on these pine-covered dunes in Brandenburg,the stone poses as an autocatalyst for nothing less than the advent of modern earth sci-
ence. Its banded crystalline body displays a kind of primitive homeostasis ,e c h o i n g
Alexander Graham Cairns-Smith ’s theory of clay genes in which clay crystals are said to
have acted as prototypical chemical scaffolding capable of instructing the earliest forms
of carbon-based molecules that led to (biological) life on earth.
18Finally the stone ’s abil-
ity to learn blends ﬁercely with its ability to remember, from its recollections of glacial
unbecoming to its birth as crystallized magma. Like its silicate kin in northern Fenno-
scandia and distant cousins on exoplanets in our own galactic neighborhood, this stone
is“alyve, ”with its own agency and story to tell.
The story, of course, is one of paradigm change. The need for a new geologic para-
digm, made explicit by recent advances in astrobiology as well as a postcolonial recogni-
tion of Indigenous scholarship, can be described as what Kathryn Yusoff has dubbedthe “geologic turn, ”or a critical “engagement with the mineral dimensions of human-
ity.”
19This is especially pertinent in research concerning the Anthropocene, for exam-
ple, in human dealings with fossil fuels, rare earth minerals needed for digital tech-
nologies, and other large-scale mining activities. Following Jacques Rancière ’s proposal
for a political redistribution of the senses, making sense of the “geologic turn ”is also a
15. Reinert, “About a Stone, ”97.
16. Bartlett and Wong, “Deﬁning Lyfe in the Universe, ”42.
17. Bartlett and Wong, “Deﬁning Lyfe in the Universe. ”
18. Cairns-Smith, Seven Clues to the Origin of Life .
19. Yusoff, “Geologic Subjects, ”384.Toland / Soilkin 125Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

question of aesthetics.20“Geomorphic aesthetics, ”writes Yusoff, allows “passage into
the radically incommensurate time of the geologic ”and provides “ap o s s i b l es i t ea n d
mode of sensibility for engaging with the temporal and material contractions of the
Anthropocene. ”21While Yusoff ’s investigation of “Geologic Subjects ”centers on some
o ft h ee a r l i e s tk n o w na r tt ob ep r o d u c e db yh u m a nb e i n g s —the rock paintings at Las-
caux and the Gwion Gwion paintings of western Australia —there seems to be an invi-
tation in her writing for contemporary artists to respond in kind.22
At this point, it is useful to invoke the works of Fluxus to demonstrate how stones
might animate such a paradigm change. In a playful mashup of Yoko Ono ’sTape Piece I,
Stone Piece ,23in which the artist instructs us to “take the sound of the stone aging, ”and
Povinelli ’s groundbreaking article “Do Rocks Listen? The Cultural Politics of Apprehend-
ing Australian Aboriginal Labor, ”24a new score may be formulated: Listen to rocks until pol-
itics age . This kind of listening invites observation beyond the capacity of human ears or
life spans, encouraging attentiveness to more-than-human ontologies as they directly
relate to human sociopolitical systems.25In another event score dedicated to fellow
Fluxus artist Dick Higgins, Peter Frank poetically linked the power of observation to the
self-ful ﬁlling prophecy of paradigms: “Locate an object, not spatially isolated from other
objects of its kind nor different from them in any signi ﬁcant way, and designate it the
current existing model for all such objects. Observe how the distinctiveness of that ob-ject emerges under these conditions. ”
26Stone in hand, I follow these instructions to bet-
ter understand the nature of geologic entities and the scienti ﬁc and political worldviews
they have inspired. Further instructions for observation ensue ( ﬁg. 2): analyze a stone ’s
hardness, luster, color, and speci ﬁc gravity; sketch its appearance; take photos; make po-
etry; create thin sections; use radiometric dating to estimate its age; map its location ina geologic survey; call it “Friend ”in a warm embrace; watch and listen until “it starts to
beat, live, speak and move. ”
27In reciprocation for this observational experience, I design
an in ﬂatable avatar of the stone, so that it too may gain new perspectives on its place
and time in the world ( ﬁg. 3). If kinship can be established through the performative
dimensions of geomorphic aesthetics and a critical engagement with the sensual,
affective, and (geo)political subjectivity of geogenic beings, then a stone ’sq u a l i ﬁca-
tion as kin lies ultimately not in its capacity for life in a conventional biological sense
20. Ranciere, Politics of Aesthetics , 174.
21. Yusoff, “Geologic Subjects, ”383.
22. Yusoff, “Geologic Subjects, ”383.
23. See Yoko Ono ’sTape Piece I and Stone Piece , 1963, reproduced in Friedman, Smith, and Sawchyn,
Fluxus Performance Workbook , 86.
24. Povinelli, “Do Rocks Listen? ”
25. See Krzywoszynska, “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene, ”for arguments for “attentiveness ”
rather than simply knowledge-sharing in soil management and land care.
26. Peter Frank, Paradigm (for Dick Higgins) , 1983, reproduced in Friedman, Smith, and Sawchyn, Fluxus
Performance Workbook , 38. See also Merton, “Self-Ful ﬁlling Prophecy, ”for his thoughts on self-ful ﬁlling realities,
especially as they relate to scienti ﬁc paradigms.
27. Valkeapää, cited in Reinert, “About a Stone, ”110.126 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

but, rather, in its capacity for making mea ning, shifting perspectives, and pushing
paradigms. Floating above the horizon ( ﬁg .3 ) ,t h ep i n k - g r a yg r a i n yf a c eh a sa e s t h e t i c
potential in its animated storytelling-beyo nd-words capacity for revealing historical
coordinates to curious humans, and affective potential in the rediscovery of geogenic
agency through performative acts of observation. Whether it lives or not is secondary.
In the “temporal and material contractions of the Anthropocene, ”28I am interested in
not only what it can do but also what it can do with me.
Stone, I ’m listening.
Learning —Conjuring CLORPT, Soilkin ’s Teacher
If a stone may be understood as a critter that we grant agency to, then how do we make
the leap toward entities without easily identi ﬁable critter features? “Empathy is not so
hard to establish, rooted in a shared experience of embodied life: death, pain, joy, even
hope are accessible, ”notes Reinert.29But these common experiences are con ﬁned to
what Reinert, citing Povinelli, calls the carbon imaginary, “a preanalytical orientation
that parses the world through the lens of organic life. ”30Reinert challenges stepping
outside this imaginary in order to question the idea of classi ﬁcation according to king-
dom. In Soilkin worlding, the task of extending empathy between animal, mineral, plant,
and microbial lyfe-forms belongs to the soil. A hybrid amorphous being made up of
weathering, life-giving minerals, and decaying —literally mineralizing —organic mat-
ter, soil de ﬁes classi ﬁcations and kingdoms because of its all-inclusiveness. It is both
body and surrounding environment. It occupies space and time but is neither here
nor there, now nor then. It is always in a state of becoming. Soil is the place where
all other spheres and stages and scenes merge into one: the dynamic interface between
biosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, and all that plays out in the techno-
sphere. Soil at ﬁrst seems to resist subjectivity because of its massive distributedness
around the earth or its “hyper-objectness, ”in Timothy Morton ’st e r m s .31On closer exam-
ination, the critter we are dealing with can be described in Yusoff ’st e r m sf o rn o n -
normative subjectivity: “Stretched between the inhuman and nonhuman elements,
determined by unfamiliar material and temporal orders . . . the possibility for an identi-
ﬁcation with the earth and other biological formations that does not start from a point
of alienation or whole-ism (Gaia), but recognizes an entirely different mode of produc-tion. ”
32Such a non-normative mode of production fosters a sensibility for empathy and
kinship in the coproduction of knowledge, which is in turn necessary for the coproduc-
tion of lyfe-respecting food stuffs, fuels, textiles, shelter, and medicines for Humankin.
28. Yusoff, “Geologic Subjects, ”383.
29. Reinert, “About a Stone, ”106.
30. Reinert, “About a Stone, ”106.
31. Morton, Hyperobjects .
32. Yusoff, “Geologic Subjects, ”399.Toland / Soilkin 127Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Echoing Reinert ’s question “What kind of critter might a stone be? ”33we might
then ask, “What kind of critter might soil be? ”—not as in the critters that live in soil,
but soil as a critter itself. At ﬁrst glance, soil is the direct offspring of parent rocks. But
soil is more than the mineralogical sum of its parts. Characterized by its shaggy coat
of disintegrating litter, celebrated by soil scientists as the “detritusphere, ”soil is quite
clearly a zombie kind of critter: sometimes leaky, sometimes gassy, partly living, partly
nonliving, a spongy, sprawling mass of chemically related minerals and decaying plant
life teeming with billions of unassuming creatures that diligently feed on the dead tomake room for the living. How is one to possibly love this zombie-critter without being
able to easily differentiate it from the rest of the landscape? Relational exercises in
embodied knowledge-transfer offer simple gestures for recognizing non-normative sub-
jectivity ( ﬁgs. 4 and 5) and set up an amiable foundation for exploring what could be
called “pedontology, ”or the speculative study of soil-being and -becoming. Where a
stretch of the mind is needed to give lyfe to a stone, soils exhibit dissipation, autoca-
talysis, homeostasis, and learning with s uch complexity and elegance that categories
of life and nonlife are conceptually and, given the state of the Anthropocene, ethically
problematic.
The concept of an individual soil is hardly comparable to individual trees or humans
or even stones. Human classi ﬁcation of individual “species ”of soils —taxonomically
Figure 4. Soilkin exercise
#4:Soil knowledge-transfer
event #1 (2020). Fluxus-
inspired instructions asmeme, dimensions and
media variable. In reference
to Joel Tauber, Seven
Attempts to Make a Ritual ,
2000.
33. See Reinert, “About a Stone, ”96.128 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

organized as soil groups such as podsols, al ﬁsols, cambisols, or luvisols —is a skill that
can be learned with the aid of taxonomic handbooks and soil-scienti ﬁc guidelines, or
passed on as local knowledge and performed as diagnostic encounter, for example, inthe assessments of ﬁelds made by farmers. Recognition of the nuanced differences and
needs as well as vulnerabilities of individual members of a species (i.e., soil groups),
however, usually requires years of direct interaction with soil critters. To read the soil,
or speak its language, is not only to identify material features that can be measured with
the eyes, hands, and a host of measuring instruments but also to recognize the interde-pendencies and agential connections within the local and global soil neighborhood: the
socioeconomic tendencies of the farmers down the road who may or may not be over-
fertilizing their ﬁelds; the political will of elected leaders who have the power to regulate
fertilizer loads; the waterless creek in the valley; the planes overhead and powerplant in
the next town contributing to rising temperatures that dry out the ﬁelds.
A particularly convivial exercise in soil science studies is soil judging ( ﬁg. 6), a com-
petitive sport-like event in which students, teachers, and practitioners gather to describethe diagnostic features of a soil. In a research area increasingly informed by proximal
soil-sensing technologies and big data paradigms like pedometrics and precision agricul-
ture, soil-judging represents an opportunity for researchers to connect with soils in an
embodied way. The work is done in TEAMs ( “together everyone accomplishes more ”)i n
soil pits arranged as a parcourse, and focuses on the observational and descriptive skills
Figure 5. Soilkin exercise
#5:Soil knowledge-transfer
event #2 (2020). Fluxus-
inspired instructions asmeme, dimensions and
media variable. In reference
to Ana Mendieta, Silueta
Series ,1 9 7 3 –80; and Annie
Sprinkle and Beth
Stephens, Dirty Wedding to
the Soil , 2014.Toland / Soilkin 129Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

of attentiveness needed to read a soil ’s history.34Soil judging, with its ethos of skill-
sharing-as-sport, is performative on multiple levels. Taxonomic guides provide the score,
soil-scienti ﬁc societies provide the stage, and the soil itself steps in as sparring partner.
While feminist scholars such as Karen Barad and Judith Butler have examined perform-
ativity in different social and environmental contexts, Jens Hauser and Lucie Strecker
have proposed the term microperformativity to describe post-Anthropocentric performa-
tive practices in the arts and sciences, and Chris Salter has acknowledged the extension
of performance as knowledge production to more-than-human worlds: “Bacteria per-
form processes. Scientists perform experiments. Algorithms perform actions. Humans
perform gender and sex . . . who or what nowadays doesn ’tperform? ”35Soil judging
brings different forms of performativity together to collectively coauthor soil biographies
in the verse of soil taxonomic description, enacted as ritual offerings of attentiveness
and knowledge sharing, albeit ﬁrmly grounded in the disciplinary legacies of soil science.
An extended task of soil judging would be not only to identify the faces in the landscape
Figure 6. Soilkin exercise
#6:Observe a soil (2020).
Fluxus-inspired instructions
as meme, dimensions andmedia variable. In reference
to herman de vries, this
earth ,2 0 1 8 ;a n dN e w t o n
Harrison / Harrison Studio,
Making Earth (raking,
digging, eating) , 1970.
34. See Cooper, “T.E.A.M. Soil Judging ”; and Ponte and Carter, “Evaluating and Improving Soil Judging
Contests, ”for a description of the pedagogical ideas behind soil-judging.
35. See Barad, “Posthumanist Performativity ”and “Nature ’s Queer Performativity ”; and Butler, Gender
Trouble . Hauser and Strecker, “On Microperformativity, ”draw on ideas of entangled technologies in Salter, En-
tangled Technology and the Transformation of Performance , to develop their theory of “microperformativity, ”
which could be attributed to the microbial actions within soils.130 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

but also to speculate new methods of care for Soilkin, to acknowledge past and future
human-soil relationships and to imagine alternative soil-time trajectories.
Fluxus artist Dick Higgins once wrote that “musical activity takes place in time,
and . . . anything that just breaks up time happening in it, absorbing it, is musical. ”36Ac-
cording to this logic, the events of a soil-judging contest as well as those events in the
lyfe story of a soil being judged in such a contest are musical. The score of an individual
soil biography is written in horizontal bands below the surface, called soil horizons,which detail recognizable patterns of chemical and physical events in the distribution
of various materials. Soil groups are born of genderless parent materials, which then
age over time in a process called weathering. Weathering is usually understood as an
active force (wind, rain, heat, frost, etc.) on a passive body (soil). Soil scientist Roy Si-
monson, however, argued that weathering is only one process that causes soil to “age”
and that weathering alone does not create a soil.
37Rather, this is where pedogenesis
comes into play. Pedogenesis is a process understood as acts of transfers, transforma-
tions, additions, and removals within or from the forming soil. This understanding ech-
oes early Russian concepts of soil memory, or the site-speci ﬁc recording of chemical
changes over time.38Pedogenetic processes can furthermore be seen as evidence of
learning, or what Bartlett and Wong have described as the fourth criteria for lyfe:
“The ability of a system to record information about its external and internal environ-
ment, process that information, and carry out actions that feedback positively on its
probability of surviving/proliferating. ”39In soil-scienti ﬁc terms, pedogenesis refers to
the patterned weathering of soils resulting from predictable responses to other agents,
such as climate (including the in ﬁltration of rainwater and temperature effects, e.g.,
surface heating or freezing), interaction w ith macro- and microorga nisms, topographi-
cal position (e.g., steepness of slope, as well as top, bottom, or middle position on a
slope), parent material (e.g., sand dunes, granite, or volcanic ash), and time. Soil scien-
tist Hans Jenny, inspired by the pioneering work of Vasily Dokuchaev in the 1880s, fa-
mously gave these factors of pedogenesis a nickname: CLORPT (climate + organisms +
relief+parent material+time).40
Well over a century after the introduction of the concept of pedogenesis, and a
good few decades after Fluxus disrupted the art world with its text-as-event –based prov-
ocations, I propose a reimagining of pedogenesis in Soilkin terms: CLORPT is conjured as
a superagent that teaches rather than ages soil. Instructions are given and soil responds.
Soils, with their own unique more-than-mineral agency, “learn ”from CLORPT ’s lessons,
36. Higgens, cited in Dezeuze, “Origins of the Fluxus Score, ”3–4.
37. See Simonson, “Outline of a Generalized Theory of Soil Genesis. ”
38. See, e.g., Targuliana and Bronnikova, “Soil Memory, ”229 –43; and Wells, “Cultural Soilscapes. ”
39. Bartlett and Wong, “Deﬁning Lyfe in the Universe. ”
40. Hans Jenny ’sFactors of Soil Formation is a functional-factorial model and focuses on external factors
that in ﬂuence a soil. It is most applicable over regional scales. Simonson ’s model is a process-systems model,
which focuses on what happens within the parent material; it is most applicable at the landscape scale. However,
Jenny ’s and Simonson ’s approaches are often combined in a complementary way.Toland / Soilkin 131Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

writing their lyfe experiences on horizontal bands of color, texture, and acidic testimony.
Pedogenetic processes thus are a form of soil performativity, not in a neoliberal sense of
performing ecosystem services or soil functions, but in an aesthetic sense of performing
ontologies. Fluxus again provides the context here for performance as knowledge crea-
tion. Chemist-turned-artist George Brecht, while studying with John Cage, developed the
characteristic Fluxus form of the event score as well as one of its most-cited examples,
Drip Music .41Brecht ’s event score “simply indicates that a source of dripping water and
an empty vessel are arranged so that the water falls into the vessel. ”42In Soilkin terms, a
soil is a living vessel with unique pedogenetic histories that direct the outcome of the
performance. The instructions it receives by soaking up dripping water and redistributing
it via capillary action can result in the translocation of mineral notes and the transforma-
tion of the vessel itself over time. A reinterpretation of Brecht ’se v e n ts c o r ei nt h ef o r -
ested ice-age landscape of Chorin could be called Podsolation .D i s s o l v e do r g a n i cm a t t e r
and iron and aluminum ions of sandy acidic soils translocate from the surface to the sub-
soil where these materials are immobilized, leaving behind a bleached or ashy (the name
for podsolated soils comes from the Russian podzol ,m e a n i n g “ash-soil ”) upper horizon
and a darker, slightly compacted band of organo-metallic particles in the lower horizon.
Regardless of differing human histories on the surface, a podsol in the Schorfheide Cho-
rin learns —or, rather, performs —in a manner similar to a podsol on the coast of Oslof-
jord, in the land of sacred sieidi. Its musical score is ash-colored:
Drip water on quartz-rich sands covered by humus and wait.
Dancing with Soilkin: On Social Resista nce and Reciprocity in Times of MUDDD
Soils are social beings. In the empty pits of a speculative future soil-judging parcourse
in the Biosphere Reservation Schorfheide Chorin, I place upright mirrors to encourage
Soilkin to re ﬂect on this fact ( ﬁg. 7). Simonson notes that “individual bodies of soils are
seldom set apart from their neighbors by sharp boundaries. Adjacent bodies commonlygrade into one another. ”
43Pale, leached podsols in a forested moraine gradually morph
into rich brown luvisols in the glacial valley below, sometimes spilling into abandoned
leaching ﬁelds at the outskirts of the city. These soil individuals link arms in a terres-
trial dance known as the “soil catena, ”44or a chain of individual soils chemically and
physically related to one another over time and space. Drops or spikes in pH levels andthe shifting of soil horizons mark differences between bodies, but the genealogy between
41. See von Froreich, “Meeting the Alien Halfway, ”85, which suggests that event scores are particularly
suitable for exploring nonhuman scales, textures, and temporalities of matter.
42. See the comparison of Brecht ’sDrip Event (1959 –62) and Cage ’sWater Music (1952) in Dezeuze, “Ori-
gins of the Fluxus Score, ”86.
43. See Simonson ’s description in “Outline of a Generalized Theory of Soil Genesis. ”The catena concept
is so prevalent in soil science that Elsevier publishes a journal titled Catena , dedicated to research on geoecology
and landscape evolution.
44. For original descriptions of the soil catena as a soil-scienti ﬁc concept, see Milne, “Normal Erosion as a
Factor in Soil Pro ﬁle Development ”; and Bushnell, “Some Aspects of the Soil Catena Concept. ”132 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

pedons is ever-present. Establishing social sensibilities in scienti ﬁc constructs such as
the soil catena is essential for creating reciprocal kinships with more-than-mineral oth-
ers. Reciprocity, however, can be a double-edged sword. While Reinert gives amicable ac-counts of how certain sieidi stones interact benevolently with humans, he also warns of
theﬂip side of such arrangements, in which humans can be cursed with poverty, illness,
or death in retribution for disrespectful removal or destruction of sieidi.
45If we can as-
sign agency to stones, Reinert argues, it follows that these autonomous beings can also
harm and be harmed.
Current pedometric data underscores a grim picture of lyfe on earth, in which
harm perpetuates more harm. The Great Acceleration charts of the Anthropocene de-
pict spikes in fertilizer consumption and water use as socioeconomic trends, and forest
loss, biosphere degradation, and domesticated land use as earth system trends.46These
have risen exponentially since the 1950s, leading to catastrophic ﬂooding, mudslides,
deserti ﬁcation, and other soil-based harm. In their assessment of the Anthropocene,
Katrin Klingan, Ashkan Sepahvand, Christoph Rosol, and Bernd Scherer suggest thathumans must come to terms with a world that has become muddier. “Theﬂooding
of deserti ﬁe dl a n d s ,t h et h a w i n go fp e r m a f r o s t ,...d a m m i n go fr i v e r sd e t a i n i n gs e d i -
m e n t s ,t h ee x t r a c t i o no ft a rs a n d s...t h el e a k a g eo fo p e nm i n i n gp i t s ,a n dh y d r a u l i c
Figure 7. Soilkin exercise
#7:Get to know neighbors
(2020). Fluxus-inspired
instructions as meme,dimensions and media
variable. In reference to
Robert Smithson, Yucatan
Mirror Displacements 1 –9,
1969.
45. See Reinert, “About a Stone, ”97.
46. See depictions of the “great accelerators ”in Steffen et al., “Trajectory of the Anthropocene. ”Toland / Soilkin 133Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

fracking of rocks ”have turned the critical zone, that permeable, life-supporting safe
space from the treetops above to groundwater ﬂows below, into a mud zone.47Think-
ing with Klingan and colleagues, the mud zone is a direct result of intentional and col-
lateral harm to the lithosphere and pedosphere that form the very foundation of the
critical zone.48MUDDD (man + Umwelt +d e g r a d a t i o n+d i s l o c a t i o n+d i s i l l u s i o n m e n t ) i s
CLORPT ’s cursed offspring from a violent relationship with Anthropocene ’s Accelerator-
Man.49To heal harm already perpetrated and to promote preventative care against future
muddying, Humankin must rejoin forces with CLORPT and start creating soil immedi-
ately and continually. This requires a rethinking of conventional timescales, multispe-
cies worlds, and soil-protection paradigms, for CLORPT itself has changed: climate now
includes extreme temperatures and weather events brought on by global warming; or-
ganisms include human societies and their technologies;50relief can be anthropogenic,
as in the case of shifting landmasses resulting from mining, damming, and remediation;
parent materials now include technogenic substrates such as building rubble, mine
spoils, and garbage heaps; time can now last several months to several millennia.
With muddiness comes the chance for resistance and reciprocity, and a thorough
recalibration of Soilkin-Humankin relations in the critical zone. Once again Fluxus of-
fers a methodology of performing with the world that has historically embraced
resistance —against art world conventions and social norms of labor, gender, morality,
philosophy, and politics —while resonating with movements of creative resistance
today. Fridays for Future, Land Back, and Extinction Rebellion recall, in their own ways,
the spirit of Fluxus —for example, in the performative staging of events of protest and
in the reproducibility of their actions. Beyond resistance, Fluxus also offers a practice of
generosity in the scripting of scores that can be re-created and reinterpreted inde ﬁnitely,
questioning art world norms of authorship, authenticity, and audience. Dance in particu-
lar plays a prominent role in Fluxus methodology: George Brecht and Ken Friedman,
among others, drew on the conviviality of movement to facilitate reciprocity.
Stone, will you dance with me? (ﬁg. 8)
Let’s conclude by the ﬁreside. Carefully placing the granite cobbles back into the
ring around the ﬁrepit in Chorin, I admit that the stones and soils participating in the
47. Introduction in Klingan et al., Textures of the Anthropocene , 25, published in the context of the Anthro-
pocene Curriculum hosted by the House of World Cultures and Max Planck Institute in Berlin from 2013 to 2022.
48. In the Critical Zones exhibition, series of events, and publication, Latour and Weibel used the critical
zone as framing mechanism for the geopolitical crisis of the Anthropocene. The critical zone historically refers to
the spatial unit stretching from the top of the lower atmosphere to the top of the lithosphere beneath the soil.
49.Man rather than hu-man is used here in reference to the overwhelmingly masculine, techno-normative
framing of the Anthropocene as critiqued by authors such as Stacy Alaimo, Rosi Braidotti, and others in Grusin,
Anthropocene Feminism .
50. Although Jenny originally included humans in his CLORPT model, Rudi Dudal, among other prominent
soil scientists, include humans as a sixth soil-forming factor, reasoning that humans cause so much change that
they are distinct from other organisms. See Dudal, “Sixth Factor of Soil Formation. ”134 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Soilkin exercises are not mine to claim as dance partners or otherwise. I wonder if my
actions are truly received as reciprocal, if my human desires for conviviality are congru-
ent with other life- and lyfe-forms. Harm is inevitably framed by resistance and consentin a language of geontological and pedontological agency beyond the capacity of human
comprehension. Mere acknowledgment of the possibility of geogenic and pedogenic
agency does not necessarily lead to nonharmful treatment. In a more-than-human reck-
oning with the #MeToo movement, there is little guidance in technoscienti ﬁc literature
or the social sciences regarding appropriate ways to ask geogenic and pedogenic othersfor consent. Guidance can be better found from those who already know how to ask. In
this sense, one of the most meaningful “event scores ”for engaging with Soilkin could
be interpreted as the retelling of the Honorable Harvest by Robin Wall Kimmerer, re-
vered by many but as of yet not cited in most guidelines for soil management:
Take only what you need and use everything you take. Be accountable as the one who
comes asking for life [or lyfe]. Ask permission before taking. Abide by the answer. Nevertake the ﬁrst. Never take the last. Take only what you need. Take only that which is given.
Never take more than half. Leave some for others. Harvest in a way that minimizes harm.Use it respectfully. Never waste what you have taken. Share. Give thanks for what you
have been given. Give a gift, in reciprocity for what you have taken.
51
Figure 8. Soilkin exercise
#8:Possible Flux
performance for the post-
Anthropocene (2020).
Fluxus-inspired instructions
as meme, dimensions and
media variable. In referenceto Luce Fierens, Possible
Flux Performances or
Post ﬂuxgames ,1 9 8 7 ,
reproduced in Friedman,
Smith, and Sawchyn,
Fluxus PerformanceWorkbook ,3 5 : “Ask a child
to dance with you. 1
minute. ”
51. Kimmerer, Braiding Sweetgrass , 183.Toland / Soilkin 135Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Staging the instructions of the Honorable Harvest in the Anthropocene offers a starting
point for performing reciprocity, for giving back for years of taking without asking, for
heeding rather than appropriating Indigenous wisdom, for reconciling Humankin withCLORPT in a way that makes room for new lyfe and replaces muddiness with gratitude.
52
Through social readings of geological and pedological worlds, new event scores can bescripted for new rituals of reciprocity: dance with soil for one minute and with stone
for one millennium ( ﬁg. 8); unseal sealed surfaces; replace concrete beds with mulch
blankets; compost as if your life depended on it (it does); give thanks ( ﬁg. 9).
ALEXANDRA R. TOLAND is assistant professor of arts and research at the Bauhaus-Universität
Weimar and current co-chair of the IUSS Commission on the History, Philosophy and Sociology
of Soil Science. She coedited the book Field to Palette: Dialogues on Soil and Art in the Anthropo-
cene (2018) and has published widely on the topic of soil and art.
Acknowledgments
The Soilkin project was presented in various forms at the Shape of a Practice program at the House of
World Cultures Berlin in 2020, at the Twenty-Second World Congress of Soil Science in Glasgow in
Figure 9. Soilkin exercise
#9:Practice reciprocity
(2020). Fluxus-inspired
instructions as meme,dimensions and media
variable. In reference to
Peter Frank ’sThank You
Piece , n.d., reproduced in
Friedman, Smith, and
Sawchyn, Fluxus
Performance Workbook ,3 7 :
“Thank you / [repeat ﬁfteen
times] / Politeness is nocrime ”; and Asad Raza,
Absorption ,2 0 1 9 –2023.
52. See, e.g., Imoro et al., “Harnessing Indigenous Technologies ”; Dickson-Hoyle et al., “Walking on Two
Legs ”; see also soil scientist D. L. N. Rao ’s plea to relearn Indigenous soil management practices, quoted in
Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”708.136 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

2022, and at the Sixth Nordic STS Conference in Oslo in 2023. Thanks to Tilia and Taavi and Ulf
Kypke-Burchardi and other forest kin. Thanks to Myriel Milic ´evic´, Anna Krzywoszynska, Be Körner,
Harriet von Froreich, Elizabeth McTernan, Margarita Garcia, Eric Brevik, Tom Sauer, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their editorial suggestions.
References
Barad, Karen. “Nature ’s Queer Performativity. ”Kvinder, Køn and Forskning, Feminist Materialisms 1–2
(2012): 121 –58.
Barad, Karen. “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to
Matter. ”Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 28, no. 3 (2003): 801 –31.
Bartlett, Stuart, and Michael L. Wong. “Deﬁning Lyfe in the Universe: From Three Privileged Func-
tions to Four Pillars. ”Life10 (2020): 42.
Bennett, Jane. “A Vitalist Stopover on the Way to a New Materialism. ”InNew Materialisms: Ontology,
Agency, and Politics , edited by Diana Coole and Samantha Frost, 352. Durham, NC: Duke Univer-
sity Press, 2010.
Bubandt, Nils. “Haunted Geologies: Spirits, Stones, and the Necropolitics of the Anthropocene. ”In
Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet , edited by Anna Tsing, Heather Swanson, Elaine Gan, and
Nils Bubandt, 348. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Bushnell, Thomas Mark. “Some Aspects of the Soil Catena Concept. ”Soil Science Society of America ,
January 1, 1943, 466 –76.
Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity . New York: Routledge, 1990.
Cairns-Smith, Alexander Graham. Seven Clues to the Origin of Life . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985.
Cooper, Terence H. “T.E.A.M. Soil Judging: An Experiment. ”Journal of Agronomic Education 20, no. 2
(1991): 123 –25.
Dezeuze, Anna. “Origins of the Fluxus Score —from Indeterminacy to the Do-It-Yourself Artwork. ”
Performance Research: A Journal of the Performing Arts (2014): 78 –94.
Dickson-Hoyle, Sarah, Ronald E. Ignace, Marianne B. Ignace, Shannon M. Hagerman, Lori D. Daniels,
and Kelsey Copes-Gerbitz. “Walking on Two Legs: A Pathway of Indigenous Restoration and
Reconciliation in Fire-Adapted Landscapes. ”Restoration Ecology 30, no. 4 (2022): 1 –9.
Dudal, Rudi. “The Sixth Factor of Soil Formation. ”Presented at the “International Conference on Soil
Classi ﬁcation 2004, ”Petrozavodsk, Russia, August 3 –5, 2004. https://proprights.org/PDFs/workshop
_2011/References/BAS/Soil%20References/Human%20Created%20Soils.pdf .
Friedman, Ken, Owen F. Smith, and Lauren Sawchyn. The Fluxus Performance Workbook . 40th anniver-
sary ed. Great Britain: Performance Research e-Publications, 2002.
Grusin, Richard. Anthropocene Feminism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.
Hamilton, Jennifer Mae, and Astrida Neimanis. “Composting Feminisms and Environmental Human-
ities. ”Environmental Humanities 10, no. 2 (2018): 501 –27.https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-7156859 .
Haraway, Donna J. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2016.
Harvey, Graham. The Handbook of Contemporary Animism . London: Routledge, 2015.
Hauser, Jens, and Lucie Strecker. “On Microperformativity. ”Performance Research: A Journal of the Per-
forming Arts (2020): 1 –7.
Imoro, Ziblim Abukari, Abubakari Zarouk Imoro, Abudu Ballu Duwiejuah, and Ammal Abukari. “Har-
nessing Indigenous Technologies for Sustainable Management of Land, Water, and Food Re-
sources amidst Climate Change. ”Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 5 (2021): 1 –11.https://doi
.org/10.3389/fsufs.2021.691603 .
Ingold, Tim. “Rethinking the Animate, Re-animating Thought. ”Ethnos Journal of Anthropology 71, no. 1
(2011): 9 –20.
Jenny, Hans. Factors of Soil Formation —a System of Quantitative Pedology . New York: McGraw-Hill, 1941.Toland / Soilkin 137Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

Kimmerer, Robin Wall. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scienti ﬁc Knowledge, and the Teachings of
Plants . Minneapolis: Milkweed, 2013.
Kirksey, Eben. The Multispecies Salon . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2014.
Klingan, Katrin, Ashkan Sepahvand, Christoph Rosol, and Bernd M. Scherer, eds. Textures of the
Anthropocene: Grain Vapor Ray . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014.
Knebel, Kristin, Gisela Maul, and Thomas Schmuck, eds. Abenteuer der Vernunft —Goethe und die Natur-
wissenschaften um 1800 (Adventures in Reason —Goethe and the Natural Sciences around 1800) .W e i -
mar: Klassik Stiftung Weimar, 2019.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role of Attentiveness in More-
than-Human Ethics. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 44, no. 4 (2019): 661 –75.
https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/tran.12293 .
Latour, Bruno, and Peter Weibel. Critical Zones: The Science and Politics of Landing on Earth .C a m b r i d g e ,
MA: MIT Press, 2020.
Little Bear, Leroy. “Naturalizing Indigenous Knowledge, Synthesis Paper. ”University of Saskatchewan,
Aboriginal Education Research Centre, Saskatoon, Sask. and First Nations and Adult Higher Ed-
ucation Consortium, Calgary, Alta (2009). Accessed December 5, 2020. https://www.afn.ca/uploads
/ﬁles/education/21._2009_july_ccl-alkc_leroy_littlebear_naturalizing_indigenous_knowledge-report
.pdf.
Massumi, Brian. Ontopower: War, Powers, and the State of Perception . Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2016.
Merton, Robert K. “The Self-Ful ﬁlling Prophecy. ”Antioch Review 8, no. 2 (1948): 193 –210. https://doi.org
/10.2307/4609267 .
Milne, Geoffrey. “Normal Erosion as a Factor in Soil Pro ﬁle Development. ”Nature 138 (1936): 548 –49.
Morton, Timothy. Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World . Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Ponte, Kelly J., and Brian J. Carter. “Evaluating and Improving Soil Judging Contests Based on a Se-
lected Pro ﬁciency Level. ”Journal of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Education 29 (2000): 8 –14.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. “Do Rocks Listen? The Cultural Politics of Apprehending Australian Aboriginal
Labour. ”American Anthropologist 97, no. 3 (1995): 505 –18.
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. “Geontologies: The Concept and Its Territories. ”e-ﬂux81 (April 2017). https://
www.e- ﬂux.com/journal/81/123372/geontologies-the-concept-and-its-territories/ .
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity and the Pace of Care. ”So-
cial Studies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
Rancière, Jacques. The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the Sensible . London: Continuum, 2004.
Reinert, Hugo. “About a Stone —some Notes on Geologic Conviviality. ”Environmental Humanities 8,
no. 1 (2016): 95 –117. https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3527740 .
Rose, Deborah Bird. “Val Plumwood ’s‘Philosophical Animism ’: Attentive Interactions in the Sentient
World. ”Environmental Humanities 3, no. 1 (2013): 93 –109.
Salter, Chris. Entangled Technology and the Transformation of Performance .C a m b r i d g e ,M A :M I TP r e s s ,
2010.
Simonson, Roy W. “Outline of a Generalized Theory of Soil Genesis. ”Modern Concept of Soil Genesis —a
Symposium . March 1, 1959. https://doi.org/10.2136/sssaj1959.03615995002300020021x .
Singh, Neera M. “The Nonhuman Turn or a Re-turn to Animism? Valuing Life along and beyond Capital. ”
Dialogues in Human Geography 12, no. 1 (2022): 84 –89.https://doi.org/10.1177/20438206221075708 .
Steffen, Will, Wendy Broadgate, Lisa Deutsch, Owen Gaffney, and Cornelia Ludwig. “The Trajectory of
the Anthropocene: The Great Acceleration. ”Anthropocene Review 2, no. 1 (2015): 81 –98.https://
journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2053019614564785 .
Targuliana, Victor, and Maria Bronnikova. “Soil Memory: Theoretical Basics of the Concept, Its Cur-
rent State, and Prospects for Development. ”Eurasian Soil Science 52, no. 3 (2019): 229 –43.
Tsing, Anna, Heather Swanson, Elaine Gan, and Nils O. Bubandt, eds. Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet .
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2017.138 Environmental Humanities 15:3 / November 2023Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

von Froreich, Harriet. “Meeting the Alien Halfway. ”InActivating Dissonance: 20 Years of Live Art Edu-
cation in Finland ,e d i t e db yT e r oN a u h a ,8 1 –89. Helsinki: Taideyliopiston Teatterikorkeakoulu,
2021.
Wells, E. Christian. “Cultural Soilscapes. ”InFunction of Soils for Human Societies and the Environment ,
edited by Emmanuel Frossard, Winfried E. H. Blum, and Benno P. Warkentin, 125 –32. London:
Geological Society Special Publications, 2006.
Yusoff, Kathryn. A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
2019.
Yusoff, Kathryn. “Geologic Subjects: Nonhuman Origins, Geomorphic Aesthetics and the Art of Be-
coming Inhuman. ”Cultural Geographies 22, no. 3 (2015): 383 –407.Toland / Soilkin 139Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/15/3/119/2034258/119toland.pdf by guest on 04 October 2025

