Vol.:(0123456789)Cultural Studies of Science Education (2021) 16:1083–1096
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-021-10026-y
1 3
FORUM
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications 
for promoting socioecological justice through science 
education
Sarah El Halwany1  · Majd Zouda1 · John Lawrence Bencze1 
Received: 28 January 2021 / Accepted: 10 February 2021 / Published online: 1 July 2021 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021
Abstract
Inspired by Torres-Olave and Bravo’s original paper, entitled ‘Facing Neoliberalism 
through Dialogic Spaces as Sites of Hopes in Science Education: Experiences of two Self-
Organized Communities’, the present essay considers potential contexts to resist neoliberal 
models of science education. This paper discusses affordances of themes and notions from 
domains of Science and Technology Studies (STS) to inform STEPWISE-informed peda-
gogies (Bencze 2017) that engage with (bio)political analyses of technoscience for social 
and environmental justice. Notions from STS highlighted include: ‘sociotechnical imagi-
naries’, ‘emotive actants’ and ‘anthropocentric temporalities’. We illustrate these in relation 
to contemporary science and technology products and practices to highlight futures and 
subjects that they foreground and foreclose. We end by considering how such STS notions 
may extend areas of interest within science education (scholarship), through: 1) situating 
fields of (techno)science within their social and political sphere, 2) meeting future studies 
that seek to problematize individual perceptions of futures, 3) considering different forms 
of environmental activism beyond (personal) actions and 4) contributing to an ‘affective’ 
science education.
Keywords Science education · Social and ecological justice · Science and technology 
studies
This review essay addresses issues raised in Betzabé Torres-Olave and Paulina Bravo González 
(2021) entitled, Facing neoliberalism through dialogic spaces as sites of hopes in science education: 
experiences of two self-organised communities (https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11422- 021- 10042-y)
 * Sarah El Halwany 
 sarah.elhalwany@mail.utoronto.ca
 John Lawrence Bencze 
 larry.bencze@utoronto.ca
1 University of Toronto Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, Toronto, Canada
1084 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Introduction
Roth ( 1998) argued that there is almost a ‘natural match’ between fields of Science and 
Technology Studies (STS) and science education. STS fields offer science education impor -
tant educational aims that reflect “situated, contingent and contextual nature[s] of science, 
while also acknowledging the diverse range of communities and locations where science is 
created and used” (McGinn et al. 1999, p. 17). In this paper, we continue to engage (with) 
those affinities, seeking out productive lines for re-imagining a science education for social 
and environmental justice.
We felt called to highlight this aspect of our current work after reading Torres-Olave 
and Bravo’s original manuscript, entitled ‘Facing Neoliberalism through Dialogic Spaces 
as Sites of Hopes in Science Education’. Their work resonated with us in multiple ways. 
We meet the authors’ concerns around a science education governed by “a neoliberal logic 
[that] squeezes out of us the ability and freedom to act and think collectively and which 
takes our time, our labour and, even at times, our dreams” (p.). We join them in their call 
for science education practices that “provide pedagogical conditions and experiences for 
critical and engaged citizenship” (p.) and that “act and engage with different settings in 
solidarity” (p.). In reading their work, we were reminded of Biesta’s (2015) words:
The most important question for us today is no longer how we can rationally mas-
ter the natural and social world. The most important question today is how we can 
respond responsibly to and how we can live peacefully with what and with whom is 
other (p. 15).
We carry such sentiments into our work and want to thank Torres-Olave and Bravo for 
reaffirming those commitments when describing their research with two self-organized sci-
ence teacher communities in Chile. We read their research as a form of “practicing ethico-
political hesitations” (Wallace 2018, p. 7) in science education, when authors raise ques-
tions about larger aims of science education in neoliberalism-influenced Chile. In doing 
so, they begin to “engage in the critical task of identifying, examining and addressing the 
multiple ways in which science education continues to uphold problematic enactments of 
power” (Higgins et al. 2019, p. 157).
Foregrounding dialogue as their theoretical and methodological orientation was equally 
refreshing for us, allowing us to re-encounter science education and science education 
research as necessarily relational and process-oriented (less preoccupied with science 
outcomes and extractive logics, see also Pierce 2012). This is, of course, not to suggest 
a binary between process and product but to suggest that, perhaps, preoccupations with 
measurable learning outcomes and discourses around (teaching) efficiency might have 
overpowered other ways of imagining science education and science education research. 
We were drawn to the authors’ construal of dialogue in science education and science edu-
cation research as an affective space of “love, hope and collective care” (p.) with material 
implications. Affective and material dimensions of dialogues allow us to encounter ‘per -
formative nature of pedagogies’ (Weinstein 2008), beyond mere didactic and cognitivist 
perspectives that retain dialogue as a sole representational practice. In that vein, we wonder 
how dialogue, as a performative pedagogy, might “emphasize the playful, the fictive and 
the bodily at the intersection of science and education” (Weinstein 2008, p. 395). We agree 
that “dialogues are democratizing” (Torres-Olave & Bravo, p.) when they take place across 
different settings, moving unpredictably, growing in different directions, potentializing new 
horizons for thinking, being and relating. This is how we arrive into this discussion, not 
1085
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
as a direct response to Torres-Olave and Bravo’s work, but moved by their contribution, 
to reflect, yet again, on possible sites for resisting neoliberal models of science education. 
With that, we extend our gratitude to the lead editor for enabling this space and maintain-
ing this larger dialogue.
We begin this essay by situating our interests in STS literature, discussing our careful 
approaches stepping into this field of scholarship. Next, we give an overview of existing 
research that draws on fields of STS (also known as science studies) to inform fields of 
science education. We expand on those connections, noting that (bio)political economies 
of technoscience—one area within fields of STS—remain modestly articulated within sci-
ence education and science education research (Carter et al. 2017). Later, we present three 
interrelated STS notions that re-engage with (bio)political analyses of technoscience: ‘soci-
otechnical imaginaries’, ‘emotive actants’ and ‘anthropocentric temporalities’. We con-
sider how such STS notions may extend areas of interest within science education, namely 
through: 1) situating fields of ‘technoscience’ (Sismondo 2008) within their social, politi-
cal and material contexts, 2) meeting fields of future studies, which seek to problematize 
individual perceptions of futures, 3) considering different forms of activism beyond (per -
sonal) actions and 4) contributing to an ‘affective science education’ (Alsop 2016).
Stepping carefully into STS literature
Our present contribution stems from a larger pedagogical and research project, ‘STEP -
WISE’ (Bencze 2017). STEPWISE (acronym for Science and Technology Education Pro-
moting Wellbeing for Individuals, Societies and Environments) prioritizes: 1) teaching stu-
dents about ‘power’ related socio-scientific issues (SSIs) and 2) supporting students as they 
develop an ethical praxis vis-à-vis individuals, societies and environments. One of STEP -
WISE’s recent research endeavours is to translate claims from STS literature into peda-
gogical applications for science education.
Stepping into this literature, we were particularly oriented to theoretical claims and case 
studies that carry within them possibilities to further enrich and actualize STEPWISE-like 
approaches in science education contexts; specifically, we approached STS literature that 
sought to portray fields of science and technology as entangled in complex webs of rela-
tions involving other social players (e.g. private corporations, governments) and that prob-
lematize issues of power mostly connected to neoliberal forms of governance and biopoli-
tics (defined broadly as intersections between biological and political lives, see Carter et al. 
2017). On the other hand and keeping with STEPWISE’s call for active public engagement 
on socio-scientific issues, we have been equally interested in convergences amongst STS 
literature and social movement studies (Hess 2015) to highlight roles of citizens in scruti-
nizing and reforming various technologies (e.g. those related to biotechnology). Such lines 
of inquiry  are still being  explored in our work and won’t be included  here; instead, we 
focus on studies that addressed, to various extents, issues related to neoliberal governance 
and (bio)politics in technoscience.
The title of this section ‘Stepping into the STS literature’ may imply an inside-outside 
duality, suggesting that fields of STS and science education are discrete and bounded fields 
of research/practice. This oversimplification is not intended. We recognize how STS schol-
ars/educators are already ‘doing’ science education, perhaps inviting further inquiries into 
what science and science education might mean for an STS practitioner (e.g. Birch 2017). 
1086 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
In STEPWISE and before setting to deliberately review STS research, we have long been 
influenced by theoretical insights from those fields. For instance, we have been encourag-
ing students to map relationships amongst science, technology, societies and environments 
drawing on actor-network theory (Latour 1996) to include non-humans and semiotic act-
ants and to acknowledge their often-hidden roles in stabilizing socio-scientific networks 
(Bencze et  al. 2018). Actor-network theory could also inform how students might take 
actions on socio-scientific issues (e.g. Ramjewan et  al. 2017). Thus, in a way, we step 
into STS literature, from past encounters.
For the past year and a half, we have immersed ourselves in this literature, negotiated 
collective understandings and began translating STS  claims into pedagogical tools (e.g. 
instructional videos) to be further negotiated with science teachers and their students. 
We turned to academic articles in several major STS journals, including: Social Studies 
of Science, Science as Culture and Science, Technology and Human Values (2010–2020), 
amongst other STS publications and conference papers. For our present purposes, we wish 
to contribute with few illustrative concepts that were gleaned from our ongoing explora-
tions of this broad and diverse literature and that might help cultivate different kinds of 
relationships within science and technology education (Alsop 2016). We invite you to 
treat those concepts as conversation starters, noting that our approach is careful and propo-
sitional/invitational (Springgay et  al. 2018). This is crucial as we attempt to steer clear 
from claiming authoritative knowledge over a (new) research field and as we resist urges 
to extract STS claims that are ‘useful’ to science education. Such extractive tendencies can 
leave us in an uneasy predicament, when considering our goals working towards socially 
and environmentally just practices through science education. In that sense, we urge our 
readers to take our contribution here as a work-in-progress, a beginning of a dialogue that 
ardently awaits participation of STS scholars, science teachers, educators, scholars and stu-
dents (next phase of our STEPWISE project), affecting and affected by a collective ‘cross-
pollination’ of knowledges.
Parsing through contributions from STS and their various modes of uptake in science 
education (research) may reiterate a distinction between those two fields. There lies another 
point of contention and probably, even, of translation. There will always be ontological, 
axiological and epistemological gaps/dilemmas when translating knowledges between two 
disciplinary fields. STS scholars appear to refrain from engaging with school science on 
grounds of its interests in ‘ready-made’ science (e.g. science laws and concepts), which 
might be incongruent with STS’s larger interests in ‘science in the making’. Weinstein 
(2008) states that ‘schools have consistently been viewed in science studies as static, con-
sensus based, free of conflict and ultimately banal and not worthy of research’ (p. 391). 
This might seem discouraging. At the same time, it prompts us to consider how we might 
navigate those epistemic barriers in our future collaborations with STS researchers/practi-
tioners. Other ontological/axiological gaps may exist as we translate STS claims into peda-
gogical materials. In our case, seeking to inform STEPWISE-like approaches, we had, at 
times, to make various decisions based on what’s ‘appropriate’ for school-aged students 
learning science. In appealing to science teachers, we might feel incessant urges to make 
‘science’ connections visible when producing pedagogical materials, returning to concep-
tions of science as ‘ready-made’ and somehow missing the mark on ‘science in the mak -
ing’. For those reasons, we believe that being in active and sustained conversations with 
STS scholars and science teachers might help us collectively consider those various dilem-
mas and interrogate those assumptions in acts of translation.
1087
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
STS and science education
STS scholars are mostly sociologists, historians, anthropologists, philosophers who study 
scientists and engineers and science-in-action, broadly understood (Sismondo 2008). 
Fields of STS are multilayered and manifold, with diverse foci that range from studying 
nature and practices of science and technology, their various impacts and forms of control. 
Some STS research focuses on reform or activism, critically addressing policy, govern-
ance and funding issues, to try to “reform science and technology in the name of equal-
ity, welfare and environment” (Sismondo 2008, p. 13). Despite (or perhaps, because of) 
their diversity, such fields are fueled by basic understandings of science and technology 
as discursive, social and material practices (Latour, 1987). Roth et  al. (1998) discussed 
how research findings from fields of STS could support students in developing ‘authentic’ 
views about nature of science and science practices. Students, for instance, might depart 
from viewing representations (e.g. graphs and models) as ‘sanitized’ versions of science 
knowledge (Bowen et al. 1998), recognizing instead how “knowledge is practiced [and not 
merely constructed] within structures, processes and environments” (Cetina, 2009, p. 3).
Two special issues of the journals Research in Science Education (1998) and Educa-
tional Studies (2017) are purposefully dedicated to highlighting affinities and possibilities 
between STS research and science/STEM education. They review STS theoretical tools and 
methodologies with implications for ‘creative and critical’ (Freitas et  al. 2017) science/
STEM education research (e.g. Buxton et al. 2017), climate change education (e.g. Ver -
lie 2017), sociocultural science education (e.g. Calabrese-Barton 1998) and teaching about 
nature of science (e.g. Costa et al. 1998).
Weinstein (2008) argues that social studies of science (likely in reference to STS 
research) offer science education four framings of science: 1) science as investigation, this 
is science as inquiry as it happens in laboratories and what’s social is limited to micro inter -
actions between lab workers and meaning-making practices, 2) science as work, whereby, 
science is more than just laboratory work and what’s social extends to writing grants, going 
to conferences and building and contesting knowledges with others, 3) science as enter -
prise, under this view, “profit, patents, political economy, interest, lobbying, legislation and 
funding all emerge as part of science” p. 395) and 4) science as culture expanding what 
“science means when understood as a culture in relation to social movements around dis-
eases, environmentalism, human objectification” (p. 395).
For a glimpse at some recent STS research preoccupations, the call for papers for a 
conference of the Society for Social Studies of Science (4S, 2021), a conference generally 
attended by STS scholars and practitioners, is worth quoting here:
What does it mean in practice to strive towards good relations as humans, with tech-
nologies, in our modes of knowing, within environments, across distance, and with 
other-than-humans? When we speak of good relations, we address ethics of care, 
frameworks of responsibility, and solidarity that span disciplinary and subject bound-
aries. We invite these reflections in relationship to the insurgence of white suprem-
acy, the intensity of grief, and continuing struggles against long standing oppressions 
at personal and structural scales. […] We invite scholarship that critically addresses 
the methods and practices that maintain oppressions within technoscience.
When encountering those words, we are immediately tempted to consider similar roles 
for a science education that helps students “strive towards good relations as humans, with 
technologies, in our modes of knowing, within environments, across distance and with 
1088 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
other-than-humans”. This interest appears to be temporally significant for science educa-
tion. Drawing on metaphors of ‘portal’, Alsop and Bencze (2020) invite us to see our cur -
rent times as opportunities to re-imagine how we might do, live and relate to science and 
technology education amidst glaring social inequities and lingering ecological distress. The 
portal “vividly captures loss of the present, ways in which radical ruptures leave us spin-
ning, oscillating between the past and the present, seeking to make sense of remnants of 
that which has been lost alongside desires for change” (Alsop & Bencze 2020, p. iv). We 
see ourselves moving with this portal, turning more intently to STS literature, as we con-
tinuously strive within our research and practices (see also El Halwany et al. 2020).
(Bio)Political economies of technoscience education
STS research does not only inform pedagogical projects but could provide frameworks to 
analyse how students become “enculturated in modern, techno science-centered society” 
(Weinstein 2008, p. 397). This is, purportedly, a focus of a special issue of the journal 
Cultural Studies of Science Education (2017), addressing intersections between biopoli-
tics (an analytical tool used in STS scholarship, see Birch 2017) and science education. 
Carter et al (2017) view “schooling, of which science education is a part […], a biopoliti-
cal system that (re)produces and regulates the economic subject” (p. 764). Bazzul (2017) 
uses microanalyses of everyday practices related to lab assessment tasks and discourses 
around careers in science to map how students are constituted as “self- investing, depo-
liticized ‘subjects of (science) labor” (p. 874). Elsewhere, Kirchgasler (2018), drawing on 
STS-inspired constructs such as ‘biomedical citizenship’, problematizes science education 
for citizenship through a cross-examination of health education science pedagogies in Phil-
ippines (as a US colony) and a general science course in the US. She analyses how science 
education programmes, through their assessments of hygiene and health, produce “exclu-
sionary boundaries [that] mark some as pre-qualified citizens and others as needing inter -
vention to be recognized as fully responsible human agents” (p. 118).
Critical perspectives on science/STEM education raise (normative) questions that per -
tain to kinds of citizens/subjects/values and futures imagined through science pedago-
gies and practices. In their analysis of the Next Generation Science Standards, Hoeg and 
Bencze (2017) argue that such standards aim to prepare competent STEM subjects able to 
participate in future market societies. De Roock and Baildon (2019) show how STEM edu-
cation initiatives through online means in Singapore serve to recruit students into a “neo-
liberal figured world of learning, work and citizenship” that rests on a “narrowly imagined 
disciplined society and workforce appealing to global capital” (p. 285). In the next section, 
we shift our attention from STEM education to fields of STEM to discuss how they par -
ticipate in production of subjectivities and imaginaries that support and are supported by 
advances in those fields.
(Bio)Political economies of technoscience
Political economies of technoscience refer “to political-economic processes, practices and 
contexts that inform fields of science and technology” (Birch 2013, p. 51). It is about rec-
ognizing how “specific economic epistemic claims (i.e. neoliberalism) have dominated 
ethical, political and social agendas and shaped technoscientific pathways” (Birch 2013, p. 
53). Within this line of work lies inquiries into “ways science (or knowledge of the natural 
1089
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
world) is embedded, embodied and enacted in particular political conditions” (Freitas et al. 
2017, p. 553). Political economies of technoscience meet with studies of biopolitics, taken 
here to be “convergence between biological existence, technology and the socio-political 
where power compels life to be administered, regulated, optimized and controlled” (Carter 
et al. 2017, p. 762).
For instance, Vora (2015) examines how gestational surrogacy (with various advances 
in assisted reproductive technologies) turns into an outsourced labour that supports life in 
the United States at the expense of lives of people in India. She proposes that ways we think 
about bodies and bodies’ parts (in this case, the uterus) as disembodied parts that are alien-
ated from subjects (with the outsourcing of gestational surrogacy) are deeply entangled 
with histories of colonialism and labour allocations that rest on racial and gendered dis-
criminatory practices. Clough (2008) looks at how digital technologies (e.g. technologies 
of surveillance and security) “operate to race populations” (p. 19), where bodies’ affects 
(e.g. face recognition, body heat, neural imaging) are monitored and deployed in biopoliti-
cal control. In other words, body parts become ‘punctualized’ (Callon 1991), reduced to 
their organismic functions, to enable their circulation in economic markets. In her book 
on The Economization of Life, Murphy (2017) argues that studies of population eugenics 
rest on quantitative racist practices that reduce life to its potential economic contributions. 
Illustrating the economization of life, Murphy discusses how dreams of formal education 
for girls in Bangladesh were entangled with surges in reproductive technologies to control 
for ‘undesired’ birth, while producing a wealth of data for population control. This research 
overview begins to gesture towards possibilities for a science education that engages with 
biopolitics of technoscience, presenting opportunities for discussing racial and gendered 
disparities in relation to technoscience practices. In the next section, we turn to specific 
conceptual notions from fields of STS that further highlight how “life has become a phe-
nomenon open to problematization, reinterpretation and reconfiguration as a result of mod-
ern bioscience and, in the specific context of the bio-economy, modern capitalism” (Birch 
2017, p. 918).
Some STS concepts
In this section, we present three notions drawn from our readings of the STS literature: 
socio-technical imaginaries, emotive actants and anthropocentric temporalities. We illus-
trate each notion in relation to contemporary science and technology practices and prod-
ucts to highlight kinds of futures and subjects that they appear to foreground and foreclose.
Sociotechnical imaginaries
‘Sociotechnical Imaginaries’ (SIs) (Jasanoff 2015) refer to “collectively held, institutionally 
stabilized and publicly performed visions of desirable futures (…) attainable through and 
supportive of, advances in science and technology” (p. 4, our emphasis). We view socio-
technical imaginaries to constitute and be constitutive of values and principles that bind 
sets of living & nonliving actants (Latour 1996) in ways that serve particular purposes. 
Indeed, STS scholars push us to think how human capacities – to learn, to be healthy, to 
work, to reproduce –“are configured as forms of capital open to speculation not only for 
individuals and their families, but also for states and transnational investment” (Adams 
et  al. 2009, p. 259). Consider, for instance, how self-tracking devices that constantly 
1090 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
measure our health, physical activity, sleep, screen time, etc., normalize obligations to 
stay informed about possible futures, as features of ‘good’ and virtuous citizenship (Lup-
ton 2016). They leverage feelings of incompleteness and prescribe narrow conceptions of 
agency, wellbeing and citizenship (Wade 2018). They help shape and justify increasingly 
growing markets that commercialize self-care, while over-responsibilizing subjects over 
their own wellbeing (Schüll 2016). Moreover, data collected as part of those self-tracking 
technologies are used by agencies and private organizations, leading to increased surveil-
lance of supposedly ‘personal and privatized’ data (Lupton 2016). With ‘pleasures’ and 
conveniences accompanying self-tracking individual behaviours (Wade 2018), incentivized 
surveillance practices appear to become increasingly normalized (Zuboff 2015).
Emotive actants
Emotive actants are “actants intensifying experiences and expressions of human feelings” 
(Stark 2019, p. 118). Human feelings extend to sensations, moods and emotions mobilized 
for “technoscientific, economic and political ends” (Stark 2019, p. 121), such as manage-
ment of (emotional) labour, consumption and health. The term ‘actant’ is borrowed from 
Actor-Network Theory (ANT) to highlight various entities (human, non-human, material 
and semiotic) that interact as part of social landscapes in which science and technology 
operate (Latour 1996). In advancing ‘emotive actants’, Stark (2019) argues that, while 
affect and emotion are clearly relational and agentic, they “have not always been well expli-
cated in relation to ANT approaches” (p. 118). Far from being personal and individual, 
emotive actants appear to drive our attachments to particular sociotechnical imaginaries 
(e.g. consumerism, individualism, nature as resource, etc.). One current example is sen-
timent analysis algorithms. Andrejevic (2011) notes how sentiment analysis and mood 
analysis’ applications [both being products of science and technology fields] “troll through 
Twitter feeds, blogs, social networking sites, online forums, bulletin boards and chat 
rooms, probing the emotional pulse of the Internet” (p. 610). It is important for students to 
recognize how their interactions with various technologies feed into “a data-driven fantasy 
of control in the affective economy, so that the more emotions are expressed and circulated, 
the more behavior is tracked and aggregated, the greater the ability of marketers to attempt 
to channel and fix affect in ways that translate into increased consumption” (Andrejevic 
2011, p. 615).
Anthropocentric temporalities
Anthropocentric temporalities in technoscience can be mapped to practices and products 
of science and technology (e.g. fertilizers) that favour human temporal timescales over 
other timescales for capitalist gains. One manifestation of such anthropocentric temporal-
ity, according to Puig de la Bellacasa (2015), may be traced to practices that continue to 
view the soil as an inert resource. She invites us to think of ‘time’ from the perspective of 
earthworm communities and ways artificial fertilization of soils aimed at accelerating yield 
would be a slowing down of development of worms and other essential soil communities, 
while simultaneously leaving farmers feeling the pressure of productionism (Shiva 1991). 
She engages with soils at the intersection of science, culture and community to “emphasize 
aspects of scientific practices and narratives that contribute to the formation of new eco-
logical cultures of care for the non-human world” (de la Bellacasa 2019, p. 392).
1091
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
Phillips (2020) explores intertwining of multiple temporalities and timescales through 
attention to a more-than-human practice: beekeeping. Resisting notions of a unitary natu-
ral time, she notes how “urgent pleas to ‘save the bees’ in the face of fears of extinction 
and lost food security […] co-exist with intimate tempos and seasonal coordinations of 
beekeeping” (p. 316). She gives an account of how “the physical and emotional work of 
beekeeping means becoming attuned to hives over time, altering one’s rhythms to coor -
dinate with those of bees and feeling how one is altered through repeated encounters” (p. 
319). Coordinating more-than-human temporalities gives “a sense of shared aliveness” (de 
la Bellacasa 2019, p. 391) that could transform humans’ relationships with the non-human 
world.
Resonances of STS concepts with science education (research)
Some of the STS research that we began to review here could offer science education some 
pedagogical openings for considering how ‘biological life […] is enmeshed with political 
life’ (Carter et al. 2017, p. 762). Science educators and teachers may choose not to refer 
literally to STS notions (such as ‘socio-technical imaginaries’), but they may be inspired by 
their pedagogical resonances within science and environmental education. We discuss such 
pedagogical resonances in relation to four areas of interests within science education and 
science education research: nature of (techno)science, future studies, activism for social 
and environmental justice and studies of affect and emotions.
Nature of (techno)science
Literature from STS is ripe with notions and theoretical constructs that could provide 
science education with conceptual tools, contemporary examples and relevant cases for 
engaging students ‘critically with the political, social and economic implications of science 
and innovation’ (Birch 2017, p. 924). This is congruent with most education and educa-
tional research targeting ‘nature of science for social justice’ (e.g. Yacoubian et al. 2020), 
socio-scientific issues (SSI) education (Sadler et al. 2011) amongst other ‘science in con-
text’ initiatives (e.g. Bencze et al. 2020), as well as critical perspectives on STEM educa-
tion (e.g. Freitas et al. 2017). STS foci on fields of ‘technoscience’ (and not merely science) 
could further reclaim discussions around nature of technology as inseparable from discus-
sions around nature of science (Roth 2001). This could further actualize a ‘technoscience’ 
education (Sismondo 2008) that could transcend science’s epistemic privileges over fields 
of technology, while equally advancing (non-reductionist conceptions of) technologies in 
relation to their material effects and affects. This may involve helping students move away 
from technological determinism and from simplistic understandings of machines shap-
ing our worlds. On the other hand, bio-concepts in STS literature (see Birch 2017) could 
help leverage roles of material technoscience cultures ‘when materiality has been too long 
ignored’ in science education (Scanterbury et  al. 2019). This can have implications for 
grappling with new modalities of citizenship that emerge with the digital age for instance, 
when bodies and lives are turned into data (e.g. through trends such as ‘quantifying the 
self’, see Lupton 2016).
1092 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Future studies
STS researchers work with a range of concepts related to futures and temporalities that 
could carry some implications for future studies in science education. Discussions of pos-
sible, probable and preferable futures as part of school science are believed to enhance 
students’ critical engagement with socio-scientific issues (Jones et al. 2012). Lloyd et al. 
(2004) argue that future concepts and processes empower individuals in the ‘present’ by 
providing positive images of possible futures, while encouraging altruistic dispositions 
that consider needs of future generations. In getting students to build their own versions of 
future scenarios, there are, however, inherent risks that students maintain ‘desired’ futures 
dismissing important players (e.g. technoscience fields, governments, business leaders, 
insurance companies, media) and their roles in shaping what we ought to desire. Notions 
from STS presented here invite critical inquiries into ‘default futures’ (Inayatullah 2013) 
we are given through science and technology, so students can challenge them and imag-
ine anew how science and technology may support non-orthodox, non-Western futures that 
are decolonized and that lie outside economic conquest of time (Inayatullah 2013). For 
instance, thinking with anthropocentric temporalities can help students problematize socio-
technical imaginaries that rest on (human) progress, efficiency, productionism and accu-
mulation (Tsing 2015). We are equally tempted to consider how future thinking in science 
education could strive to ‘diversify and “thicken” accounts of times and temporalities (…) 
to gain new insights into “small kingdoms of worldliness”’ (Phillips 2020, p. 316) and 
what this could mean for environmental/science education.
Activism for social and environmental justice
While concepts presented here do not explicitly address social movements in relation to 
technoscience, they appear to espouse a necessity for publics ‘to pursue greater oversight 
of technoscience at a time when they otherwise risk being turned into compliant consum-
ers’ (Birch 2017, p. 924). When students become attuned to complex arrangements of act-
ants involving science and technology, they might come to equally appreciate needs to 
take actions for social and environmental justice that go beyond personal and individual 
behavioural change (e.g. recycling, biking). According to Carter (2011), there are risks that 
small-scale individual actions may perpetuate neoliberal discourses and related imaginaries 
of human agency, choice and individuality. Literature from STS discussed here offers ways 
of re-thinking social and environmental activism along practices of ‘critical care’ (Martin 
et al. 2015) to enact new (affective) relationships with more-than-human worlds. A critical 
practice of care would ‘insist on paying attention to privileged position of the caring sub-
ject, wary of who has the power to care and who or what tends to get designated the proper 
or improper objects of care’ (Martin et al. 2015, p. 12). For instance, thinking with anthro-
pocentric temporalities could help students appreciate limitations of ‘quick technoscience 
fixes’ by considering how they reiterate traditional linear modes of technical rationality 
(Carter 2011). Other implications include problematizing modes of environmental ‘care’ 
premised on urges to ‘save’, ‘protect’ and ‘manage’ nature by discussing how they continue 
to prioritize human timeframes and nature-culture divisions (Martusewicz et al. 2010).
1093
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
Affect in/of technoscience (education)
Excerpts from STS literature reviewed here can push students to follow ‘affective politics’ 
(Ahmed 2014) connected to products of science and technology (such as hope, fear, anxi-
ety) that intensify and potentialize our attachments to human-centric visions, practices and 
ways of knowing, while foreclosing other ways of being with more-than-humans. Far from 
seeing emotions as personal and private, students can become attuned to political dimen-
sions of emotions (Zembylas 2016) and to our affective orientations to products and prac-
tices in science and technology. The purpose is not to become immune to those affective 
orientations (is that even possible?) but to enable students to transcend Cartesian divisions 
between thinking and feeling towards thinking as feeling and feeling as thought (Raymond 
2015). This could begin to respond to calls for an ‘affective science education’ (Alsop 
2016), by including representations of affect in science and education and by experiment-
ing with creative and transformative practices that can engender new affectivities with sci-
ence and education.). Zembylas (2016) and Alsop (2016) offer various musings and pos-
sibilities for science education and science education research that draw on the ‘affective 
turn’ (Clough, 2008) from within cultural studies of science.
Stepping out with care
Stepping into the STS literature with care compels us to step out of the discussion with 
care. We are reminded that ‘critical care’ is less concerned with a form of critique that is 
‘disapproving or judgmental’ and more with a form of doing ‘that is cautious, thought-
ful and considered’ (Martin et al. 2015, p. 12). Yet, this paper hinges on, perhaps, forms 
of harsh critique of fields of science and technology. We agree with Levinson (2018) and 
Sjostrom et  al. (2018), amongst others, that there are relative merits to such portrayals 
given often de-politicized perspectives on science and technology within education. At the 
same time, we remain conscious that brushing on biopolitics in this essay could risk over -
simplifying an otherwise complex, fluid and contested field (see Birch 2017). Hence, we 
invite further careful considerations into merits, challenges and vehicles for bringing such 
insights of STS into science education contexts.
Though we are committed to views of technoscience and education presented in this 
paper, we wonder how such views could be pedagogically enacted through ‘slow’ ontolo-
gies (Wallace 2018), which may disrupt ‘strong’ (Biesta 2015) approaches to education 
that seem to prioritize speed, efficiency and outcomes. As mentioned earlier, perhaps 
such pedagogical considerations could further take place in dialogic interactions between 
researchers, teachers and students, relative to specific contexts (echoing Torres-Olave and 
Bravo’s multi-levelled dialogue). In that sense, we resist a grandiose one formula approach 
for articulating STS concepts within science education and propose that there might be 
merits in experimenting with new pedagogical approaches that won’t delimit in advance 
what is ‘science’ nor assume students’/teachers’ ‘abilities’ to engage with insights from this 
literature. This, is, of course, easier said than done. We can’t pretend that reading through 
this literature was a simple and straightforward task. At various times, we struggled with 
‘abstractness’ and complexity of notions, anticipating similar reactions from science teach-
ers and students and ensuing resistance to such views. After all, this could be a risky under -
taking for science education. Yet, we remain hopeful and comforted that, with risks come 
1094 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
‘important pleasures through assuming subversive positions of knowing’ (Zembylas 2007, 
p. 334, our emphasis) and being with science, technology and education.
References
Alsop, S. (2016). Encountering science education’s capacity to affect and be affected. Cultural Studies of 
Science Education, 11(3), 551–565.
Alsop, S., & Bencze, L. (2020). Reimagining Science and Technology Education in the COVID-19 Portal. 
Journal for Activist Science and Technology Education, 11(2), 1–7.
Ahmed, S. (2014). Cultural politics of emotion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Adams, V., Murphy, M., & Clarke, A. E. (2009). Anticipation: Technoscience, life, affect, temporality. Sub-
jectivity, 28(1), 246–265.
Andrejevic, M. (2011). The work that affective economics does. Cultural studies, 25(4–5), 604–620.
Bazzul, J. (2017). Biopolitics and the ‘subject’ of labor in science education. Cultural Studies of Science 
Education, 12(4), 873–887.
Bencze, L. (2017).  Science and technology education promoting wellbeing for individuals, societies and 
environments: STEPWISE (Vol. 14). Springer.
Bencze, L., Carter, L., & Krstovic, M. (2018). Youth Uses of Actor-Network Theory for Undermin-
ing Societal Consumerism. Sociocultural perspectives on youth ethical consumerism (pp. 71–99). 
Cham: Springer.
Bencze, L., Pouliot, C., Pedretti, E., Simonneaux, L., Simonneaux, J., & Zeidler, D. (2020). SAQ, SSI 
and STSE education: defending and extending “science-in-context.” Cultural Studies of Science 
Education, 15(3), 825–851.
Biesta, G. J. (2015). Beyond learning: Democratic education for a human. Future: Routledge.
Birch, K. (2013). The political economy of technoscience: An emerging research agenda. Spontaneous 
Generations: A Journal for the History and Philosophy of Science, 7(1), 49–61.
Birch, K. (2017). The problem of bio-concepts: biopolitics, bio-economy and the political economy of 
nothing. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 12(4), 915–927.
Bowen, G. M., & Roth, W. M. (1998). Lecturing graphing: What features of lectures contribute to stu-
dent difficulties in learning to interpret graph? Research in Science Education, 28(1), 77–90.
Buxton, C., Harper, S., Payne, Y. D., & Allexsaht-Snider, M. (2017). Using the sociology of associations 
to rethink STEM education. Educational Studies, 53(6), 587–600.
Calabrese-Barton, A. (1998). Examining the social and scientific roles of invention in science education. 
Research in Science Education, 28(1), 133–151.
Callon, M. (1991). Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of mon-
sters: Essays on power, technology and domination (pp. 132–161). London: Routledge.
Carter, L. (2011). Gathering in threads in the insensible global world: The wicked problem of globalisa-
tion and science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 6(1), 1–12.
Carter, L., Weinstein, M., & Bencze, L. (2017). Biopolitics and science education. Cultural Studies of 
Science Education, 12(4), 761–767. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11422- 017- 9845-x
Cetina, K. K. (2009). Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Harvard: Harvard Univer -
sity Press.
Costa, S., Hughes, T. B., & Pinch, T. (1998). Bringing it all back home: some implications of recent 
science and technology studies for the classroom science teacher. Research in Science Education,  
28(1), 9–21.
de Freitas, E., Lupinacci, J., & Pais, A. (2017). Science and technology studies× educational studies: Criti-
cal and creative perspectives on the future of STEM education. Educational Studies, 53(6), 551–559.
de Roock, R. S., & Baildon, M. (2019). MySkillsFuture for students, STEM learning, and the design of neo-
liberal citizenship in Singapore. Cognition and Instruction, 37(3), 285–305.
El Halwany, S., Bencze, L., Hassan, N., Schaffer, K., Milanovic, M., & Zouda, M. (2020). Becoming 
alive within science education (research): thinking with life history (ies), bodies and stickiness. 
Cultural Studies of Science Education., 6, 1–23.
Higgins, M., Wallace, M. F., & Bazzul, J. (2019). Staying with the Trouble in Science Education: 
Towards Thinking with Nature—A Manifesto. Posthumanism and Higher Education (pp. 155–164). 
Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hess, D. J. (2015). Undone science and social movements. Routledge international handbook of igno-
rance studies., 23, 141–154.
1095
Stepping into STS literature: Some implications for promoting…
1 3
Hodson, D. (2014). Becoming part of the solution: Learning about activism, learning through activism, 
learning from activism. Activist science and technology education (pp. 67–98). Dordrecht: Springer.
Hoeg, D., & Bencze, L. (2017). Rising against a gathering storm: A biopolitical analysis of citizenship 
in STEM policy. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 12(4), 843–861.
Inayatullah, S. (2013). Futures studies: theories and methods (pp. 36–66). Visions for a better world: 
There’s a future.
Jasanoff, S. (2015). Future imperfect: Science, technology and the imaginations of modernity (pp. 1–33). 
Dreamscapes of modernity: Sociotechnical imaginaries and the fabrication of power.
Jones, A., Buntting, C., Hipkins, R., McKim, A., Conner, L., & Saunders, K. (2012). Developing stu-
dents’ futures thinking in science education. Research in Science Education, 42(4), 687–708.
Kirchgasler, K. L. (2018). Moving the lab into the field: The making of pathologized (non) citizens in 
US science education. Curriculum Inquiry, 48(1), 115–137.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society. Harvard: 
Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1996). On actor-network theory: A few clarifications. Soziale welt., 12, 369–381.
Levinson, R. (2018). Realising the school science curriculum. The Curriculum Journal, 29(4), 522–537.
Lloyd, D., & Wallace, J. (2004). Imaging the future of science education: The case for making futures 
studies explicit in student learning. Studies in Science Education, 40, 139–178.
Lupton, D. (2016). The diverse domains of quantified selves: self-tracking modes and dataveillance. Econ-
omy and Society, 45(1), 101–122.
Martin, A., Myers, N., & Viseu, A. (2015). The politics of care in technoscience. Social Studies of Science, 
45(5), 625–641.
Martusewicz, R. A., Lupinacci, J., & Schnakenberg, G. (2010). EcoJustice education for science educators. 
Cultural studies and environmentalism (pp. 11–27). Dordrecht: Springer.
McGinn, M. K., & Roth, W. M. (1999). Preparing students for competent scientific practice: Implications of 
recent research in science and technology studies. Educational Researcher, 28(3), 14–24.
Milne, C., & Scantelbury, K. (2019). Material practice and materiality: too long ignored in science educa-
tion. Springer.
Phillips, C. (2020). Telling times: More-than-human temporalities in beekeeping. Geoforum, 108, 315–324.
Pierce, C. (2012). The Promissory Future (s) of Education: Rethinking scientific literacy in the era of bio-
capitalism. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 44(7), 721–745.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social 
Studies of Science, 45(5), 691–716.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2019). Re-animating soils: Transforming human–soil affections through science, 
culture and community. The Sociological Review, 67(2), 391–407.
Ramjewan, N. T., Zoras, B., & Bencze, L. (2017). Giving meaning to STSE issues through student-led 
action research: An actor-network theory account of STEPWISE in action. Science and Technology 
Education Promoting Wellbeing for Individuals, Societies and Environments (pp. 277–293). Cham: 
Springer.
Raymond, W. (2015). Structures of feeling. In D. Sharma, & F. Tygstrup (Eds.), Structures of feeling: Affec-
tivity and study of culture (pp. 20–25). De Gruyter.
Roth, W. M. (1998). Science and technology studies and science education: a natural match? Research in 
Science Education, 28(1), 1–7.
Roth, W. M. (2001). Learning science through technological design. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching: The Official Journal of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, 38(7), 
768–790.
Sadler, T. D. (Ed.). (2011).  Socio-scientific issues in the classroom: Teaching, learning and research (Vol. 
39). Springer Science & Business Media.
Shiva, V. (1991). The violence of the green revolution: third world agriculture, ecology and politics. Zed 
Books.
Schüll, N. D. (2016). Data for life: Wearable technology and the design of self-care. BioSocieties, 11(3), 
317–333.
Sismondo, S. (2008). Science and technology studies and an engaged program. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amster -
damska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies (3rd ed., pp. 
13–31). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sjöström, J., & Eilks, I. (2018). Reconsidering different visions of scientific literacy and science educa-
tion based on the concept of Bildung. Cognition, metacognition and culture in STEM education (pp. 
65–88). Cham: Springer.
1096 S. El Halwany et al.
1 3
Springgay, S., & Truman, S. E. (2018). On the Need for Methods Beyond Proceduralism: Speculative Mid-
dles, (In)Tensions and Response-Ability in Research. Qualitative Inquiry, 24(3), 203–214. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1177/ 10778 00417 704464
Stark, L. (2019). Affect and Emotion in digitalSTS (pp. 117–135). DigitalSTS: A Field Guide for Science & 
Technology Studies.
Torres-Olave, B. & Bravo, P. (2021). Facing neoliberalism through dialogic spaces as sites of hopes in sci-
ence education: experiences of two self-organized communities.
Tsing, A. L. (2015). The mushroom at the end of the world: On the possibility of life in capitalist ruins. 
Princeton University Press.
Verlie, B. (2017). Rethinking climate education: Climate as entanglement. Educational Studies, 53(6), 
560–572.
Vora, K. (2015). Life Support: Biocapital and the New History of Outsourced Labor. Minnesota: U of Min-
nesota Press.
Wade, M. (2018). Virtuous Play: The Ethics, Pleasures and Burdens of Brain Training. Science as Culture, 
27(3), 296–321.
Wallace, M. F. (2018). The paradox of un/making science people: practicing ethico-political hesitations in 
science education. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 13(4), 1049–1060.
Weinstein, M. (2008). Finding science in the school body: Reflections on transgressing the boundaries of 
science education and the social studies of science. Science Education, 92(3), 389–403.
Yacoubian, H. A., & Hansson, L. (2020). Nature of science for social justice. Springer.
Zembylas, M. (2007). Risks and pleasures: a Deleuzo-Guattarian pedagogy of desire in education. British 
educational research journal, 33(3), 331–347.
Zembylas, M. (2016). Making sense of the complex entanglement between emotion and pedagogy: Contri-
butions of the affective turn. Cultural Studies of Science Education, 11(3), 539–550.
Zuboff, S. (2015). Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilization. Jour -
nal of Information Technology, 30(1), 75–89.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Sarah El Halwany is a candidate in Science Education at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, 
University of Toronto. Her dissertation explores how cultures of technoscience technicians are affectively 
constituted in the context of college STEM education. She further explores effects of pedagogies centered 
on STSE education (such as STEPWISE) in engendering new subjectivities vis-à-vis fields of STEM. Her 
research interests include SSI or STSE education, emotions and affect in science education.
Majd Zouda is a candidate in Science Education at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, University 
of Toronto. Her doctoral dissertation focuses on STEM discourses  in independent schools in Canada. Majd 
holds a B.Sc. in Microbiology and M.Sc. in Medical Microbiology. Prior to pursuing a Ph.D. degree, she 
worked as a high-school science teacher and the head of the junior science department in an international 
school in Damascus, Syria. For her doctoral research, she has received a SSHRC doctoral fellowship (Social 
Sciences and Humanities Research Council). Majd has been actively involved in publications regarding 
socioscientific and STSE issues, STEM education and student activism.
John Lawrence Bencze is an Associate Professor (Emeritus) in Science Education at the University of 
Toronto (1998-present). Prior to this role, he worked for fifteen years as a science teacher and as a sci-
ence education consultant in Ontario, Canada. His research programme emphasizes critical analyses—draw -
ing on history, philosophy, sociology, etc.—of science and technology, explicit teaching about problematic 
power relations and student-led research-informed and negotiated socio-political actions to address per -
sonal, social and environmental harms associated with fields of science and technology. Recent publica-
tions include two edited books about proactive citizenship. He also is co-editor of an open-source activist 
journal(goo.gl/ir7YRj).
