Supervised Ontology Oriented Deep Neural Network to Predict Soil Health  
Kushala Vijaya Kumar Mummigatti1*, Supriya Maganahalli Chandramouli2 
1 Sri Siddhartha Academy of Higher Education, Tumkur  572107 , Karnataka, India  
2 Department of Information Science, Sri Siddhartha Institute of Technology, Tumkur  572105 , Karnataka, India  
Corresponding Author Email:  vmkushala@gmail.com
https://doi.org/ 10.18280/ria. 3602 20 ABSTRACT  
Received: 6 March 2022  
Accepted: 15 April 2022  Soil health plays a vital role in agriculture. A nutrient -rich soil helps in better crop growth 
and high yield. The agriculture data in India is haphazard and no major effort is seen in 
maintaining them. Soil chemical property is a basic knowledge to  decide on cultivation. 
Knowledge base to help farmers analyse the soil health by using the chemical properties as 
the main feature in predicting the health and quality of the soil before the cultivation is a 
key factor for a better production result. This  study drives the idea of building a domain 
ontology model for soil and also utilizes a neural network in predicting the soil by 
classifying it as healthy or unhealthy based on six chemical parameters that explain the 
property of soil. Ontology plays as a knowledge base in storing the properties of the soil 
which also helps in enabling artificial intelligence concepts on the knowledge to make better 
decisions. MATLAB deep learning toolbox is used to implement the classification and also 
TensorFlow’s Keras w as used to handle the data pre -processing, normalization and also the 
network architecture to validate the result from the toolbox. MATLAB employs the Scaled 
Conjugate Gradient algorithm and performs with 92% accuracy in achieving the 
classification of soi l. Keywords:  
ontology, deep learning, neural network, 
backpropagation, scale conjugate gradient, 
soil health, classification  
1.INTRODUCTION
Globalization made a tremendous impact on India which 
impacted many sectors to grow into a better state. But 
agriculture being age -old employment in India was not much 
polished with technologies and stood as a neglected field with 
poor performance delivery. With a highly improved, timely 
and nutrient production of crops, the country can establish 
better trade culture, provide employment opportunities in the 
agriculture sector, and increase the technologies involved in 
the process, which directly helps the increase the income and 
growth of the country. In a developing country with a ma jority 
of the population dependent on agriculture as a main source of 
income, driving agriculture to meet the globalization speed 
plays a very important role.  
Human population dependency to produce high agricultural 
yield with improper knowledge of chemica l fertilizers has an 
adverse effect on cultivation land and has diminished the 
fertility of the soil and also the nutrient value of yield. 
Adoption of new scientific techniques to test the quality of soil 
in a short time helps the farmer to make a better d ecision about 
the fertilizers and the crop to be cultivated in their soil.  
India with its main revenue from agriculture has failed in 
adopting the technology and distributing it to the farmers in a 
geographical aspect. Agriculture field is the most dynamic , 
with huge and diversified data. Artificial intelligence has a 
wide practice in the industry with evidence of delivering good 
results with diversified data. An attempt is made here in 
adapting it to the agricultural land. To facilitate the approach, 
we ar e adopting an ontology framework which helps in an 
efficient storage with respected relations among the data 
helping the data.  The main objective of this paper relies on classifying the 
soil whether it is healthy soil for cultivation or unhealthy soil. 
The chemical nutrients it lacks plays an important role to 
classify them into cultivation and non -cultivation soil. To 
classify the soil according to our objective: soil has two 
properties physical and chemical. Physical properties as it 
indicates involve th e “look and feels” of soil i.e., color, texture, 
structure, porosity, density, consistency, aggregate stability, 
and temperature measured from external devices. Chemical 
properties are an important factor in determining the quality 
and nutrient factors of the soil and it is explained by the test 
conducted for pH, EC, Potassium, Nitrogen and Phosphorous. 
These are the major parameters we have considered to validate 
soil health.  
There is a huge dimension to agricultural knowledge. A 
knowledge base or a frame work to preserve the knowledge 
related to agriculture by invoking many dimensions like soil 
with chemical and physical properties, crop type, fertilizer 
type which involves chemical, organic, bio -chemical etc., 
weather, cultivation type, harvesting time de pending on the 
crop etc., which holds many of these kinds of dimension is 
lacking, therefore, we come up with ontology that can handle 
these dimensions effectively. Ontology helps in capturing the 
knowledge and provides an understanding of the domain. 
Onto logy helps in describing and conceptualizing the basic 
concepts in the domain used and establishes a relationship 
among them. This helps in the retrieval of the knowledge from 
the base effectively with a minimum amount of querying [1].  
Indian cultivation land varies widely with different soil 
types, cultivation practices, weather and crops. Currently, 
there are many ontologies developed for the domain of 
agriculture. Name a few of them: AGROVAC, Crop 
Revue d'Intelligence Artificielle  
Vol. 36, No.  2, April, 2022 , pp. 341-346 
Journal homepage:  http://iieta.org/journals/ria  
341

 Cultivation Standards, Crop ontology etc. These ontologi es 
are developed by specific organizations under specific regions, 
knowledge, interfaces, search criteria etc., explaining, that 
AGROVAC ontology is widely used but it involves the 
knowledge base of horticulture and animal husbandry which 
makes adapting to  local regions a gap leading it as a drawback. 
Crop cultivation standards involve only knowledge of 
standardizing the crop with no knowledge of considering soil 
as a parameter. The CropOnto incorporated all the attributes 
of AGROVAC along with farming acti vities. Our review of 
domain ontology extensively proves the reuse of the ontology 
in Indian farmlands is challenging and fails. They fail in 
considering the property of soil and a framework to decide on 
them. Hence, we attempt to build a domain ontology f or the 
soil's chemical properties.  
With the domain knowledge present with us which we 
obtained by constructing ontology, we can apply deep learning 
techniques to classify the soil into a healthy or unhealthy class 
which helps in the fast -decision -making process during 
cultivation decision. Deep learning is a part of artificial 
intelligence that uses neural network architecture to process 
information. They are well known for their speed and accurate 
results as they are conceptualized based on the human brain's 
working process. Deep learning a rchitecture beats many 
technical challenges faced by machine learning. It can handle 
a large amount of data without feature engineering, it 
efficiently delivers the results compared to machine learning.  
We performed the same study by implementing differen t 
machine learning algorithms with the knowledge base i.e., by 
constructing a domain ontology of soil. The maximum 
accuracy of the model achieved approximately was 80% [2]. 
Machine learning failed to perform well on the varying data 
samples collected from us. An efficient algorithms like 
decision tree, random forest, XGBoost was implemented in 
classifying the objective. Which resulted in 77,85,80 percent 
of accuracy along with very poor ROC and precession values. 
Deep learning can manage any kind of data i. e., data without 
common patterns as needed by machine learning. With the 
advantages of deep learning studied, it is evident that neural 
networks can produce better results in many challenging 
problems related to agriculture [3]. By adopting deep learning 
we achieved in a better accuracy of 92%, the problems of 
machine learning faced in handling dissimilar was easily and 
timely achieved.  
 
 
2. LITERATURE SURVEY  
 
Artificial intelligence is playing an evident role in many 
fields and effectively delivering very go od results. A neural 
network can deliver better results as they are trained with 
specific data which are processed logically in producing the 
result [3].  ANN is composed of three layers named as the input 
layer, the hidden layer and the output layer [4]. T he input layer 
is the only visible layer in the neural network (NN) it acts as a 
receiver and transformer by accepting the information in 
various forms and pass on to the next layer. Hidden layers are 
the magnificent layers that handle the whole computatio n. It 
handles many computations works like weight adjustment, 
adjusting the bias, activation function, transfer function etc., 
the output layer receives the computational works done by the 
hidden layer and outputs the prediction as per the user 
requirement . 
The learning phase of the neural network involves adjusting the weights in the network such that it can predict the 
appropriate class label. A NN is classified into two types 
supervised and unsupervised [5]. Supervised learning of NN is 
trained based on input -output data which are fed to the 
network, they generally involve multi -layer feed -forward 
which is trained using a back -propagation algorithm. 
Unsupervised learning of NN does not relay on input -output 
data but trains automatically on the in formation present in 
input -output example data.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Basic structure of neural network with back 
propagation  
 
Convolution neural network along with android based was 
used in soil classification, which consisted of 10000 images of 
soil from Cagayan  Valley, Philippines. The images contained 
the upper layer images of soil that belonged to different classes. 
Using CNN with a few layers of hidden layers and learning 
rate the soil images were able to get classified into 16 different 
classes with 90% and more accuracy [4].  
Soil class prediction using orbital sensing data and terrain 
attributes derived from digital sources and geology 
departments using ANN was successful in producing an 
accuracy of 90 to 95%. A neural network simulator along with 
a backpro pagation algorithm is used for this study [3]. Soil 
class classification along with soil moisture and temperature 
profile prediction model was built using neural network 
backpropagation and Levenberg -Marquardt algorithm on the 
data collected from remotely sensed microwave [5]. Network 
architecture was designed with three hidden layers with the 
sigmoid and tangent transfer as activation functions to classify 
the soil into its classes.  
Collecting the factors like organic matter, essential plant 
nutrients, an d micronutrients required for the growth of a crop 
was evidently found using the backpropagation algorithm 
which suggests and finds the correlation between the nutrient 
facts, and external factors' effects and suggests the growth of 
the crop [6]. The backp ropagation idea was also implemented 
to classify the soil with the ability to classify 5 different types 
of soil by considering 11 input parameters [7, 8]. The same 
idea was used to classify the soil based on its general behavior 
and the given physical con dition, the input parameter is 
porosity and water content and the output is a type of the soil 
class it belongs to with 95 to 99 percent accuracy, the similar 
idea is implemented with different algorithms of deep learning 
was achieved to classify the soil with similar accuracy level 
[9-11]. 
An ontology is a set of concepts and categories in a subject 
area or domain that possesses the properties and relations 
between them. They help in providing background knowledge 
that can be used by machine learning and d eep learning models 
[12]. They also help in training the better model by improving 
the data quality. Navigation between one structure of data to 
342
 another structure of data is easily made with their usage of 
them. Ontologies are also used as structured outpu t in the task 
of predicting whether the entity has relationships with one or 
more classes. Ontology helps as a tool between humans and 
computers by improving the communication between them by 
reusing the knowledge, information and data.  
Agriculture Online Service (AOS), is a domain ontology 
developed to provide agricultural knowledge management 
with other semantic applications. This ontology supported a 
multi -linguistic approach to storing the knowledge. As the 
knowledge base for agriculture is a lack in a county like Sri 
Lanka, a domain ontology was developed with major concern 
to users. With this approach, they achieved creating a 
repository of knowledge and retrieval of information 
according to the query concerning the context requested by the 
user [13]. Research for domain Ontology for agriculture was 
conducted in Pakistan which makes the stakeholders store, 
manage and share the instances effectively and reuse them 
effectively. Their main intention was to create E -modeling 
Ontology was agriculture [14].  
Farmer helping system ontology developed by Chennai, 
Indian Researchers concentrated on providing a helping hand 
framework for farmers [15]. This integrates different 
information from soil, pesticides, crop, methodology and 
many more. The framework accepts  the user requests and 
analyzes it to reach the information to the appropriate 
knowledge base with the solution. The data is semantically 
annotated which helps in storing, analyzing and retrieving the 
data.  
With these studies considered and reviewed artifi cial 
intelligence and ontology are playing an important role in 
different aspects of agriculture. Deep learning algorithms have 
been extensively used in making decisions on different 
prospects. The importance of knowledge in aspect towards a 
particular dom ain of agriculture can be addressed with 
ontology.  
 
 
3. METHODOLOGY  
 
As discussed previously with the architecture of NN 
concerning Figure 1, the backpropagation technique has three 
layers, input hidden and output layers. Backward propagation 
of errors in th e technique adopted by the backpropagation 
algorithm. This is, after every forward pass in the network this 
algorithm does a backward pass to adjust the weights and bias 
in the neural network until the errors are minimized. The first 
layer takes the input parameters which can be either simple 
scalar or complex vector forms of data. This advantage is 
completely leveraged in building our soil classification on the 
devise data.  
The data was collected from soil testing institutes around 
Mysore district, Karnataka State, India. The data was 
handwritten in the logbooks, these are then typed into the 
computer. The data contained the parameters like soil type, 
acres, survey number of the land, owner information, PH, EC, 
Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Nit rogen values. We discarded the 
values like owner information, acres, and survey number.  
Observations and handling of the data: Basic statistics of the 
data project that 80% of the soil data appeared to be unhealthy 
and 20% is a healthy class. This alone pr oves the data we had 
gathered dominated class -imbalance characteristics. The data 
did not project any similarity or inferences. The value of each 
parameter varied drastically from each acre which we inferred from the pair plot. By consulting the soil exper ts, we derived 
the desired values of each parameter that decide the health of 
the soil. With the derived value, a new feature called as the 
target is added representing 0 as unhealthy and 1 as healthy 
soil.  
As we had already mentioned the challenge in agr icultural 
data is there are no similar patterns in the data. The data varied 
drastically with very few changes in geographic region and 
cultivation practices. The soil properties changed in every 
single acre of land due to different cultivation practices, 
fertilizers use and the crops produced. Class imbalance with 
the dominance of unhealthy soil is one of the challenges which 
was not effectively handled by the machine learning approach.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. The raw data collected from soil test institutes 
(Visualization from Jupyter Notebook)  
 
Figure 2 is the raw data collected from the agricultural soil 
test center. Agricultural data is not digitalized. The data was 
loaded in the Jupyter notebook to understa nd the relationships 
using EDA and to pre -process.  
Figure 3 represents the architecture and workflow adopted 
in classifying the soil using domain ontology. The data is 
collected from the soil testing centers and also acquired in -
depth knowledge of the soi l domain. This helps in identifying 
the main features needed for the knowledge base and how to 
obtain the relation between them. Construct a soil domain -
oriented ontology. Validate the ontology with new data. With 
the help of ontology, the framework applie s deep learning 
neural network to classify the soil to the desired class.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Methodology adopted frame work  
343
 3.1 Domain ontology  
 
Ontology is developed using Proté gé  4.3. This is one of the 
major steps involved in understanding the significant class 
features and their inferences. This creates domain -specific 
knowledge representing the soil class and its properties. The 
important reason to generate ontology is to acquire and get a 
profound insight into the features in the dataset collected and 
treated.  The domain ontology with the combination of 
chemical property and soil health as the class and their 
respected attributes are visualized using asserted class 
hierarchy visualization tool in Figure 4. The hierarchical 
structure between the class and their relation is depicted as tree 
structure in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Asserted class hierarchy of soil health  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Tree structure produced by proté gé  
 
Using MATLAB, the collected data was trained using 
scaled conjugate gradient algorithm. The same data was also 
trained using TensorFlow’s Keras to re -validate the accuracy 
and performance of the model. The network architecture was 
composed of five hidden l ayers which employed batch -
normalization, dropout layer with learning rate of 0.05 to 
improve the performance stochastic gradient descent was also 
adopted.  
 
3.2 Scaled  conjugate gradient algorithm  (SCG)  
 
SCG algorithm is proved to outperform the bench mark of  
back propagation algorithm, it is completely an automated and 
less time -consuming algorithm as it avoids linear search 
process to adjust the weights [16]. In SCG the search is performed along with conjugate directions which makes faster 
convergence other than the steepest descendent algorithms.  
Eq. (1) represents the generalization of forwarding pass. 
Error is calculated using Eq . (2) and performs 
Backpropagation. In SCG step size function is a quadratic 
approximation of the error function which makes it more 
robust and independent from the user.  
 
ℎ1=𝑤n * i1 + wn+1 * in+1 + b1 * 1  (1) 
 
Error = sum * ½ (target – output)2  (2) 
 
SCG = E ( wk + σkpk) − E (wk)/ σk + λkpk  (3) 
 
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 
The data from agricultural test institutions are trained using 
a neural network that was stored in our domain ontology.  The 
predictions are 0 and 1, 0 being unhealthy and 1 being healthy 
class.  The accuracy of the classification model is measured 
based on the confusion matrix and ROC curve.  
Figure 6 rep resents the overall accuracy of the model which 
is 90.9%. The accuracy of the data set which was split into 
training, test and validation is also present. Figure 7 represents 
the ROC curve which is used to analyze the accuracy of the 
classification model. This is used to measure the degree and 
capacity of the model in achieving the classification of the 
classes.  
The results discussed above evidently prove a better 
performance and knowledge base compared to the study we 
made in our survey. The study proved t hat there is a lack of 
knowledge base for the easier retrieval of knowledge. With the 
domain ontology built we defend to have a knowledge base. 
With easy access to knowledge neural networks performed 
better in classifying the soil.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Confusion matrix for the soil data -set classification 
model  
 
Figure 8 represents training vs test loss in every epoch. The 
figure tells us that error decreased and validated at 0.0631 at 
31 iterations which is leading to a better performance.  
344
  
 
Figure 7.  ROC curve for the classification model  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Training vs Test loss  
 
 
5. CONCLUSION  
 
Agricultural data is rapidly changing data. The data varies 
drastically from a geographical region, crops grown, fertilizers 
used, cultivation methodology and various other external 
factors. Agriculture is the field in India that lacks digitalization 
of the data, knowledge management system or storage system. 
The agriculture data has many interrelated dimensions. Storing 
and managing such kinds of data need to be available 
according to the geographical region. This type of system will 
help in taking decisio ns by minimizing the time by farmers in 
deciding the soil health.  
With this intention, a domain -oriented ontology of soil is 
built by identifying the concepts and their relations in soil. 
Which is helps in storing the knowledge soil properties as a 
knowle dge base. A decision support method was also 
attempted by using a deep neural network to classify the soil. 
Classification of the soil will help the farmers to treat the soil 
with proper nutrients. We have achieved the knowledge base 
and also the classific ation with 92 percent of accuracy. The ontology can be extended with other factors like climate, 
fertilizers, and crops and adopt an artificial intelligence 
method to get the desired result.  
Predicting whether the soil is healthy or unhealthy is an 
initial  step in the decision of the cultivation. Along with 
chemical properties external factors like humidity, and 
temperature using external devices can also be adopted using 
wireless sensors, and IoT devices to decide on the soil quality 
to be more confident.  Soil images data can also be an 
additional consideration to classify the soil.  
From the above implementations, we can conclude that 
Deep learning and Ontology combined can result in evident, 
easeful results in the agricultural field.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] Taye, M.M. (2010). Understanding semantic web and 
ontologies: Theory and applications.  arXiv  preprint  
arXiv:1006.4567.  
[2] Kushala , V.M.,  Supriya,  M.C.,  Suma,  N.R.  (2021) . 
Supervised  machine learning technique to predict soil 
health . Turkish  Online  Journal  of Qualitative  Inquiry  
(TOJQI),  12(7): 1622 -1630.  
[3] Kuwata,  K., Shibasaki,  R. (2015).  Estimating  crop yields  
with deep  learning  and remotely  sensed  data.  In 2015  
IEEE  International  Geoscience  and Remote  Sensing  
Symposium  (IGARSS) , pp. 858-861. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/IGARSS.2015.7325900  
[4] Atluri,  V., Hung,  C.C.,  Coleman,  T.L. (1999).  An 
artificial  neural  network  for classifying  and predicting  
soil moisture  and temperature  using  Levenberg -
Marquardt  algorithm.  In Proceedings  IEEE  
Southeastc on'99.  Technology  on the Brink  of 2000  (Cat.  
No. 99CH36300) , pp. 10-13. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/SECON.1999.766079  
[5] Calderano  Filho,  B., Polivanov,  H., Chagas,  C.D.S.,  
Carvalho  Jú nior,  W.D.,  Barroso,  E.V.,  Guerra,  A.J.T.,  
Calderano,  S.B. (2014).  Artificial  neural  networks  
applied  for soil class  prediction  in mountainous  
landscape  of the Serra  do Mar¹ .  Revista  Brasileira  de 
Ciê ncia  do Solo,  38(6):  1681 -1693.  
[6] Lagarteja.,  G.J. (2020).  Android -based soil series  
classifier  using  convolutional  neural  network . 
International  Journal  of Scientific  & Technology  
Research , 9(2): 2277 -2285 . 
[7] Odhiambo,  L.O.,  Freeland,  R.S.,  Yoder,  R.E.,  Hines,  J.W. 
(2002).  Application  of fuzzy -neural  network  in 
classification  of soils using  ground -penetrating  radar  
imagery.  In 2002  ASAE  Annual  Meeting  (p. 1). 
American  Society  of Agricultural  and Biological  
Engineers.  
[8] Ghosh,  S., Koley,  S. (2014).  Machine  learning  for soil 
fertility  and plant  nutrient  management  using  back  
propagation  neural  networks.  International  Journal  on 
Recent  and Innovation  Trends  in Computing  and 
Communication,  2(2): 292-297. 
[9] Yee, K.M.,  Aung,  T.Z.,  San, T. (2019).  Soil type 
classification  based  on neural  network . International  
Journal  of Creative  and Innovative  Research  in all 
Studies  (IJCIRAS),  2(3): 6-11. 
[10] Htun,  W., Htay,  S. (2010).  Classification  of soil type 
using  backpropagation  neural  network  (Doctoral  
dissertation,  MERAL  Portal).  
345
[11] Elarabi,  H., Ali, K. (2009).  Soil classification  modelling
using  artificial  neural  network . The International
Conference  on Intelligent  Systems  (Icis2009),  Kingdom
of Bahrain.
[12] Xiong,  J., Yang, Y., Yang,  Z., Wang, S. (2010).  An
online  system  for agricultural  ontology  service.  In 2010
Third  International  Conference  on Intelligent  Networks
and Intelligent  Systems , pp. 479-481.
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICINIS.2010.106
[13] Walisadeera,  A.I., Ginige,  A., Wikramanayake,  G.N.
(2014).  User  centered  ontology  for Sri Lankan
agriculture  domain.  In 2014  14th International
Conference  on Advances  in ICT for Emerging  Regions
(ICTer) , pp. 149-155.
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICTER.2014.7083894[14] Ahsan,  M., Motla,  Y.H.,  Asim,  M. (2014).  Knowledge
modeling  fore-agriculture  using  ontology.  In 2014
International  Conference  on Open  Source  Systems  &
Technologies , 112-122.
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICOSST.2014.7029330
[15] Shyamaladevi,  K., Mirnalinee,  T.T.,  Trueman,  T.E.,
Kaladevi,  R. (2012).  Design  of ontology  based
ubiquitous  web for agriculture -Aa farmer  helping  system.
In 2012  International  Conference  on Computing,
Communication  and Applications , pp. 1-6.
https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICCCA.2012.6179214
[16] Mø ller,  M.F.  (1993).  A scaled  conjugate  gradient
algorithm  for fast supervised  learning.  Neural  Networks,
6(4): 525-533. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893 -
6080(05)80056 -5
346
