
   The Routledge Handbook of Anthropology and the City  provides a comprehensive study of current 
and future urban issues on a global and local scale. Premised on an ‘engaged’ approach to urban 
anthropology, the volume adopts a thematic approach that covers a wide range of modern urban issues, with a particular focus on those of high public interest. Topics covered include security, displacement, social justice, privatization, sustainability, and preservation. Offering valuable insight into how anthropologists investigate, make sense of, and then address a variety of urban issues, each chapter covers key theoretical and methodological concerns alongside rich ethnographic case study material. The volume is an essential reference for students and researchers in urban anthropology, as well as being of interest for those in related disciplines, such as urban studies, sociology, and geography.  
  Setha Low  is Professor of Anthropology, Earth and Environmental Sciences (Geography), 
Environmental Psychology, and Women’s Studies at The Graduate Center, City University of 
New Y ork, USA. Her most recent books are  Spatializing Culture: The Ethnography of Space and Place  
(2017), and  Spaces of Security: Ethnographies of Securityscapes, Surveillance and Control   (2019), edited 
with M. Maguire. She is former President of the American Anthropological Association and 
served as Deputy Chair of the World Council of Anthropological Associations.  The Routledge Handbook of 
Anthropology and the City 

 Edited by Setha Low  The Routledge Handbook 
of Anthropology 
and the City 
 First published 2019 
 by Routledge  2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 and by Routledge 
 711 Third Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10017 
  Routledge is an imprint of the T aylor & Francis Group, an informa business  
 © 2019 selection and editorial matter, Setha Low; individual chapters, the 
contributors 
 The right of Setha Low to be identified as the author of the editorial 
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
  Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 
  British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data  
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
  Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data  
A catalog record has been requested for this book
 ISBN: 978-1-138-12609-1 (hbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-64709-8 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Bembo 
 by Apex CoVantage, LLC 
v List of figures  ix
 List of contributors  x
 Acknowledgments  xv
Introduction: engaging the city and the future 1
Setha Low
 PART I
Precarity  25
  1 Precarious detachment: youth and modes of operating in 
Hyderabad and Jakarta 27 
 AbdouMaliq Simone 
  2 Precarious labor, inequality and public space: trash pickers 
and ambulant vendors in Buenos Aires, Argentina  41
 Mariano Perelman 
  3 Homelessness and the city  55
 Tom Hall 
  4 Disproportionate barriers and challenges: urban minority male 
life cycles in Philadelphia 69 
 Bill McKinney 
 PART II
Displacement and mobility 85 
  5 Displaced, misplaced, re-placed: in search of an understanding of 
‘race’ and urban change – evidence from Cape T own  87
 Annika Teppo  Contents 
Contents 
vi  6 Affect, race, and generative fieldsites in urban anthropology  100
 Ana Y . Ramos-Zayas and Ulla D. Berg 
  7 (Im)mobilizing Bangkok: towards an ethnography of urban 
circulation 113 
 Claudio Sopranzetti 
  8 Moving through the contested city: automobility and civic culture 
in Beirut, Lebanon  126
 Kristin V . Monroe 
 PART III
Security and insecurity  139
  9 Security and technology 141 
 Carolina Frossard and Rivke Jaffe 
 10 Airports, from vital systems to nervous systems  153
 Mark Maguire and Réka Pétercsák 
 11 Security and insecurity in fragile urban fabrics: a suburb in Norway  167
 Thomas Hylland Eriksen 
 12 Making sense of the New Europe: national anxieties and everyday 
life in Amsterdam  182
 Anouk de Koning 
 PART IV
Environment and sustainability  197
 13 Environmental gentrification: sustainability and the just city  199
 Melissa Checker 
 14 Incremental gentrification: upgrading and the predicaments of making 
(Indian) cities slum-free  214
 Ursula Rao 
 15 Tackling pollution with care: everyday politics and citizen engagement 
in Auckland, New Zealand  228
 Eveline Dürr and Jeannine-Madeleine Fischer 
Contents
vii 16 Engaging with sustainable urban mobilities in Western Europe: urban 
utopias seen through cycling in Copenhagen  240
 Malene Freudendal-Pedersen 
 PART V
Citizenship, rights, and social justice  255
 17 Racialized citizenship and the modern American city, ethnographically 
considered  257
 John L. Jackson, Jr. 
 18 A right to the city? housing rights and liberal property regimes 
in Santiago, Chile  268
 Edward Murphy 
 19 Neighborhood grassroots organizations and rights to the city 
in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil  283
 Maria Gabriela Hita and John Gledhill 
 20 Marxist urbanism meets the specter of communism: anthropological 
engagements with master-planned projects and mass dispossession 
in Ho Chi Minh City 297 
 Erik Harms 
 PART VI
Built environment and spatial governance  311
 21 Beyond neoliberalism: the High Line and urban governance  313
 Julian Brash 
 22 The semiotics of urbanness: lifestyle centers and the 
commodified city 326  Gabriella Modan 
 23 Governing through garbage: waste infrastructure breakdown and 
gendered apathy in Vietnam  342
 Christina Schwenkel 
 24 African materiality and the house   356
 Deborah Pellow 
Contents 
viii 25 The past and the future of ritualized sociality in open urban spaces: 
the corso in Southeastern Europe  377
 Vesna Vučinić Nešković 
 PART VII
Financialization and privatization  393
 26 Financialization and shifting urban growth regimes in Hong Kong 
and China  395
 Alan Smart 
 27 Guilty subjects: new geographies of blame in the aftermath of the 
US housing market collapse  409
 Jeff Maskovsky 
 28 21st Century City form in Asia: the private city  421
 Tom Looser 
 PART VIII
Heritage preservation and cultural expression  435
 29 Ethics and profits: economic development, hospitality, and the 
preservation of urban heritage  437
 Michael Herzfeld 
 30 Gender, art, and the reshaping of the urban in Amman, Jordan  451
 Aseel Sawalha 
 31 Dancing, design methods and the politics of space in Kampala: an 
accidental ethnography  463
 Elizabeth Chin 
 32 Lisbon is black: an argument of presence  475
 Derek Pardue 
 33 Brazilian popular music and the city  492
 Ruben George Oliven 
 Index  509
  3.1 Manchester backstreets in the 1970s  59
  3.2 Central Square, Cardiff, 2016  65
 16.1 Cycling in Copenhagen, Denmark  246
 20.1 The Bitexco T ower, viewed from Th ủ Thiêm, District 2, Ho Chi Minh 
City, Vietnam. The homes in the foreground were demolished in early 
2010 as part of the land clearance for a large master-planned urban development known as the Th
ủ Thiêm New Urban Zone.  299
 23.1 Spring cleaning of communal areas in social housing, Vinh City, 2011  344
 23.2 Early days of the 2011 garbage crisis  346
 23.3 Choreography of waste removal  347
 23.4 Garbage collection point for Wards 6 and 7, 2011  351
 24.1 Plan of Dagomba compound  362
 24.2 Outside a Dagomba compound, Y endi  363
 24.3 Alhaji Yaro’s compound  366
 24.4 Alhaji Yaro’s house: adult resident kin  368
 24.5 Malam Bako’s land: official survey map, ca. 1915  371
 24.6 Alhaji Mahdi’s house in Tamale  372
 24.7 Alhaji Mahdi’s house in East Legon, Accra  373
 25.1 Building uses at the corso in Smederevska Palanka (1930–2001)  382
 25.2 Paths of the corso participants in Smederevska Palanka (1930–2001)  382
 25.3 An earlier evening corso in present-day Smederevska Palanka  387
 25.4 A later evening corso in present-day Smederevska Palanka  388
 32.1 Map of Lisbon from 1836  481
 32.2 Exposition of historical street signs, 2011  483
 32.3 Odivelas municipality of the greater Lisbon metropolitan area, 2009  485
 32.4 The popular Amílcar Cabral stencil in Arrentela on the south ‘margin’ 
of Lisbon, 2007  486 Figures 
x  Ulla D. Berg  is Associate Professor in the Department of Latino and Caribbean Studies and the 
Department of Anthropology at Rutgers, USA, and Director of the Center for Latin American 
Studies at the Rutgers University. Her publications include  Mobile Selves: Race, Migration, and 
Belonging in Peru and the U.S  (2015) and  Transnational Citizenship Across the Americas  (2013), co-
edited with Robyn Rodriguez. 
  Julian Brash   is Associate Professor in the Department of Anthropology at Montclair State Uni-
versity, USA. His research interests include the High Line and other new public parks in New 
Y ork City. He is the author of  Bloomberg’s New York: Class and Governance in the Luxury City  
(2011). 
  Melissa Checker   is Associate Professor of Urban Studies at Queens College, City University of 
New Y ork (CUNY), USA, and of Anthropology and Environmental Psychology at the CUNY 
Graduate Center. Her books include  Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism and the Search for Jus-
tice in a Southern Town  (2005), and  Sustainability in the Global City: Myth and Practice  (2015), edited 
with Cindi Isenhour and Gary McDonogh. 
  Elizabeth Chin   is Professor of the MFA Program Media Design Practices at the Art Center 
College in Pasadena, USA. Her work spans a variety of topics, including race, consumption, and 
marginalization. She focuses on engaging marginalized youth in collaboratively taking on the complexities of the world around them, with current projects in Los Angeles (USA), Uganda, and Haiti. Her publications include  My Life With Things: The Consumer Diaries  (2016). 
  
Eveline Dürr   is Professor in the Department for Social and Cultural Anthropology, Ludwig- 
Maximilians-Universität Munich, Germany. She conducts fieldwork in the Americas and Ocea-
nia and is interested in urban anthropology, spatiality, environment, and inequality. With Rivke Jaffe, she co-edited  Urban Pollution: Cultural Meanings, Social Practices  (2010). 
  
Thomas Hylland Eriksen   is Professor of Social Anthropology at the University of Oslo, Norway. 
He has written extensively about identity politics, multiculturalism, and globalization, and is also 
the author of several widely used textbooks in anthropology. His latest book is  Overheating: An 
Anthropology of Accelerated Change  (2016). A former President of EASA, Eriksen was awarded the 
University of Oslo’s Prize for Research in 2017. 
Jeannine-Madeleine Fischer  is a research fellow in the interdisciplinary research group Urban 
Ethics at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, funded by the German Research  Contributors 
Contributors
xiFoundation (DFG). In her dissertation project about environmental ethics in Auckland, Aotearoa/
New Zealand she explores urban ideals and practices of the “good life” in environmental terms.
     Malene Freudendal-Pedersen    is Associate Professor at Roskilde University, Denmark. She has 
an interdisciplinary background and has for many years been investigating the praxis of mobilities 
and its significance for (future) cities. She is the co-manager of the international Cosmobilities Network and co-founder and co-editor of the journal  Applied Mobilities . 
  
Carolina Frossard   is a PhD candidate in the Department of Human Geography, Planning and 
International Development Studies of the University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. She is part of the 
research team for the Public-Private Security Assemblages and Citizenship (SECURCIT) project at the University. Her research focuses on urban security arrangements in Recife, Northeastern Brazil. 
  
John Gledhill   is Emeritus Professor at the University of Manchester, UK, and a fellow of the 
British Academy. His most recent books in English are the monograph  The New War on the Poor: 
The Production of Insecurity in Latin America  (2015) and the edited collection  World Anthropologies 
in Practice: Situated Perspectives, Global Knowledge  (2016). 
  Tom Hall   is Reader at Cardiff University and Head of the School of Social Sciences. His back-
ground and training are in social anthropology and his published work includes the ethnogra-
phies  Better Times Than This: Youth Homelessness in Britain  (2003) and  Footwork: Urban Outreach 
and Hidden Lives  (2017). 
  Erik Harms   is Associate Professor of Anthropology and International & Area Studies at Yale 
University, USA. He works on urbanization in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, and is the author of 
 Luxury and Rubble: Civility and Dispossession in the New Saigon  (2016) and  Saigon’s Edge: On the 
Margins of Ho Chi Minh City  (2011). 
  Michael Herzfeld   is Ernest E. Monrad Professor of the Social Sciences in the Department of 
Anthropology and Director of the Asia Center’s Thai Studies Program at Harvard University, 
USA. His field research – conducted in Greece, Italy, and Thailand – currently focuses on artisan-ship, urban conservation, and the ethnography and politics of knowledge. Recent works include  Evicted From Eternity: The Restructuring of Modern Rome  (2009) and  Siege of the Spirits: Community 
and Polity in Bangkok  (2016). 
  
Maria Gabriela Hita   is Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology at the Federal Uni-
versity of Bahia, Brazil. Her research focuses on sociocultural and political issues, including urban 
poverty, family, health, gender, and race. She is the author of  Raça, Racismo e Genética em Debates 
Científicos e Controvérsias Sociais  (2017). 
  John L. Jackson, Jr.  , is Dean of the School of Social Policy & Practice and Richard Perry Univer-
sity Professor at the University of Pennsylvania, USA. He is the author of several books, includ-
ing  Harlemworld  (2001),  Real Black  (2005),  Racial Paranoia  (2008), and  Thin Description  (2013), and 
editor of  Social Policy and Social Justice  (2017). 
  Rivke Jaffe   is Professor of Cities, Politics and Culture at the University of Amsterdam, Nether-
lands. Her research focuses on urban politics in relation to security governance, organized crime, 
and environmental pollution. Her publications include C oncrete Jungles: Urban Pollution and the 
Contributors 
xiiPolitics of Difference in the Caribbean  (2016) and  Introducing Urban Anthropology  (2016) with Anouk 
de Koning. 
  Anouk de Koning   is Associate Professor in Anthropology and Development Studies at Rad-
boud University, the Netherlands, and leads the Reproducing Europe: Migrant Parenting and 
Contested Citizenship project. She is the author of  Global Dreams: Class, Gender and Public 
Space in Cosmopolitan Cairo  (2009), and  Introducing Urban Anthropology  (2016), with Rivke 
Jaffe. 
  Tom Looser   is Associate Professor of East Asian Studies at NYU, USA. His areas of research 
include cultural anthropology, Japanese and global studies; urban studies, new media studies, art 
and architecture; and critical theory. He is the author of  Visioning Eternity: Aesthetics and Politics of 
the Noh Theater in Early Modern Japan  (2008), among other publications. 
  Setha Low   is Professor of Anthropology, Earth and Environmental Sciences (Geography), Envi-
ronmental Psychology, and Women’s Studies at The Graduate Center, City University of New 
Y ork (CUNY), USA. Her areas of research include urban studies, space and place, urban plan-ning and design, cultural preservation and diversity, and social justice and public space. Her most recent books are  Spatializing Culture: The Ethnography of Space and Place  (2017) and  Spaces of Secu-
rity: Ethnographies of Securityscapes, Surveillance and Control   (2019), edited with Mark Maguire. She 
is former President of the American Anthropological Association and served as Deputy Chair 
of the World Council of Anthropological Associations.  She received the Athena Accolade City Award in 2018.
  
Mark Maguire   is Dean of the Maynooth University Faculty of Social Sciences, USA. His research 
explores counterterrorism training and operations in several European jurisdictions. He is co-
editor of  The Anthropology of Security :  Perspectives From the Frontline of Policing, Counterterrorism and 
Border Control  (2014), with Catarina Frios and Nils Zurawski, co-editor of forthcoming books 
 Bodies of Evidence  (2018), with Ursula Rao and Nils Zurawski, and  Spaces of Security  (2019), with 
Setha Low. 
  Jeff Maskovsky   is Professor of Anthropology at the Graduate Center, City University of New 
Y ork (CUNY), USA, and of Urban Studies at Queens College, CUNY . His research and writing 
focus on health, race, poverty, and security in the urban United States. His books include  Rethink-
ing America: The Imperial Homeland in the 21st Century  (2009), co-edited with Ida Susser, and a 
forthcoming monograph,  Poverty and the Fight for Life in the New Inner City . 
  Bill McKinney   is Executive Vice President and Director of Research and Evaluation for The 
Food Trust, USA. Based in Philadelphia and trained as an applied anthropologist, Dr. McKinney 
has spent the past 25 years working in nonprofit, academic and private settings, and has worked in areas including food access, violence reduction, reentry, youth development, education, and community development. 
  
Gabriella Modan   is Professor of Sociolinguistics in the Department of English at the Ohio State 
University, USA. Her research focuses on the discursive construction of space in urban settings. 
She is the author of  Turf Wars: Discourse, Diversity, and the Politics of Place  (2007), and she has pub-
lished in such journals as  Language in Society ,  Journal of Sociolinguistics ,  City and Society , and  Journal 
of Linguistic Anthropology . 
Contributors
xiii  Kristin V. Monroe   is Associate Professor of Anthropology at the University of Kentucky, Lexing-
ton, USA. Her research has concerned mobility and urban space in Beirut, Lebanon, in both the 
historical and contemporary eras. She is the author of  The Insecure City: Space, Power, and Mobility 
in Beirut  (2016). 
  Edward Murphy   is Associate Professor of History and Global Urban Studies at Michigan State 
University, USA. He is the author of  For a Proper Home: Housing Rights in the Margins of Urban 
Chile  (2015) and the managing editor of  Anthrohistory: Unsettling Knowledge, )  the Modern World . 
  Ruben George Oliven   is Professor of Anthropology at the Federal University of Rio Grande do 
Sul in Porto Alegre, Brazil and a member of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences. He is the Past 
President of the Brazilian Anthropological Association. He won the Erico Vannucci Mendes Prize for Distinguished Contribution to the Study of Brazilian Culture. His most recent books include  Tradition Matters: Modern Gaúcho Identity in Brazil  (1996) and  Megaeventos Esportivos no 
Brasil  (2014), with Arlei Sander Damo. 
  
Derek Pardue   is Associate Professor and Program Coordinator of Brazilian Studies at Aarhus 
University, Denmark. He is currently Senior Fellow at the Hanse-Wissenschaftskolleg Institute, 
Germany, where he is writing a book that mixes urban anthropology and ethnographic fiction regarding black presence in the city of São Paulo, Brazil. Recent work includes  Cape Verde, Let’s 
Go: Creole Rappers and Citizenship in Portugal  (2015). 
  
Deborah Pellow   is Professor of Anthropology in the Department of Anthropology, The Max-
well School, at Syracuse University, USA. Her areas of specialization are African Studies (Ghana), 
urbanization and transnationalism, gender, and the anthropology of space and place. Her books include  Setting Boundaries: The Anthropology of Spatial and Social Organization  (1996) and  Landlords 
and Lodgers: Socio-Spatial Organization in an Accra Community  (2002). 
  
Mariano Perelman   is Adjunct Researcher at the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas 
y Técnicas (CONICET, Argentinian National Research Council) and Professor in the Depart-
ment of Anthropology of the Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina. He has published widely on urban poverty and precarity. His most recent co-edited volume is  Desigualdades persistentes y 
territorialidades emergentes  (2017). 
  
Réka Pétercsák   is PhD Researcher in the School of Business at Maynooth University, USA, 
funded by LERO, the Irish Software Research Centre. Her primary focus is on knowledge cre-
ation in hybrid organizations that emerge in the Smart City. In particular, she studies the role of 
leadership in the technological instrumentation of the urban environment. 
  Ana Y. Ramos-Zayas   is Professor of American Studies, Ethnicity, Race and Migration, and Sexu-
ality Studies at Yale University. Her research aims to understand and disentangle systems of power 
and privilege at a variety of scales. Her publications include the award-winning  Street Therapists: 
Affect, Race, and Neoliberal Personhood in Latino Newark  (2012). 
  Ursula Rao   is Professor of Anthropology at the University of Leipzig, Germany. Her current 
research focuses on e-governance and the social consequences of biometric technology in India. 
She has also written on urban space, Hindi- and English journalism, and ritual theory. Recent publications include ‘T olerated Encroachment Resettlement Policies and the Negotiation of the Licit/Illicit Divide in an Indian Metropolis’  Cultural Anthropology  28: 760–779. 
Contributors 
xiv  Aseel Sawalha   is Associate Professor of Anthropology at Fordham University, USA. She r esearches 
how diverse groups negotiate urban space. After a project on Lebanon,  Reconstructing Beirut: 
Memory of Space in a Postwar Arab City  (2010), she is now researching the groups and processes 
transforming Amman, Jordan, through its expanding art scene. 
  Christina Schwenkel   is Associate Professor of Cultural Anthropology and Director of South-
east Asian Studies at the University of California, Riverside, USA. She has conducted extensive 
research in Vietnam on architectures of memory and postwar reconstruction of urban infra-structure. Schwenkel is the author of  The American War in Contemporary Vietnam: Transnational 
Remembrance and Representation  (2009). 
  
AbdouMaliq Simone   is Research Professor at the Max Planck Institute for the Study of Religious 
and Ethnic Diversity, Germany, Visiting Professor of Sociology, Goldsmiths College, University of 
London, UK, and Visiting Professor of Urban Studies at the African Centre for Cities, University of Cape T own, South Africa. Recent books include  New Urban Worlds: Inhabiting Dissonant Times  
(2017), with Edgar Pieterse, and  Improvised Lives: Rhythms of Endurance for an Urban South  (2018). 
  
Alan Smart   is Professor in the Department of Anthropology and Archaeology at the University 
of Calgary, Canada. His research and teaching interests include the political economy, urban 
anthropology, Hong Kong, China, and North America. His publications include  Making Room: 
Cultural Production in Occupied Spaces  (with Alan Moore, 2015). 
  Claudio Sopranzetti   is Junior Research Fellow at Oxford University, UK, in All Souls College. 
His work deals with economic restructurings, reorganizations of everyday life, and emerging 
forms of political mobilizations in Thailand and Italy. He is the author of  Owners of the Map: 
Motorcycle T axis, Mobility and Politics in Bangkok  (2017) and  Red Journeys: Inside the Thai Red Shirts  
(2012), and he is currently working on  Awakened , an anthropological graphic novel. 
  Annika Teppo   is Associate Professor of Cultural Anthropology at the University of Uppsala, 
Sweden, and Docent in Urban Studies at the University of Helsinki, Finland. Her areas of research 
specialization include South Africa and the postapartheid city; social inclusion/exclusion, malls and urban spaces, moral/morality, religion, race, class, and ethnicity. Her recent publications include ‘Moral Radicals: Afrikaners and Their Grassroots Ecumenism After Apartheid’,  Journal 
of Southern African Studies , 44(2), 253–267 (2018), and ‘“Our Spirit Has No Boundary”: White 
Sangomas and Mediation in Cape T own’.  Anthropology and Humanism , 36(2), 225–247 (2011). 
  
Vesna Vučinić-Neš ković   is Professor in the Department of Ethnology and Anthropology at 
the University of Belgrade, Serbia. Her research interests include urban spatial behavior, socio-
economic cultural exchange, and the post-Socialist revival of religious festivities in Southeastern Europe. Her most recent book is  Methodology of Anthropological Fieldwork: From the Normative to 
the Experiential  (2013). 
xv Acknowledgments 
 This volume is the result of a collaboration with colleagues who are committed to furthering a 
more engaged and public urban anthropology. Contributors wrote original and at times person-ally revealing chapters about their experiences and theoretical and methodological conclusions from field sites across the globe. They were invited to write clear and lively narratives summariz-ing the literature on the geopolitical region and topic, explaining their methods and fieldwork practices, reporting their findings, and then reflecting on the significance of their work for a public audience. I am indebted to them for taking on this challenge and producing compelling stories of how urban anthropologists study the city from a critical perspective. Without their participation and willingness to stay on schedule this volume would not have been possible. I want to thank each for their hard work, scholarship, and creativity in imagining the future of the city based on ethnographic evidence. 
 I owe a tremendous debt to the Graduate Center of the City University of New Y ork, and 
particularly the PhD Programs in Anthropology, Environmental Psychology and Earth and Envi-
ronmental Sciences (Geography) for creating an intellectual and collegial atmosphere where my interest in engaged and critical urban anthropology could flourish. Many of my colleagues and students in New Y ork City have enriched my thinking and clarified my understanding of criti-cal scholarship and politically inflected research practices. I would like to especially acknowledge and thank Jeff Maskovsky for his provocation to think about the labor of engagement for the introduction and for his writings on protest anthropology. Sally Merry has been an intellectual interlocutor and co-author of our ideas about anthropological engagement and encouraged this project from its beginning. Ida Susser, Melissa Checker, Leith Mullings, and Dana Davis deep-ened my understanding of social transformation through grassroots political movements, while my doctoral students Manissa Maharawal (now a professor at American University) and Zoltan Glück demonstrated how politically engaged ethnography unsettles traditional anthropological ethics and practices. Manissa and Zoltan encouraged me to address the future of urban anthro-pological practice through the militant ethnography of Jeffrey Juris. Graduate students Maria Cecilia Salvi, Vaiva Aglinskas, Chris Baum, and Claire Panetta helped find many of the con-tributors through their own academic networks and knowledge of urban ethnographies. Maria Cecilia Salvi helped to translate the chapters that were originally written in Spanish and offered support throughout the editing process. Cindi Katz, Susan Saegert, Michelle Fine, and David Harvey, colleagues who share my interest in social justice and public space, have also contributed to these ideas. I am grateful to have such wonderful colleagues and graduate students and to work in an institution that nurtures interdisciplinary scholarship and critical approaches to research and theory. 
 This book was supported by a sabbatical leave granted by President Chase Robinson and 
Provost Louise Lennihan at the Graduate Center of the City University of New Y ork. The 
Acknowledgments 
xviWenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research and Leslie Aiello promoted this project 
with an initial workshop grant on engaged anthropology. Sally Merry and I edited the workshop papers to produce a special issue of  Current Anthropology  on engaged anthropology (Low and 
Merry 2010) that was a first step in the development of the ideas presented in the introduction. Support also came from my Routledge editor, Katherine Ong, who suggested that I edit a Rout-ledge Handbook and offered guidance along the way. Louisa Vahtrick kept the project moving while Katherine was on leave. I particularly want to thank Marc Stratton, the editorial assistant who worked miracles getting the contracts from all the contributors, tracking down the illustra-tions, resolving copyright issues, answering author questions, and putting this volume together so that it could proceed to production. Marc, Louisa, and Katherine were crucial members of the editing team and then placed this volume in the capable hand of Tina Cottone, who managed its production with encouragement. Tina supported this effort by working with all 33 contri-butions throughout the copy-editing and proofing stages. I greatly appreciated her willingness and good humor as she reminded us of impending deadlines so that we could meet our publica-tion goal. 
 The final acknowledgment goes to my husband, Joel Lefkowitz, an expert in ethics, social 
justice, and research methodology, who has encouraged my commitment to socially responsible 
social science practice. He is a wonderful writer and editor whose magic included editing the introduction and discussing its ideas, while at the same time preparing dinners to sustain us while I worked. I deeply appreciate and recognize his contribution to this volume. 
        
1 The purpose of this book 
  The Routledge Handbook of Anthropology and the City   presents an engaged urban anthropology that 
draws upon a history of critical engagement with the city and a commitment to social justice and 
transformation through the intersection of ethnography and politically informed action ( Susser 
2010 ; Maharawal 2011). Recent calls for public ethnography ( Fassin 2013 ), militant ethnogra-
phy ( Juris 2007 ,  2017 ) and protest anthropology ( Maskovsky 2013 ) reflect a growing interest in 
producing knowledge that is useful, benefits those we work with and addresses urban problems. At its most modest, this book renders urban anthropology more accessible, in terms of selecting topics that have broad appeal, as well as a style of writing and research reporting designed for multiple publics and media audiences. But at its most ambitious, it argues for a more politically engaged and publicity-savvy mode of urban anthropological practice. 
 T o accomplish these ends, the chapters focus on key urban anthropological issues, such as 
precarity, displacement, security, sustainability, citizenship, spatial governance, financialization 
and cultural preservation, that are of public interest and relevant in today’s rapidly changing global economy, with shifting urban populations, growing economic disparities and hardening state boundaries. The narratives are compelling, employing innovative approaches to method and exposition, including the auto-ethnography of working with ex-offenders in Philadelphia (McKinney), driving a motorcycle taxi in a political demonstration in Bangkok (Sopranzetti), dancing in the stalled traffic of Kampala (Chin), drawing architectural genealogies in Accra (Pel-low), riding the train with vendors in Buenos Aires (Perelman) and recording rap musicians in Lisbon (Pardue), among others. Some contributors report their experiences as protest anthro-pologists (Checker, Maskovsky) and activist anthropologists and documentarians (Brash, Hita and Gledhill, Perelman, Sopranzetti). Each contribution, whether written from the position of critic, artist, activist or archivist, traces the ways in which it is increasingly hard for people to navigate the city due to economic restructuring and public policies that place the burden of survival on the individual. 
 Newspapers, television and radio programs, blogs, magazines, zines, Facebook posts, tweets 
and Instagram also document, albeit superficially, these same concerns. Y et social media and news 
updates reach millions of people who want to comprehend and change the world they live in,   Introduction 
 Engaging the city and the future 
 Setha Low 
Setha Low
2while urban anthropologists who provide in-depth research and reports on these same issues 
struggle to find their audiences. This book argues that real-world engagement combined with more effective translation and circulation of the research can reach publics who would utilize our work. 
 This introduction lays out the logic and labor 
1  of what constitutes this kind of engaged urban 
anthropology and what is necessary to move this agenda to the center of the discipline. The 
chapters describe the environmental, political, economic and social crises facing cities as well as the opportunities urban life holds for creativity, resistance, imagination and generativity. Each offers a social critique of urban programs, processes and policies or involvement in advocacy, col-laboration and activism as part of an ethnographic endeavor. These comprehensive field studies undertaken at both global and local scales elucidate how urban anthropologists investigate, make sense of, confront and translate these problems and opportunities for a variety of audiences. 
 There is a long history of urban anthropologists improving lives and a generation of urban 
activists who both studied and fought against racial exclusion, homelessness, lack of adequate 
housing, forced displacement, poverty, inadequate or nonexistent health care, drug and organ traf-ficking, un- and underemployment, and pollution and environmental degradation most often in the U.S. (e.g., Kim Hopper, William Leap, Carol Stack, Brett Williams, Paul Farmer, Barbara Rose Johnston, Nancy Scheper-Hughes, Eleanor Leacock, Delmos Jones, Leith Mullings, Ida Susser and Philippe Bourgeois). This volume identifies a new generation of scholars and activists who are reformulating these concerns internationally – drawing from this tradition and adding new theoretical perspectives and methodologies as well as insights into the complexities of urbanity. The intensity of globalization, environmental disparities, socioeconomic inequality, governmental and corporate corruption and neoliberal urbanism has transformed the dual city of the 1980s ( Castells 1989 ;  Mollenkopf and Castells 1991 ) into the “precarious city” of the present, where a 
substantial portion of urban residents are impoverished by structural systems of oppression and racism that benefit a small professional and elite class. 
 The chapters trace the contours of current practice and methodology to highlight how urban 
ethnographers uncover power dynamics and forms of resistance that exist in an effort to better 
articulate and transform them. The means by which this is accomplished varies: some con-tributors prefer a personal voice to elaborate the process of discovery or narrate as activists collaboratively solving local problems. Others employ cultural criticism and critical analysis to achieve their ends. Regardless, the point of each contribution is to illuminate the intellectual and historical context of the problem and explicate the theoretical and methodological approach with ethnographic examples drawn from fieldwork. Each chapter reports the research findings and conclusions presented in such a way that that prospective readers – academics, students, activ-ists, NGO and government decision-makers and the concerned public – can come away with a 
more sophisticated understanding of the issues and the motivation to engage them. 
 The rationale for this ethnographically based and publicly accessible format is that anthro-
pology, especially cultural anthropology, is at risk of becoming irrelevant and illegible even in 
the face of the growing importance of the public humanities and social sciences. The scholarly writing in our journals has become more obscure in the battle for intellectual recognition of fine-grained and nuanced ethnographic analyses. Urban anthropology has suffered from some of this same malaise, and recent changes in  City & Society  
2  have refocused on the critical edge-work of 
the city within national, transnational and global imaginaries and realities. The rejuvenation that 
occurred with the renaming of the Society for Urban Anthropology to the Society for Urban, National and Transnational/Global Anthropology in the U.S. was significant in its redirection of the field. It turned perceptive studies of people living in the city into more complex politi-cal, economic and multisited ethnographies articulating the scalar relationships of the city to the 
Introduction: Engaging the city
3body, family, neighborhood and region as well as to the nation-state, transnational corporations 
and the global economy. 
  Rivke Jaffe’s and Anouk de Koning’s (2016 ) introductory text redefines urban anthropology 
as a critical area of study that focuses on issues of place and space, violence, security, citizen-
ship, politics and planning. From their European perspective, urban anthropology peaked in the 1970s and 1980s and is now resurfacing as an important part of the discipline that examines globalization, migration, transnationalism and communication technologies and “how different technologies shape urban life whether in the form of infrastructure, mobilities, or the intersection of offline and online worlds” ( Jaffe and De Koning 2016 : 165). They highlight post-neoliberal solidarities, affect and temporality, and ecology and sustainability as emerging in the mid-2010s; and their chapters on national anxieties in the new Europe (de Koning) and security technology in Recife and Kingston (Frossard and Jaffe) illustrate these trends. 
 This book argues that we should not take the “urban” and urban processes for granted or 
reify these productive abstractions, but instead experiment with new theories and critical per-
spectives to revive their conceptual value. In practice it is difficult to distinguish the urban from the exurban, suburban or even rural, much less argue about the differences among villages, towns and cities. Y et the reality is that medium and large cities are growing, expanding and morphing into new configurations where over half of the world’s population is located. Architects, plan-ners and urban designers are struggling to imagine and implement architectural and engineering systems that can respond to the landscape of emerging economies and informal ways of living. Power relations and financial manipulation of currency and credit among national governments, developers, corporations and transnational elites have increasingly functioned to keep wealth in the hands of the elite players, while many urban residents struggle to keep jobs, hold on to their housing, bring families together and provide safe neighborhoods for their children – often through political mobilization and resistance. The engaged urban anthropologists in this handbook confront this “fractured urbanism” ( Bank 2011 : 241) through the theoretical frame-works of precarity (Simone, Perelman, Hall), affect (Ramos-Zayas and Berg, Maskovsky, de Kon-ing), racial displacement (T eppo, Jackson, McKinney, Murphy), security (Maguire and Pétercsák, Frossard and Jaffe, Eriksen), mobility (Monroe, Sopranzetti, Freudendal-Pedersen), infrastructure (Schwenkel, Harms, Chin), financialization (Smart, Looser), governance (Brash, Modan, Dürr and Fischer), gentrification (Rao, Checker, Sawalha, Vučinić-Nešković, Herzfeld) and ethnomusicol-ogy (Oliven, Pardue) to interrogate the contradictions and disjunctions of urban experience. 
 Equally important is to reflect on why we are involved in the study of the city. The problems 
of rapid urbanization and the technological, political, economic and social challenges of creating 
socially just societies are becoming increasingly insoluble. Part of the issue is simply the scale of urban growth. By 2030, the number of cities with 1 to 5 million inhabitants is projected to be 559 and another 731 cities will have between 500,000 and 1 million inhabitants ( United Nations 
2016 ). In 2016, 1.7 billion people – 23 percent of the world’s population – lived in a city with at 
least 1 million inhabitants ( United Nations 2016 ). Cities, and their residue and ruins, including 
informal settlements, DIY 
3  suburbs, exclusive commuting towns and exurbs and deteriorating 
malls and edges, are where most people live – sufficient incentive for maintaining our interest. 
 Y et my desire to study the city has more to do with the social inequities that characterize the 
urban landscape, and how the city as a material structure, a structure of feeling and a form of 
sociality reveals the history, political economy and social construction of inequality. Over time it became not enough to describe and analyze gated communities ( Low 2003 ), private hous-ing governance ( Low 2017 ) and the lack of inclusion in public space ( Low, Taplin and Scheld 2005 ; Low and Iveson 2016); I need to speak out, offer solutions and try to change the injustices 
revealed through research. 
Setha Low
4 We might take our cue from work in urban studies that is producing a literature on new kinds 
of cities and the urban processes that characterize them. The research presented in this book on 
the social and cultural underpinnings of private cities (Looser), financialization (Smart), housing policy (Murphy), political regimes (Harms, Jackson, Maskovsky) provides a base. But I do not yet see our work influencing non-anthropological urbanists in a significant way. Even the thoughtful volumes on the global and sustainable city ( Peterson and McDonogh 2012 ;  Isenhour, McDonogh 
and Checker 2015 ) are absent from these broader discussions about emerging cities and thus 
unable to contest their claims. T o be in this conversation engaged urban anthropologists need to be more outspoken about their social values and judgments, more pointed in their claims and more militant in their ethnographic practice. 
 That is the purpose of this handbook, highlighting theories and ethnographies that will lead 
urban anthropology in new directions accompanied by more engaged practice. In this effort 
every chapter combines political intent and ethnographic knowledge to confront social justice problems that plague cities today, while retaining the richness and contextual complexity that characterize our work. This book does not abandon the urban or leave the city and its material-ity behind, but contends that we need a clearer focus that resonates with those with whom we struggle. The intention is to reach a wider set of publics and find our voices by effectively com-municating and acting upon the public significance of our findings. 
 Engaged urban anthropology 
 History 4  
 T o frame this discussion of what constitutes an engaged urban anthropology – and why there is a 
need for it – a brief review of the conflicting views of what constitutes its history and subsequent marginalization is helpful. One perspective is that anthropological knowledge was developed to rem-edy social problems, including those of colonial administration, and therefore was always engaged but in a manner that reinforced existing power relations (Bennett 1996;  Rylko-Bauer, Singer and Willigin 2006 ). Another approach is the politically conscious, critical practice that flourished from the 1930s through the 1970s to address inequality and offer political-economic critique (Berreman 1968;  Patterson 2001 ;  Roseberry 2002 ;  Silverman 2007 ). Engaged urban anthropologists included 
in this book are critical of anthropology’s settler colonial past and prefer participatory methods and multi-vocal writing, a non-imperialist system for the distribution of knowledge and expertise, and work that is collaborative rather than hierarchical within community settings. 
 American anthropology is embedded in a history of urban engagement even though it was 
marginalized and excluded from the academy. Franz Boas and his students laid the groundwork 
for linking anthropology and urban life, including important studies on race relations by  Melville 
Herskovits (1928 ) and by such notable activist anthropologists as Zora Neale Hurston ( Pierpont 
2004 ;  Silverman 2007 ). In the 1930s, engaged research was sponsored by the Depression-era 
Works Project Administration (WPA), which employed anthropologists and supported such ini-tiatives as urban research surveys and the publication of  Black Metropolis  (Drake and Clayton 
1970). Margaret Mead was an internationally known writer and public speaker who tackled pragmatic problems, such as housing, urban development, race, malnutrition and environmental pollution, but her celebrity and success in translating anthropological insights from non-Western cultures to critiques of American society were not received positively by many colleagues (Mead 1942; Lutkehaus 2008). 
 During World War II anthropologists participated in the war effort, but there were aspects 
of their work, such as the administration of Japanese relocation camps in the United States, that 
Introduction: Engaging the city
5subsequently led to the vociferous 1960s outcry at this involvement . Even greater concern devel-
oped about the use of anthropological knowledge in the 1950s and 1960s when anthropologists were offered lucrative, academic tenured jobs as anthropology departments expanded with Cold War funding ( Chomsky et al. 1997 ;  Nader 1997 ;  Silverman 2007 ). Many women and minor-
ity anthropologists continued to work in the public sector because of barriers to academia and the marginalized nature of their activist interests. Their exclusion decreased the visibility and importance of engaged work in the broader discipline ( Silverman 2007 ;  Low and Merry 2010 ). 
 Y et an engaged urban anthropology survived the McCarthy era in a few academic and public 
settings. Marshall Sahlins, Stanley Diamond, Eric Wolf, Marvin Harris, Constance Sutton, Kath-
leen Gough and David Aberle organized Vietnam “teach-ins.” In 1963, Eleanor Leacock along with June Nash and Helen Safa fought for better working conditions for women in the United States and Latin America, and in the 1970s and 1980s Christine Gailey, Louise Lamphere, Richard Lee and many others joined Leacock in her campaign ( Patterson 2001 ;  Roseberry 2002 ). Feminist 
anthropology flourished during this period, urging more inclusive methodologies, active engage-ment with the individuals and communities studied, and more egalitarian research relationships ( Susser 2009 ;  Huggins and Glebbeek 2009 ). Informants became collaborators, co-researchers and 
colleagues rather than the subjects of study. 
 During the 1990s there was renewed interest in engagement signaled by Shepard Forman’s 
call for “an anthropology that includes prominently among its missions empirically grounded 
social criticism on the one hand and theoretically guided participation in public policy processes on the other” ( Forman 1993 : 298). By the mid-1990s and early 2000s, a growing number of anthropologists supported activism within and outside the academy. Nancy Scheper-Hughes’s proposal for a militant anthropology suggests that “cultural relativism, read as moral relativism, is no longer appropriate to the world in which we live and that anthropology, if it is to be worth anything at all must be ethically grounded” ( 1995 : 410). Gavin  Smith (1999 ) prescribed moving 
from political engagement to formulating anthropology as a political practice, and Stuart  Kirsch 
(2002 ) argued for the appropriateness of advocacy in cases of environmental injustice.  Lassiter 
(2005 ) advocated writing collaborative ethnographies, while  Victoria Sanford and Asale Angel-
Ajani (2006 ), Shannon  Speed (2006 ) and Charles  Hale (2006 ) claimed that critical engagement can best be achieved by activist research and advocacy rather than academy-based cultural cri-tique. Melissa Checker (2008) concluded that the discipline was on the threshold of a new era when anthropological expertise, activism, theory and knowledge were being disseminated widely and freely through new technologies as well as through news media, journal publications and institution-sponsored reports. 
 Contemporary arguments: practice, praxis and engagement 
 By 2010 engaged anthropology – including an engaged urban anthropology – had become more 
visible, reaching farther into the academic as well as the practicing parts of the profession. Y et many academics had reservations about this form of knowledge production and many practicing, public and activist anthropologists found it difficult to convince promotion review committees that their participatory research projects, popular writing, technical reports or policy papers had scholarly merit. Even outside the academy, at professional meetings, during informal discussions and in journal reviews there lingered the prejudice that engaged research did not generate theory and that activism was too political to be a “professional” activity. While some Latin American countries, such as Chile and Mexico, had  colegios , professional organizations for anthropologists 
working outside of academia, there continued to be a disparity between the acceptance, publica-tion and evaluation of these allegedly different forms of knowledge production. 
Setha Low
6 In an effort to be more inclusive, Sally Merry and I proposed that there were multiple avenues 
for becoming engaged – through commitments to informants, support of field-based and local 
communities, teaching and public education, social critique, collaboration, advocacy and activism ( Low and Merry 2010 ). Ida  Susser (2010 ) and  Kamari Clarke (2010 ) took more radical stands, a 
position with which I now agree. Susser argued that while the critique of colonialism, imperial-ism and oppressive governments is part of engagement, “participation in social transformation is a necessary further step” ( 2010 : S232), while  Clarke (2010 ) contended that we should be 
“documenting efforts that not only have explanatory power but connect that power to praxis” ( 2010 : S301). 
 Paulo Freire’s definition of  praxis  
5  as “reflection and action directed at the structures to be 
transformed” ( 1970 : 126) most closely resembles my current understanding of what constitutes 
engagement. He outlines a practice that is as dependent on reflection as on action, and formulates 
praxis as an experiment rather than research. His directive to take action, consider the impact of the action, analyze the results of the action through reflection, and then alter and revise the conception and plan for implementation is a useful guide. The process is not unlike the reitera-tive research process of ethnographers who use participant observation and a grounded theory approach in the field or design anthropologists who start with an intervention and then study its impact. 
 Often it is an action that initiates an engaged project, as in the case of Moore Street Market 
in Brooklyn, New Y ork. When the Economic Development Corporation of New Y ork City 
threatened to close this Latino market, the vendors who worked there organized and convinced local politicians to help fight the closure. Funds obtained from Latino Assembly Representatives were used to bring public space designers into the mix, and the Public Space Research Group was asked to document the importance of the market for those who used or worked in the market or lived in the neighborhood. The analysis consisted of vendors, community members, designers and anthropologists reflecting on what we had accomplished, and then moving forward with a plan to add more Latino and other entrepreneurs and community space. Implementation is ongoing with both successes and failures as new small businesses join the older vendors in an effort to keep it vibrant and open to diverse users ( Low 2017 ). 
 Hans Baer also uses the term “ engaged anthropology , in part because the latter encompasses 
much of what public, practicing and applied anthropologists do but also because it entails an 
engagement with the crucial issues of the day” ( Baer 2012 : 217). He cites Maximillian Forte’s (2011) fear that “public anthropology” is a liberal reformist project that relies on authorities and institutions and not enough on social struggle or tackling issues of power and inequality. Baer, like myself, ultimately prefers an inclusive notion of engagement and adheres to “praxis as a merger of theory and social action or practice” ( Baer 2012 : 224). 
 Protest anthropology, positive anthropology and militant ethnography 
 Other models of politically engaged anthropological practice have also emerged. Jeff Mas-
kovsky’s  protest anthropology  explores the perils of scholars who “are not just aligned with protest 
movements, revolts, and uprisings but are also full-fledged participants in them” ( 2013 : 126). This 
“high-stakes” domain has its own rewards, especially as he argues, during a time of global crisis when governmental and civil society institutions are unable to deal adequately with mounting threats to environmental and social well-being. A protest anthropologist himself, Maskovsky analyzes the contributions of  David Graeber (2009 ) and  Manissa Maharawal (2011 ,  2012 ), who 
participated in organizing, documenting and planning actions during the Occupy Movement of 2011. He considers what role being an anthropologist plays in their understanding and execution 
Introduction: Engaging the city
7of direct democracy and horizontal and nonhierarchical social relationships. While the high risks 
and personal consequences are evident – including the possible failure of the movement ( Maha-
rawal 2017 ), the difficulty of getting an establishment job ( Maskovsky 2013 ; Checker 2014) and imprisonment or even death for activists working under authoritarian regimes, such as in Latin America (Mariano Perelman, personal communication) – protest anthropologists are nevertheless reimagining the world as more participatory, democratic and collaborative and bring this vision to the ethics and ethnography of their discipline. 
 Activists’ use of digital technologies, self-reflection and circulation of alternative news has 
also broken down the separation between participant and observer, “constituting a significant 
challenge to traditional academic approaches,” especially with regard to social movements ( Juris 
2007 : 164). Jeffrey Juris purposes  militant ethnography  as an alternative way to undertake research 
and political praxis through “collaboratively produced ethnographic knowledge” that “aims to facilitate ongoing activist (self)-reflection regarding movement goals, tactics, strategies, and organizational forms” ( Juris 2007 : 165). He points out that there are inherent contradictions in many of the organizational forms, such as the horizontal networking of social movements and the institutional hierarchy of academia, such that anthropologists involved in both must navigate between institutional and social relational demands. He conceives of militant ethnography as a methodology that uses engaged anthropology to contribute to social movement goals while retaining an embedded ethnographic position to generate knowledge of movement practices and dynamics ( Juris 2014 ). His model of politically committed ethnographic research adds another dimension to the methodological innovations explored in this book. 
 Strengthening a  positive anthropology  is yet another way to rethink engagement. Edward  Fischer 
(2014 ) argues that anthropologists should advocate for a context-dependent notion of well-being 
for the diverse circumstances of people regardless of income differences in the South and Global 
North. Supporting local moral projects and taking individual aspirations seriously produce more grounded understandings of what it means to experience the “good life” and to engage in work that leads to this outcome.  Courtney Desiree Morris (2015 ) goes farther in her interrogation of the ends of engagement and asks what would happen if we imagined engaged work as a “practice of freedom, an act of imagination, a tool for transforming an unequal world” ( 2015 : 541). 
 Melissa Checker, however, cautions against taking on the role of an anthropological “super-
hero,” noting that as academics and applied anthropologists, we are as constrained by “the same 
political and economic trends and demands that increasingly circumscribe activists’ efforts” (2014: 416). Engaged urban anthropologists have access to some academic and professional privileges, but we also need to acknowledge “our own powerlessness and vulnerability” (Checker 2014: 416) and our limited ability to provide the material resources and social network access often requested. Further, anthropologists’ desire for reciprocity can lead to the false recognition of or claims about what we can accomplish. Checker (2014) and  Kim Hopper (2003 ), using their own ethnographic 
examples, remind us of how engaged work can be coopted or reinforce the very institutions they are trying to transform. While Checker continues to advocate for an engaged and activist anthro-pology, she urges us to have realistic expectations for ourselves and our research participants. 
 The labor of engagement 
 The emotional, ethical and social relational demands of protest anthropology, positive anthropol-
ogy and militant ethnography help to articulate the additional labor of engagement and how it deviates from the accepted norms, ethics and methodologies of traditional urban anthropology and ethnography. For example, Juris (2014) argues that activism entails breaking out of activist and academic “ghettos” and entering public debates in order to “‘provoke’ critical thought and 
Setha Low
8action and to ‘translate’ between different visions, languages, and concerns” (2014: 1). He adds 
that militant ethnography also requires (self) reflection, collaborative production of knowledge, building horizontal networks and negotiating the conflicts and dilemmas faced when navigating academic, activist and public worlds. 
  Maskovsky (2013 ) points out that for protest anthropology, playing a central role in a move-
ment by organizing and planning activities and commitment to the political work is of foremost 
importance. T o participate directly in social action alongside others with similar commitments – sometimes agreeing and sometimes dissenting – includes taking a political stand and eschewing the positivist ideal of scientific neutrality.  Morris (2015 ) adds imagining freedom to the kinds of labor required for engagement, while Fischer (2014) suggests supporting local moral projects. Finally Checker suggests that engaged urban anthropologists remain aware of their own struc-tural constraints and vulnerability to cooptation. 
 Thus the labor of an engaged urban anthropology always includes some kind of politics, 
both of the anthropologist and of the people and projects engaged with. It is composed of a 
heterogeneous and complex set of skills – many familiar to any urban ethnographer, such as self-reflection and collaboration, while others are acquired through practice. There are aspects of being engaged that are distinct from traditional urban anthropology, such as disrupting activist/academic dichotomies, provoking critical thought and discussion, negotiating the boundaries and contradictions of being committed to a political project yet remaining committed to the ethnographic vision of nuanced and insightful work. All urban research includes imagination and commitment, but it is engaged when it is directed to a political and social vision of the future – for example, overt endorsement of a value system of social justice. 
 In addition to political commitment, there is also the emotional labor of sustaining oneself 
and co-workers through the rollercoaster of crises of confidence and trust, physical exhaustion 
and mental fatigue. Facing conflicting ideas and measures of success or failure and being able to know when to stop, ask for help or try another strategy require affective labor of a special kind often developed only through engaged experience. The labor of engagement necessitates being involved in research to solve urban problems, but also to learn and transform oneself. Many urban anthropologists share this sentiment. The primary goal of Partners for Urban Knowledge, Action, and Research (PUKAR) founded by anthropologist Arjun Appadurai and historian Carol Breckenridge in Mumbai is 
 to think of research as a process oriented learning journey rather than an end product ori-
ented goal . . . Research is not only about generating new knowledge but also about the ways that research affects the researcher himself or herself. 
 ( Maharawal 2012 : 682) 
 The engaged practices of the urban anthropologists in this book encompass multiple kinds of 
labor – scholarly, strategic, emotional and political. Many of the contributors are not involved in 
direct action, yet all the ethnographies grapple with social justice issues and search for more equi-table solutions and deeper ethnographic understandings. Their ethnographies identify critical and transformational issues, such as environmental gentrification (Checker, Dürr, Rao) and the survival of marginalized urban youth and incarcerated young adults (Simone, McKinney, Pardue). Some of the contributors join forces with grassroots organizations already committed to preserv-ing art and urban heritage (Herzfeld, Sawalha) and transforming their neighborhoods (Hita and Gledhill, Dürr). A few locate their engaged research interventions in settings that publicize and expose an impeding infrastructural breakdown, such as a traffic jam, barricaded roads or piles 
Introduction: Engaging the city
9of garbage (Chin, Monroe, Schwenkel) or insecurity due to increasing crime, terrorism or racial 
stereotyping (Maguire and Péterczák, Frossard and Jaffe, de Koning). 
 All of the researchers select methods and techniques that reveal underlying structures as well as 
everyday problems. They protect the people they work with and the data collected in such a way 
as to insure the least harm. 6  They all attempt to translate their findings in ways that nonspecial-
ists can understand and in some cases offer a plan of action or strategy for communicating the 
outcomes to relevant publics. 
 The work of translation 
 Encouraging urban anthropologists to be engaged does not end with their research practice, 
but includes an imperative to translate their findings in ways that have positive consequences in their field settings and on social issues. Translation, however, is always fraught because of differ-ences in the context of knowledge production and the multiple publics addressed.  Paige West (2005 ) argues that politics of translation and theories of value are at the center of environmental 
anthropology. Her example of how Gimi local beliefs were translated into generic categories detrimental to the conservation project illustrates the “political problematic for an engaged envi-ronmental anthropology” ( West 2005 : 632). It is rare to be able to control findings in such a way as to guarantee they reach their intended audience and objective. 
 Engaged urban anthropology faces similar outcomes when urban issues are translated in ways 
that hurt or exclude local populations. A number of the ethnographic cases in this book explore 
new forms of translation by reinterpreting previous theories and findings (Ramos-Zayas and Berg, Simone, T eppo, Brash, Maskovsky), and through critiques of the original translations as rac-ist (Jackson, de Koning, McKinney, Pardue) or vestiges of colonial and oppressive social relations (Oliven, Pardue, T eppo, Harms, Pellow). While difficult and often uncertain in its effects, engaged anthropology necessitates the translation of research into understandable language, actions and assessments of what counts ( Charnley and Durham 2010 ). 
 Another strategy for determining the impact of urban research is to consider the “afterlife 
of ethnography” (Fassin 2015). After the publication of his fieldwork on policing in the suburbs 
of Paris ( Fassin 2013 ), Didier Fassin recounts bringing his analysis of the contradictory roles of police in controlling minority youth to a left-leaning media public and governmental officials. His second book on French prisons (2016) also elicited media attention, but in ways that were discouraging, especially with regard to his recommendations for greater cellphone access and the reduction of solitary confinement. 
 Fassin is committed to the publicization of ethnography, bringing what he regards as two 
worlds of meaning – that of the ethnographer and cultural members and readers – into dialogue 
(2015b: 603). In the United States there is an increasing gap between society and scholars, and a separation of those who do research and the objects and subjects of their studies. It is this “sepa-ration” that much of engaged, activist and protest anthropology addresses. Fassin, on the other hand, endorses a public presence, but suggests that anthropologists pay more attention to what happens when a publication circulates and generates debate, exposing “its author to a public” (Fassin 2015: 607) and tracking the ways that these encounters occur. 
 Thus, translation is part of the labor of engagement, and needs to be thought about as an 
intrinsic part of the process. Translation and publicization as well as producing collaborative 
knowledge and action are as much a part of engaged anthropology as the choice of problem, research method, mode of analysis, presentation of findings, publication and dissemination strat-egy and policy recommendations. 
Setha Low
10 Public issues and urban anthropology 7  
 This book demonstrates that the work of urban anthropologists is integral to the public sphere of 
circulating media reports, city politics and collective experience. The ethnographies probe urban issues with new forms of analysis, emergent theories and methods, leading to more research and inquiry, and insights into how problems can be addressed through engaged urban anthropology practice. The chapters are organized around eight topics of critical importance to contempo-rary and future cities: precarity; displacement and mobility; security and insecurity; environment and sustainability; citizenship, rights and social justice; built environment and spatial governance; financialization and privatization and heritage preservation and cultural expression. Each topic is briefly defined and the individual chapters in each section introduced. 
 Precarity 
 Increasing precarity reveals the pervasive neoliberalism that has reduced protections for poor and 
homeless populations in global cities and reinforced cultural patterns of political marginalization by race, class and gender in many parts of the world. The term “precarity” incorporates urban anthropological concepts of poverty, marginality and suffering into a metaphor for life on the edge of society and sustainability, thus becoming expendable in both a social and physical sense. Judith Butler writes that “precariousness and precarity are intersecting concepts. Lives are by definition precarious: they can be expunged at will or by accident; their persistence is in no sense guaranteed” (2009: 25). Precarity, on the other hand, is a state of existential and physical vulner-ability accompanied by invisibility from the social and political institutions that are supposed to mitigate these risks. It is a “politically induced condition in which certain populations suffer from failing social and economic networks and support and become differentially exposed to injury, violence, and death” ( Butler 2009 : 25). 
 The chapters in this section explore some of the forgotten corners of this form of human 
fragility and how urban exclusion is resisted. AbdouMaliq Simone begins with a study of youth 
in Hyderabad and Jakarta, exploring how they respond to their exclusion from capital accumula-tion, political normalcy and care. Simone highlights how marginalized young people employ the practices of “crafting” as a specific performance to gain attention, “waiting” and “accelerating” to deal with the temporal dimensions of limited opportunities, “harvesting” to recuperate waste and, more importantly, “precarious detachment” to deal with their own sense of expendability. Mariano Perelman examines the naturalization of precarity for informal waste collectors and ambulatory vendors in Buenos Aires, whose limited access to public space and unequal spaces of social reproduction are shaped by culture and class. He warns that naturalizing precarious activi-ties as legitimate ways to earn a living contributes to even greater marginalization and inequality of those who perform precarious labor. 
 Precarity relies on invisibility. In T om Hall’s ethnography, though, the hidden “rough sleepers” 
on the streets of Cardiff become socially and spatially visible through the efforts of street-based 
care-workers who track their daily movements to provide food and services. By tracking teams of care-workers and volunteering to become one himself, Hall is able to map the overlooked urban spaces where outreach workers and homeless alike can spend time undisturbed, creating a counter-topography of urban living. In the final chapter of this section, Bill McKinney, an applied anthropologist, narrates his personal journey working with Black and Latino youth to keep them in school and out of prison and mentoring ex-offenders in his neighborhood. McK-inney outlines the history of structural racism in Philadelphia that underlies the precarity of local minority youth, and practices his version of urban anthropological activism within this social 
Introduction: Engaging the city
11justice project. His work provides the ethnographic backdrop for acknowledging that regardless 
of whether a person is detained as an undocumented Latino worker and deported or stopped as a young Black man and ends up in prison, the structure of the current policing system creates precarity for those people of color. 
 Displacement and mobility 
 Precarity often leads to displacement in which people are compelled to leave the place in which 
they live, territorially and symbolically. Displacement includes the unintentional impact of (un)natural disasters, such as Katrina in New Orleans, Hurricane Sandy in New Y ork City or Hur-ricane Harvey in Houston, but more frequently it is characterized by ethnically and racially enforced evictions and migrations. As an urban anthropological concept, it is used to describe the social, political, environmental and economic strategies by which people are removed from where they live as well as the personal and emotional experience of removal in the face of famine, war, violence, discrimination and genocide. Displacement includes questions about how homeless people end up living on the street and other situations of bare life, deprived of any rights, includ-ing that of survival ( Agamben 1995 ). Emplacement is an ancillary term that urban anthropolo-gists employ to describe the place-making that occurs in refugee camps, temporary shelters and informal settlements by migrants and other people fleeing hunger and death in the face of the dehumanizing and debilitating effects of displacement ( Pardue 2017 ). 
 Mobility is an aspect of the displacement experience and reflects an urban anthropological 
interest in the “new mobilities paradigm,” a theoretical framework that traces contemporary and 
historical mobility through the movement of people, objects, capital and information, globally as well as locally (Hannam, Sheller and Urry 2006). The “mobilities turn” encompasses a wide array of concerns, from studies of urban circulation and transportation, such as those identified in this section, to research on migration, tourism and travel; virtual and informational mobility; mobility nodes and spatial mobility; and materiality and mobility (Hannam, Sheller and Urry 2006). Ash Amin and Nigel Thrift argue that the way to understand a city is by the means of movement since it creates human relations through the acts of collection, transport and ordering. Movement, whether by walking, cycling, automobile, bus or motorcycle, produces 
 a complex pattern of traces, a threadwork of intensities which is antecedent to the sustained 
work of revealing the city minute on minute, hour on hour, day on day, and so on. These forces are distinguished in four ways: by what they carry, by how they carry, by their stretch in space and by their cyclicity. 
 (Amin and Thrift 2002: 81–82) 
 The concepts of displacement and mobility intersect through how they are socially and affec-
tively configured in postcolonial contexts (T eppo, Ramos-Zayas and Berg) and how they influ-
ence and control the power dynamics of activist resistance and state intervention (Sopranzetti, Monroe). Annika T eppo questions the permanence of the displacement historically created by apartheid by revealing how as a White woman she was misplaced and re-placed as part of her analysis of segregation and mobility in Cape T own. She points out that the reproduction of urban social boundaries and racial categories in postcolonial cities continues to reinforce spa-tial and racial divisions but in “blurred” and porous ways. The difficulties of moving through urban spaces due to racial assumptions and the salience of race for most South Africans obscures other emerging solidarities based on faith, class, moral ideas, class and individual preferences. Ana Ramos-Zayas and Ulla Berg examine the intersection of race and affect through the life 
Setha Low
12histories of an Andean Peruvian migrant and a Puerto Rican return-migrant to complicate how 
displacement and mobility work to refashion individual interiority through political-economic and emotional means. Employing the concept of “generative fieldsite,” they track these migrants as they contend with social, cultural, national and racial boundaries and recognize the com-plex processes of affective self-fashioning and self-identification used to make themselves legible across different social worlds. 
 Claudio Sopranzetti’s initial interest in mobility and circulation as a characteristic of con-
temporary urban capitalism is reconfigured through his experience with motorcycle taxi driv-
ers swept up in a Red Shirts protest in Bangkok. His ethnography reveals how the relationship between mobility and immobility, and its use by the motorcycle taxi drivers, is central to the flow of people, commodities and capital, and that by stopping this flow and strategically directing it, the power of the state is disrupted. He concludes that urban circulation can reinforce as well as resist state power, offering urban anthropology a theoretical and methodological tool for not overestimating the grip of state power. Kristin Monroe also investigates the importance of being mobile in an urban environment as a window on citizenship and civic life. By studying auto-mobility on the congested and dangerous streets of Beirut, she discovers that the ability to pass through security blockades reveals a hierarchy of social control based on class, gender, ethnicity and religion. The infamous Green Line that divided Beirut into predominantly Christian and Muslim sectors during the long war (1975–1990) remains as a political geography of sectarian territories requiring passengers and drivers to negotiate their political identities within these conflicting structures of power inscribed in urban space. 
 Security and insecurity 
 Security and insecurity have become important topics in urban anthropology because of increas-
ing precarity; fear of displacement; constraints on mobility; gender, racial and political violence; and militarization of the police in the city. Interest in these themes has followed a theoretical trajectory, from defining security as a necessary basis for everyday life to a series of formulations that include violence and warfare, an infrastructure of governance, a realm of secrets and a set of assemblages ( Low and Maguire 2019 ). Security, when “defined as a modality of constructing danger, fear and anxiety, and the measures taken to guard against such threats” ( Glück and Low 2017 : 1), encompasses a wide range of activities, such as individuals searching for safety within 
an insecure state, state mobilization of security forces, migrants and refugees seeking housing and citizenship, and middle-class families questioning the financial security of mortgages. All are attempts at reducing risk and insecurity at multiple scales. These processes contribute to and in some cases even determine the physical, moral and legal environments that enable the precarity, displacement and immobility that differentially impact people. Because security is driven by fear – both fear of others and fear of economic failure – it is a defensive strategy and constrains the circulation and occupation of urban space by others. 
 Security is experienced in everyday practice, particularly in specific built environments, such 
as airports and subways, suburban neighborhoods and urban public spaces, where the norms of 
everyday behavior are used to construct a sense of comfort and continuity. When viewed in this broader sense security is “the feeling and reality . . . that this is a sensible and reliable world in which to act” ( Molotch 2012 : 3). Harvey Molotch views security as a “massive, social moral, and political thing” that allows us to study how “‘normal’ life operates, and how it can engulf the world through worries about one’s body, bombs and bastions” ( 2012 : 1). 
 The chapters in this section take up a number of these themes by exploring security in 
radically different ways. Carolina Frossard and Rivke Jaffe focus on security technologies as 
Introduction: Engaging the city
13“boundary objects,” utilizing radio communication devices to illustrate how technologies con-
nect and blur the roles of state and non-state actors as well as private and public security rela-tionships in the pursuit of urban safety. They emphasize that security technologies, such video surveillance and “shot spotters,” that are touted as “smart city” solutions to a safer city are anything but neutral in their effects, and document how corporate profit motives and political motives and interests predict whether a security technology will be employed or effective. Mark Maguire and Réka Pétercsák investigate technological security strategies as well, but as part of the critical infrastructure – the “vital system” – of airport security. They find that counterterrorist policing relies more on the tacit knowledge and organizational memory of police officers and their ability to filter and react to abnormal behavior. Protection from terrorist attacks requires situational awareness achieved through unarmed community policing rather than technological solutions “in search of problems to solve.” 
 The chapters by Thomas Hylland Eriksen and Anouk de Koning focus on the security and 
insecurity concerns of immigrant populations struggling to survive in Western European cit-
ies, where their presence is a source of cultural and political conflict and even violence. In these contexts, security refers to feelings of belonging and “being at home” ( Duyvendak 2011 ), 
especially for non-European Muslims from the Middle East and Africa, who are stigmatized by the media for their fundamentalism, or Eastern European workers and refugees, who find their hosts hostile to their culture, language and lifeways. Erikson’s ethnography focuses on an ethni-cally complex suburb of East Oslo characterized by continuous mobility and sense of transience accompanied by social problems, such as unemployment and crime. Using network analysis to compare this suburb to a traditional Norwegian town, he highlights the difficulty of creating a sense of belonging in urbanized suburbs where commutes to work are long, leisure time is limited, and relationships do not overlap because of the spatial separation of work, family and recreational activities. Y et even though he finds that suburban minority youth speak of themselves as “foreigners,” they strongly identify with Oslo, especially the eastern parts, where they choose to live. De Koning examines another aspect of the anxiety and insecurity created by the racist imaginaries that picture European nations as homogenously White, and non-White citizens as threatening – as a burden and existing outside society. Her ethnography of a notorious Amster-dam neighborhood with a history of conflict between White “Dutch” residents and young men with Moroccan backgrounds included working with the municipal bureaucracy respon-sible for neighborhood policies. She identifies the importance of key iconic figures used by the media to criminalize “Moroccan youths” and how these youths resist this hegemonic reading by articulating alternative narratives. From an engaged perspective she tracks a “youth and security” assemblage and the ability to reframe urban problems connecting the racialized discourses about nationhood and belonging to security in everyday life. 
 Environment and sustainability 
 Cities continue to have a disproportionate impact on environmental degradation due to density 
and spatial expansion, demand for goods and services, and dependence on imported foodstuffs because of an accelerating shortage of land. Even before concerns about climate change and the rise of the Anthropocene, cities had energy, water, waste and clean air needs that could not be met by existing social, political and economic strategies. Shortages of food, water, energy and open space have plagued cities from their very beginnings, and yet discussions of sustainability were viewed as something that biologists and ecologists worried about. Urban sustainability, environ-mental sustainability and social sustainability are now critical issues within urban anthropology being studied in a myriad of ways. 
Setha Low
14 Melissa Checker, Gary McDonogh and Cindy Isenhour (2016) agree that sustainability as a 
discourse and a set of practices is particularly important for rapidly growing cities, where it takes 
on various meanings: 
 [Sustainability] signals a “modern” way to envision the future, a way to understand relation-
ships between the built environment and ecological resources, a foundation for demanding more just social relations, an approach to urban planning, a branding strategy, and a nostalgic reference to a preindustrial past. 
 (Checker, McDonogh and Isenhour 2016: 1) 
 Most importantly, the desire for greater urban sustainability has real-world consequences for 
those who live there and can provide viable strategies for social and environmental change, but can threaten the well-being of those excluded from those beneﬁts. 
 The chapters in this section focus on this last critical dimension of the study of urban 
sustainability – that is, as a way to interrogate environmental inequities and social justice issues. 
Melissa Checker, an activist anthropologist working in New Y ork City, examines how environ-mental improvements and pollution remediation in low-income neighborhoods are accompa-nied by redevelopment plans that ultimately displace low-income and people of color from their communities. Even as local community groups fight for parks, more open space and bike lanes they realize that they are also creating outcomes that hurt rather than sustain their constituents, a process that Checker calls “environmental gentrification.” In the informal settlements of Delhi, Ursula Rao observes attempts at “slum upgrading” and neighborhood beautification by college-going boys who clear neglected open spaces of garbage, paint walls and install play equipment to create small parks for local residents and children. Wealthy families invest in septic tanks and toilets, and a private company offers clean drinking water for a small fee. But the financial liability of this sustainability effort is too great for the poorer residents of the neighborhood, creating what Rao refers to as “incremental gentrification” for the wealthier residents while failing to recognize the unequal and discriminatory results of the cleaning drive, inscribing class relations in space. 
 Eveline Dürr and Jeannine-Madeleine Fischer identify a different cultural dynamic involved in 
tackling urban pollution problems in Auckland. In their ethnography of encounters between envi-
ronmental activists, community leaders and residents in two neighborhoods, they found that cleaning up the environment and reducing waste are a sign of being a “good kiwi,” reflecting national pride. A garden club focused on the remediation of indigenous species encourages citizen engagement across the middle-class “White” and disadvantaged Mā ori and Polynesian descendant neighborhoods, which 
resulted in cultural revitalization and empowerment but also became a strategy of social control. 
 The last chapter in this section takes a utopian view of what sustainable transportation practices 
might look like by exploring the importance of bicycling in Copenhagen. Malene Freudendal-
Pedersen studies how cycling transforms the city from the embodied and emotional experience of “freedom” for the cyclist to the integration of bicycle transportation through city planning. Whether Brooklyn residents where I live ultimately experience the kind of “freedom” that Freudendal-Pedersen has when cycling her city streets or transforms automobile dependence in New Y ork City is yet unknown. But the evidence is clear that cycling, when prioritized within urban transportation systems, is an important step towards creating a more livable, environmentally friendly city. 
 Citizenship, rights and social justice 
 The struggle for environmental justice and sustainability is predicated on various concepts of 
citizenship, rights and social justice developed by local communities to make claims and direct 
Introduction: Engaging the city
15change. Engaged urban anthropologists also utilize these concepts, drawing upon different social 
theories depending on their ethnographic objectives and political leanings. For example, my research on social justice and public space employs Iris Y oung’s (1990) assessments of social justice that question individualist proposals for promoting greater equity. Her insistence on evaluating inequality in terms of social groups because group-based comparison reveals important patterns of structural inequalities underlies our work on socially just public space based on park and plaza ethnographies (Low and Iveson 2016;  Low, Taplin and Scheld 2005 ). Edward Soja’s (2010) claim that social justice and injustice are constituted geographically and that the equitable distribution of resources, services and access to those resources and services is a basic human right underpins much of the urban anthropological work on displacement and precarity. 
 Urban anthropologists such as Edward Murphy and Maria Gabriela Hita and John Gledhill in 
this section use theories of rights that are universal often at the individual level. They draw upon 
Henri Lefebvre’s (1996) concept of the “right to the city” that offers a utopian imaginary of a better society and the right to a better life, where individual rights can be defended by judicial actions. Erik Harms’s chapter cites the Marxist geographer David Harvey (2008), who contends that rights are community-based and collective, such as the shared resources of the commons. 
 Theories of citizenship are equally varied by historical, political and cultural context.  James 
Holston’s (2008 ) theory of citizenship for Brazilians argues that citizenship is a combination of 
“formal membership based on principles of incorporation into the nation-state” and “the sub-stantive distribution of the rights, meanings, institutions and practices that membership entails to those deemed citizens” ( 2008 : 7). In his analysis citizenship, while universal in its distribution, 
provides only a gradation of rights, where most rights are available to certain kinds of people. Murphy makes this point in his ethnography of Santiago, Chile, where property rights do not guarantee the right to a safe and secure city. 
 Each of the contributors in this section offers their own understandings of citizenship, rights 
and social justice based on their ethnographic experiences. In their work the concepts weave 
in and out of the text, sometimes making a theoretical appearance, and other times emerging in new forms and cultural configurations. In his long-term ethnography of racialized citizen-ship Harlem, New Y ork City, John Jackson contends that American racism only “grudgingly grants civic belonging and social legitimacy to those living out their lives on the wrong side of Dubois’s infamous color line.” For Jackson, class and racial identity are prone to manipulation and reconfiguration and must be scrutinized in the United States. He argues that citizenship is racialized to such an extent that American citizenship is a technicality of the legal code, while full American belonging is predicated on social value created by one’s distance from the “wretched” Black American subject. 
 Edward Murphy’s study of housing movements of low-income residents in Santiago queries 
“what kind of rights” in response to Lefebvre’s demand for a right to the city. Citing the hun-
dreds of land seizures that have created a series of neighborhoods, a majority of Santiago’s poor own houses with land titles and basic infrastructure. Through an historical examination of prop-erty relations, Murphy posits that there is a connection between property and propriety, such that becoming a homeowner is linked to a sense of personhood and advancement and ties directly into rights of citizenship as well as dignity and respect. Y et these rights have been only partially forthcoming in that even with legally sanctioned property rights and permanent neighborhoods, housing rights have not provided a more secure and integrated city. 
 Maria Gabriela Hita and John Gledhill consider a grassroots organization’s rights to the city 
as a framework for evaluating a particular type of community organization created in an irregular 
settlement in Salvador, Brazil. They study how local residents secure participation in decisions about urban interventions that affect their neighborhood. Critiquing their roles as academics 
Setha Low
16working within the community and mediating relations between the community leaders and 
governmental and nongovernmental organizations, Hita and Gledhill develop their own mode of engaged urban anthropological practice as researcher-participants and interlocutors, helping the organization to revive itself, recording meetings, organizing an archive and offering advice on technical and legal questions. They conclude that the residents achieved a more sophisticated form of community organization for making demands on public authorities and were able to provide contestation from below that was inclusive. 
 In the final chapter, Erik Harms reworks his Marxist framework to understand how Ho Chi 
Minh City residents mobilize capitalist understandings of the market to formulate their own 
concepts of social justice. He argues that a critical urban anthropology must take seriously Viet-namese enthusiasm for the city’s newest 68-story skyscraper built in the rubble of demolished neighborhoods. Even those evicted agree that losing their homes is a necessary step to creating a modern capitalist city. In reaction to these unexpected findings, Harms proposes a left-leaning commitment to social justice that engages the actual history of Marxism, but cautions that the ethnographer must remain aware of the negative consequences of free-market policies for the most disadvantaged urban residents. 
 Built environment and spatial governance 
 The cultural and aspirational significance of the new skyscraper that symbolizes the promise of 
the rising Asian city even for the evicted residents of Ho Chi Minh City underscores how the built environment becomes a focal metaphor, a material force, and thus socially productive in the urban environment. The commodification of urban space under capitalism through com-mercial redevelopment, large-scale architectural and landscape projects and efforts to “clean up the environment” has a profound impact on the design and planning of cities. Studying the built environment is critical to understanding the materiality of people’s lives whose homes and homelands are disrupted by globalization, uneven development, violence and social inequality. The effects of crises of poverty, neoliberal restructuring and global capitalism can be recognized in the changing built environment that includes expanding refugee and resettlement camps, gentrification of low-income neighborhoods, privatization of public spaces and profit-driven urban planning and redevelopment. The built environment not only is useful as a conceptual framework but also provides a powerful tool for uncovering spatial injustice. It offers a basis for engaged urban anthropology activism, such as opposing architectural, planning and design inter-ventions that have the ability to destroy urban centers, erase cultural meanings from the landscape and restrict local participation in the built environment. 
 Spatial governance is a concept that urban anthropologists derive from Michel Foucault’s 
writings on urban governmentalities ( 2007 ) to theorize how the built environment, the parti-
tioning of space and the material aspects of planning and design discipline bodies, control popu-
lations, configure institutions and direct social life. The neoliberalization of urban governance has focused on “privatization, marketization and consumerism” ( Maskovsky and Brash 2014 : 
262), allocating urban space to profit-driven rather than socially responsible enterprises. In this context, the built environment and processes of spatial and urban governance work together to produce cities that are socially, spatially and materially unequal in the distribution of public infrastructure – transportation, waste management, water services, electricity – and public and private resources – parks, playgrounds, markets, open space, shopping, job opportunities and much more. The rise of the precarious city is based on the uneven development and inequi-table spatial distribution that are produced by market-driven decision making and greed. The 
Introduction: Engaging the city
17following chapters interrogate the built environment and its governance capacities in cities of the 
Global North and South. 
 Julian Brash was struck by the success of the High Line, a linear park redeveloped from a 
deteriorating elevated railway in Manhattan, New Y ork City, and now crowded with visitors 
and lined by new luxury condominiums. Its impact on nearby businesses and real estate prices, the “High Line effect,” has become a model for urban redevelopment for cities across the globe. Brash’s ethnography exposes how the High Line’s novel design, sustainability, degree of public access and reuse of infrastructure are seductive in its public-ness and openness, going beyond urban neoliberal strategies by creating value that can be captured by an array of commodities – from condominiums to perfume. 
 Lifestyle centers that resemble a public city square are another material expression of the com-
modification of the built environment organized to improve profits by creating streets, buildings 
and shops inscribed with symbols associated with the city. Gabriella Modan decodes how the semiotics of the Easton T own Square in suburban Columbus, Ohio, makes the shoppers feel as if they are in a public space, yet the language of signs suggests that it is not. This upscale mall contradicts the perceived urbanity through a code of conduct that limits legitimate behavior to retail, dining or entertainment activities and prohibits groups of more than four people, protests and protesters and certain kinds of speech. 
 A different kind of governance theorized as “gendered apathy” towards the built environ-
ment is explored in Christina Schwenkel’s ethnography of emerging market socialism in Vinh, 
Vietnam. While studying housing, Schwenkel’s attention was quickly drawn to the breakdown of urban infrastructure and an examination of a garbage crisis. She argues that waste removal in Vietnamese cities is dependent not only on adequate public infrastructure but also on disciplined residents, the women whose civic responsibility is the daily trash ritual and who through their participation maintain the urban social order. The women who felt disaffected by the state’s promises of social betterment, however, refused to dispose of their trash correctly to express their disappointments with the inefficiencies of socialist governance and their fears of privatization and the threat of relocation. 
 The built environment and the materialities of everyday life have always played a significant 
role in the social production of spatial form and the social construction of meaning. The last two 
chapters in this section contribute to a socio-spatial theorization of the built environment based on traditional and modern spatial practices and ritual use in cities outside the U.S.-dominated core. Deborah Pellow examines Accra and Tamale residents’ attachments to place through her exploration of home as a critical site of cultural and political identity. Her ethnography traces how different modernities are expressed in the built environment of Sabon Zongo, a Hausa neighborhood, and in the elite suburban houses of northerners in Accra. Traditional social con-trols of gender and lineage relationships are materially and symbolically transformed by the style, size, social use and spatial divisions that she documents with detailed architectural drawings and kinship genealogies. Vesna Vučinić’s historical and ethnographic study of the  corso  in Southeast-
ern Europe also records the deterioration of traditional forms of social encounter along gender, age and class lines. The  corso  as a social institution observed in Serbia, Montenegro and Croatia 
was composed of a circular promenade of residents, a public self-presentation that utilized the town square or street. But changes in the built environment due to large-scale development proj-ects are overtaking the older, small-scale pedestrian zones, eliminating this cultural practice and restricting it to the urban margins of villages and towns. Thus, she argues, the cross-class, -gender and -ethnic sociality of the historical period is no longer socially reproduced without the built environment that supported it. 
Setha Low
18 Financialization and privatization 
 The transformation of the built environment and emergence of new forms of affective and spa-
tial governance are supported, and in some cases produced, by the processes of financialization and privatization. Financialization is a process whereby financial markets, institutions and elites gain greater influence over economic policy. When used in conjunction with the concept of “everyday life,” the term takes on the additional meaning of how financial value and concepts of financial worth dominate not only the economic sector but also the personal, social and cultural domains. Its study draws upon a long history of urban anthropological interest in money, but also includes recent attention paid to the social impact of financial instruments, such as the low-equity mortgages and securities made up of bundled mortgages. 
 Privatization – that is, the transfer of ownership of public sector property, goods and services 
to private corporations and individuals – is also not new, but has become crucial to any analysis 
of city form and functioning since the economic restructuring of the 1980s and rise of urban neoliberalism. Urban development and redevelopment, the production of both market rate and low-income housing, and the creation of cultural institutions and public space amenities have increasingly shifted from governmental auspices to private-public partnerships and to private limited partnerships with mixed success. The financialization and privatization of all city services, spaces and affects have become a dominant force in urban inequality and a determining factor in the future of the city. 
 Alan Smart’s chapter provides a definition and history of the concept of financialization 
through the lens of regulation theory. He contends that the lack of self-balancing and economic 
crises of capitalist systems gave rise to the dominance of finance in the aftermath of Fordism. The promotion of homeownership and consumption associated with it promoted the taking on of debt through long-term mortgages, incorporating owners into a moral as well as financial value system. Smart’s historical ethnography of squatter housing in Hong Kong and recent study of the commodification and financialization of Chinese housing illustrate how the hegemony of finance legitimates inequality with greater security only for elites and corporations. 
 The impact of the US home mortgage market collapse devastated the nine million homeown-
ers who faced foreclosure by 2009, and the ten million people evicted by 2013. The unregulated 
and in many cases illegal and corrupt bundling of risky mortgages and predatory lending led to an economic crisis of unimaginable proportions, displacing middle- and low-income families. Jeff Maskovsky’s ethnography of the aftermath of the housing crisis reveals that the affective and moral damage of the foreclosure crisis is just as insidious, placing the blame of financial failure on homeowners’ unwitting response to low-interest, low-equity mortgages promoted as safe by private banks and mortgage brokers. He examines the financialization of the US housing market and the parsing out of blame and responsibility to show what these affective and moral discourses mean politically in terms of class and racial struggles for rights and recognition. 
 The chapter by T om Looser brings together discussions of financialization and privatiza-
tion by imagining an urban future predicated on these processes, that of the “private city.” 
Accompanying the growth of global cities, such as Shanghai, T okyo, London and New Y ork, the emergence of private cities organized as special economic zones or privatized university com-pounds signals another trend in city financing and building. Because of the difficulties of fund-ing municipal governments due to an inability to collect taxes and competition for public bond offerings, privatization of urban infrastructure and the selling off of state-owned enterprises, such as electricity, water and telephone, have been used by cities to make up financial shortfalls since the 1980s. Neoliberal policies and unregulated capital markets have accelerated the privatization of city services as municipalities attempt to reduce their exposure to fluctuating currencies and 
Introduction: Engaging the city
19commodity markets. The proliferation of special economic zones has been used as a strategy for 
funding economic development as a state and corporate project. In this economic and political context, a number of “private” cities have been constructed as small city-states with new models of governance that allow for the freer play of capital investments and strategies of profit-making. These private cities are intended to be separate from the existing structure and culture of nation-states, offering an alternative way to organize urban life. Since many of these private cities are not yet complete or completely functioning, Looser is only able to report his observations of some Asian examples of eco-cities and university educational centers cut off from the financial, cultural and national context of the territories in which they are located. 
 Heritage preservation and cultural expression 
 The loss of the intimate scale of the built environment, increase in financialization and rise of the 
private city do not impede the emergence of new cultural expressions and strategies for challeng-ing the hegemony of urban elites and rapacious corporations. The chapters in this final section provide a more optimistic portrayal of the capacity of individuals and collectivities to oppose the political and economic forces of urban redevelopment, privatization, commodification and displacement that plague urban neighborhoods. A number of tactics are discussed, including fighting for the historic preservation of neighborhoods to impede the displacement of communi-ties who have lived there for generations and mobilizing artistic expressions as varied as painting, dance and music to compel recognition of people and problems that are otherwise invisible and overlooked. 
 Michael Herzfeld’s exploration of people and places threatened by gentrification draws upon 
his fieldwork in Rome and Bangkok and his collaborative efforts to protect local residents living 
in the historically and symbolically significant urban cores. He argues that urban anthropologists must understand the extent of residents’ will to stay as well as the motivations of those who want to move them out. He reveals the structural violence enacted on poor and long-term residents who have decided that their historic housing has value beyond residential utility, while the com-modification of heritage by the authorities requires the transformation of this newly constructed past into a source of profit and attraction for tourists. 
 In Amman, Jordan, historic preservation of old neighborhoods and gentrification through the 
development of art galleries and cafes involved a less contentious process. Aseel Sawalha reveals 
the growing presence of women as key agents in transforming the city by creating a local incu-bator for art-based businesses, supporting artists’ work and providing new venues where art and crafts could be purchased. The increased appreciation of the historic buildings in the decaying neighborhood of East Amman and the flow of new people are accomplished by upper-middle- and middle-class women interested in creating a cultural center even at a time when radical Islam is proliferating in the region. The presence of elite women encourages working-class women to become more involved by refurnishing an open-air market where their crafts can be sold. The women succeeded in increasing the presence of women in public arenas while also preserving a deteriorating historic neighborhood without displacing local residents. 
 Cultural expression such as art, dance, music and theater plays increasingly important roles 
in the transformation of the city, but it also provides an innovative methodology for the ethno-
graphic exploration of the politics of space. Elizabeth Chin’s work with urban youth in Kampala centers on the use of dance to embody imagined futures. Through dance the city becomes a site of performance and thus a place that can be shaped and changed. Through her traf-fic jam experiment – that of dancing for an audience of drivers trapped in traffic at a busy 
Setha Low
20intersection – Chin and her collaborators contest the removal of street vendors and the increasing 
control of public space for income-generating purposes as well as the stigma of being “public women.” Chin challenges assumptions about who can use public space and engages her urban anthropological practice to perform/reform the city in ways that open up opportunities for women and youth. 
 Derek Pardue’s ethnography of Cape Verdean Creole (Kriolu)-speaking youth in Lisbon 
employs Kriolu rap and morna lyrics to reaffirm the value of music and other forms of expressive 
culture as important material dimensions of the city. He argues that blackness and African trans-migration have always been constitutive of Lisbon neighborhoods recognized by some cultural institutions and state agencies that promote “Luso-African” events as a pop brand, while Kriolu rappers offer an alternative urban vision and music scene. His intention is not only a theoretical examination of race and space through music but also the promotion of the notion of “Lisbon as black” as a strategy to legitimate the public visibility of Luso-African youth and combat racial profiling by the Portuguese police. 
 The final chapter by Ruben Oliven directs urban anthropologists to the study of music, espe-
cially popular music, and their lyrics that depict everyday lives, concerns and feelings, in different 
historical, political and social contexts. Beginning in the 1930s, with the start of urban-industrial development in Brazil, Oliven analyzes samba, the hegemonic music genre of that time, through lyrics that describe neighborhoods, markers of modernity such as the telephone, having or avoid-ing work, and the power of money. Oliven, like Pardue and Chin, considers cultural expressions such as samba a window into the social imaginary of the time, a way to understand social and political events and in the case of Pardue and Chin to change the imagined future to one that is more equitable, open and just. 
 Conclusion 
  The Routledge Handbook of Anthropology and the City  has the explicit goal of making urban 
anthropology accessible, both in terms of selecting topics that will have broad and general 
appeal as well as an accessible style of writing and moving the discipline towards politically engaged practice. The topics covered are not the usual list of types of cities, geographical regions or theoretical perspectives, but instead address critical aspects of contemporary cities that are of public interest. The engaged urban anthropological approach developed in this introduction and illustrated by the ethnographic chapters has a receptive audience especially among younger scholars and students who are interested in urban anthropology’s relevance in today’s rapidly changing global economy, characterized by territorial instability and the emergence of new political subjectivities. For the next generation of urban anthropologists, engagement with the city implies grappling with rampant inequality and the resulting environmental, affective and social problems faced by cities while not losing sight of the rich opportunities occasioned by urban life. 
 This introduction reconsiders what constitutes engagement by aligning it with recent theories 
of protest and positive anthropology as well as militant ethnographic ethnography and collab-
orative knowledge production. Drawing on a long history of activism that has not always been acknowledged or respected, this iteration of engaged urban anthropology emphasizes praxis – that is, reflection and action – as well as careful research and analysis as the basis of contempo-rary practice. One step towards this goal is to define the labor of engagement, which includes breaking down academic and practicing anthropology boundaries and silos of theoretical versus useful ethnographic work. Further, translation and an analysis of the afterlife of ethnographies are identified as essential to any public anthropology project. 
Introduction: Engaging the city
21 The kinds of engagement explored by the contributors include a range of theoretical, meth-
odological and activist interventions from social critique and the development of local programs 
and policies to other forms of outreach, including advocacy, collaboration and activism. The authors provide comprehensive ethnographies of contemporary and future urban issues through the insights of urban anthropologists as they investigate, make sense of and then engage these problems and opportunities in new ways. 
 The chapters are organized by critical urban issues that include: precarity; displacement and 
mobility; security and insecurity; environment and sustainability; citizenship, rights and social 
justice; built environment and spatial governance; financialization and privatization, and heritage preservation and cultural expression. The flow of topics moves from ethnographies that detail the threats of precarity and displacement, such as increasing physical and social vulnerability, suffering and insecurity, as well as examine the cultural and psychological risks involved in the loss of one’s home, cultural identity and sense of belonging. The sequence of topics then turns to the many ways that marginalization and exclusion transpire through environmental and incremental gentri-fication, restrictions on citizenship and human rights, neoliberal strategies of urban development and governance, and financialization and privatization. The concluding section on artistic and cul-tural expressions and historic preservation, along with some of the chapters on activism, commu-nity organizing and political resistance, offers the most optimistic ethnographic examples, where glimmers of a more participatory, democratic and anti-racist future are imagined and actualized. 
  Engaging the City and the Future , the title of this introduction, reflects the book’s intention to 
imagine the future of the city and the social and political constraints that lie ahead. Part of this 
future, evident in these ethnographic cases, is how cities will continue to be dominated by global capital, political elites and corporations that derive profit and political control through governance strategies, financialization and privatization. Both the “private city” and the “precarious city” are referenced as future imaginaries and the economic and social structures that enable these realities are explored and dissected. Many of the images are dark and dystopic, based on cities vulnerable to accumulation by dispossession, and thus render the poor and racialized as “foreign,” invisible and even toxic to the social body and civic life. But there are a number of ethnographies that illuminate tactics that urban residents use to take back the city through appropriation of urban space and services, refusal to cooperate and collaborate with governmental rules and regulations, demands for rights to the city, and continued struggles for equity and visibility. The strength of cities lies in the many people who live with purpose and resolve, taking back the city slowly and patiently through everyday actions and political organizing. It is the role of an engaged urban anthropology to document, publicize and join these struggles through our ethnographic work. 
 Notes 
  1  I want to thank my colleague Jeff Maskovsky for suggesting that it is the “labor” of engagement that is 
so important at this point in time. He has been a major contributor to my thinking on this subject. 
  2  The  Journal of the Society for Urban, National, and Transnational Anthropology . 
  3  Do-it-yourself (DIY) urbanism. 
  4  Material included in this history section is drawn in part from previous publications on this topic:  Low 
and Merry (2010 ) and Low (2011, 2014). 
  5  Hannah Arendt has also influenced me through her idea of the active life, and praxis as the engagement 
in political action. For  Arendt (1958 ) it is the engagement in active practice that creates a public. 
  6  Of course it is better to always be sure that you cause no harm, but if you are an activist and part of a social 
movement there is a degree to which you will not be able to protect everyone you work with, much less yourself, as Mariano Perelman points outs from his work with  cartoneros  in Argentina. Many activist stu-
dents, whether participating in uprisings in Cairo, Istanbul, Berlin or New Y ork City, have been arrested, detained and often jailed. 
Setha Low
22  7  I decided to create  The Routledge Handbook of Anthropology and the City  when I realized that much of what 
urban anthropologists write about is on the pages of the  New York Times  without the depth of analysis, 
long-term research and self-reflection that characterize our work. 
 References 
 Agamben, Giorgio 1995.  Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life . Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
 Amin, Ash and Nigel Thrift 2002.  Cities: Reimagining the Urban . Cambridge: Blackwell. 
 Arendt, Hannah 1958.  The Human Condition . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Baer, Hans 2012. Anthropology in 2011: A View From the Antipodes in a Turbulent Era.  American Anthro-
pologist  114(2): 217–226. 
 Bank, Leslie J. 2011.  Home Spaces, Street Styles: Contesting Power and Identity in a South African City  . London: 
Pluto Press. 
 Bennett, John W . 1996. Applied and Action Anthropology: Ideological and Conceptual Aspects.  Current 
Anthropology  37: 23–53. 
 Berreman, Gerald D. 1968. Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social Anthropology.  Current 
Anthropology  9(5): 391–396. 
 Butler, Judith 2009.  Frames of War: When is Life Grievable?  New Y ork: Verso. 
 Castells, Manuel. 1989.  The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring and the Urban-
Regional Process . Oxford; Basil: Blackwell. 
 Charnley, Susan and William H. Durham 2010. Anthropology and Environment Policy: What Counts? 
 American Anthropologist  112(3): 397–415. 
 Checker, Melissa 2008. Anthropology in the Public Sphere, Special Section: 2008: Emerging Trends and 
Significant Impacts.  American Anthropologist  111: 162–170. 
 Checker, Melissa 2014. Anthropological Superheros and the Consequences of Activist Ethnography.  Ameri-
can Anthropologist  116(2): 416–420. 
 Checker, Melissa, Gary McDonogh and Cindy Isenhour 2016. Introduction: Urban Sustainability as Myth 
and Practice. In  Sustainability in the Global City . C. Isenhour, G. McDonogh and M. Checker, eds. New 
Y ork: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–28. 
 Chomsky, Noam et al. 1997.  The Cold War and the University: Toward an Intellectual History of the Postwar Years  . 
New Y ork: The New Press. 
 Clarke, Kamari 2010. T oward a Critically Engaged Ethnographic Practice.  Current Anthropology  51(2): 
S301–S312. 
 Drake, St. Claire and Horace R. Clayton 1970.  Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City , 
Volume 1. Chicago: University of Chicago. 
 Duyvendak, Jan Willem 2011.  The Politics of Home . New Y ork: Palgrave. 
 Fassin, Didier 2013. Why Ethnography Matters: On Anthropology and Its Publics.  Cultural Anthropology  
28(4): 621–646. 
 Fassin, Didier 2015. The Public Afterlife of Ethnography.  American Ethnologist  42(4): 592–609. 
 Fassin, Didier 2016.  Prison World: Ethnography of the Carceral Condition . Cambridge: Polity Press. 
 Fischer, Edward F . 2014.  The Good Life: Aspiration, Dignity, and the Anthropology of Wellbeing . Stanford: Stan-
ford University Press. 
 Forman, Shepard 1993.  Diagnosing America: Anthropology and Public Engagement  . Ann Arbor: The University 
of Michigan Pr ess. 
 Forte
, Maxmilian C. 2011 Beyond Public Anthropology: Approaching Zero. Keynote Address, e 8th 
Anthropology Public Anthropology Conference, “(Re)Defining Paradigms of Praxis,” American Uni-
versity, Washington, D.C., October 14–16. 
 Foucault, Michel 2007.  Security, Territory, Population . New Y ork: Picador. 
 Freire, Paulo 1970.  Pedagogy of the Oppressed . London: Bloomsbury Academy. 
 Glück, Zoltan and Setha Low 2017. A Sociospatial Framework for the Anthropology of Security.  Anthropo-
logical Theory  17(3): 281–296. 
 Graeber, David 2009.  Direct Action: An Ethnography . Edinburgh: AK Press. 
 Hale, Charles 2006. Activist Research vs. Cultural Critique: Indigenous Land Rights and the Contradictions 
of Politically Engaged Anthropology.  Cultural Anthropology  21: 96–120. 
 Hannam, Kevin, Mimi Sheller and John Urry 2006. Editorial: Mobilities, Immobilities and Moorings. 
 Mobilities  1(1):1–22. 
Introduction: Engaging the city
23 Harvey, David 2008. The Right to the City.  New Left Review  53: 23–40. 
 Herskovits, Melville J. 1928.  The American Negro: A Study in Race Crossing . New Y ork: Alfred Knopf. 
 Holston, James 2008.  Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions of Democracy and Modernity in Brazil . Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Hopper, Kim 2003.  Reckoning with Homelessness . Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
 Huggins, Martha K. and Marie-Louise Glebbeek 2009.  Women Fielding Danger: Negotiation Ethnographic Iden-
tities in Field Research . Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. 
 Isenhour, Cindy, Gary McDonogh and Melissa Checker 2015.  Sustainability in the Global City . New Y ork: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Jaffe, Rivke and Anouk de Koning 2016.  Introducing Urban Anthropology . London and New Y ork: Routledge.. 
 Juris, Jeffrey S. 2007. Practicing Militant Ethnography With the Movement for Global Resistance in Bar-
celona. In  Constituent Imagination . S. Shukaitis and D. Graeber, eds. Oakland: AK Press, pp. 164–176. 
 Juris, Jeffrey S. 2014.  Activism: Derivation. Field Notes on Activism . fieldsights/527-field-notes-on-activism, 
accessed August 11, 2017. 
 Kirsch, Stuart 2002. Anthropology and Advocacy. A Case Study of the Campaign Against the Ok T edi 
Mine.  Critique of Anthropology  22: 175–200. 
 Lassiter, Luke Eric 2005. Collaborative Ethnography and Public Anthropology.  Current Anthropology  46: 
83–106. 
 Low, Setha 2003.  Behind the Gates: Life Security and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America . New Y ork: 
Routledge. 
 Low, Setha 2011 Claiming Space for Engaged Anthropology: Spatial Inequality and Social Exclusion.  Ameri-
can Anthropologist  113 (3): 389–407. 
 Low, Setha (2014). Spatialities. In  The Blackwell Companion to Urban Anthropology . D. Nonini, ed. London: 
Blackwell Publishing, pp.19–43. 
 Low, Setha 2017.  Spatializing Culture: The Ethnography of Space and Place . London and New Y ork: Routledge. 
 Low, Setha and Mark Maguire 2018.  Spaces of Security . New Y ork: New Y ork University. 
 Low, Setha and Sally Merry 2010. Engaged Anthropology: Diversity and Dilemmas. An Introduction.  Cur-
rent Anthropology  51(2): S203–S226. 
 Low, Setha and Kurt Iveson 2016. Propositions for More Just Urban Public Space.  City  20 (1): 10–31. 
 Low, Setha, Dana Taplin and Suzanne Scheld. 2005.  Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural Diver-
sity . Austin: University of T exas Press. 
 Lutkehaus, Nancy C. 2008.  Margaret Mead: The Making of an American Icon . Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
 Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2011. So Real It Hurts: Notes on Occupy Wall Street.  Racialicioux , Octo-
ber 3, 2011.  www.racialicious.com/2011/10/03/so-real-it-hurts-notes-on-occupy-wall-street/ , accessed 
August 15, 2017. 
 Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2012. PUKAR and the Human Right to Research.  American Anthropologist  
114(4):
 682–683. 
 Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2017. Affective Afterlives: An Ethnography of Activism Between Move-
ments.  CUNY Academic Works .  http://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2259  
 Maskovsky, Jeff 2013. Protest Anthropology.  American Anthropologist  115(1): 126–129. 
 Maskovsky, Jeff and Julian Brash 2014. Governance. In  A Companion to Urban Anthropology . Don Nonini, 
ed. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 255–270. 
 Mead, Margaret 1942.  And Keep Your Powder Dry: An Anthropologist Looks at America . New Y ork: Morrow. 
 Mollenkopf, John and Manual Castells 1991.  The Dual City: Restructuring of New York  . New Y ork: Russell Sage. 
 Molotch, Harvey 2012.  Against Security . Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 Morris, Courtney Desiree 2015. Where It Hurts: 2014 Y ear in Review.  American Anthropologist  117(3): 
540–552. 
 Nader, Laura 1997. The Phantom Factor: Impact of the Cold War on Anthropology. In  The Cold War and 
the University: Toward an Intellectual History of the Postwar Years . Noam Chomsky et al., eds. New Y ork: 
The New Press, pp. 107–146. 
 Pardue, Derek 2017. Cities as Migrant Emplacement.  Anthropology News  website. April 5, 2017, pp. 26–28. 
doi:10.1111/AN.399. 
 Patterson, Thomas 2001. T oward a Critical, Socially Engaged, Integrated Anthropology.  Keynote Address, 
John Young Colloquium . Manuscript from author. 
 Peterson, Marina and Gary McDonogh 2012.  Global Downtowns . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press. 
Setha Low
24 Pierpont, Claudia Roth 2004. The Measure of America.  The New Yorker . March 8, pp. 49–63. 
 Roseberry, William 2002. Political Economy in the United States. In  Culture/Economy/Power: Anthropology 
as Critique/Anthropology as Praxis . Winnie Lem and Belinda Leach, eds. Albany: State University of New 
Y ork Press. 
 Rylko-Bauer, Barbara, Merrill Singer and John Van Willigin 2006. Reclaiming Applied Anthropology: Its 
Past, Present, and Future.  American Anthropologist  108: 178–190. 
 Sanford, Victoria and A. Angel-Ajani 2006.  Engaged Observer: Anthropology, Advocacy, and Activism . New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
 Scheper-Hughes, Nancy 1995. The Primacy of the Ethical: Propositions for a Militant Anthropology.  Cur-
rent Anthropology  36: 409–420. 
 Silverman, Sydel 2007. American Anthropology in the Middle Decades: A View From Hollywood.  Ameri-
can Anthropologist  109: 519–528. 
 Smith, Gavin 1999.  Confronting the Present: Towards a Politically Engaged Anthropology . New Y ork: Oxford. 
 Soja, Edward W . 2010. Seeking Spatial Justice. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press. 
 Speed, Shannon 2006. At the Crossroads of Human Rights and Anthropology: T oward a Critically Engaged 
Activist Research.  American Anthropologist  108: 66–76. 
 Susser, Ida. AIDS, Sex and Culture: Global Politics and Survival in Southern Africa. New Y ork: Blackwell. 
 Susser, Ida 2010. The Anthropologist as Social Critic: Working T oward a More Engaged  Anthropology  51(2): 
S227–S248. 
 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 2016.  The World’s Cities 
in 2016: Data Booklet  (ST/ESA/SER.A/392). 
 West, Paige 2005. Translation, Value, and Space: Theorizing an Ethnographic and Engaged Environmental 
Anthropology.  American Anthropologist  107(4): 632–642. 
 Y oung, Iris. 1990. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press.  
Introduction 
Agamben, Giorgio 1995. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Amin, Ash and Nigel Thrift 2002. Cities: Reimagining the Urban. Cambridge: Blackwell. 
Arendt, Hannah 1958. The Human Condition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Baer, Hans 2012. Anthropology in 2011: A View From the Antipodes in a Turbulent Era. American
Anthropologist 114(2): 217–226. 
Bank, Leslie J. 2011. Home Spaces, Street Styles: Contesting Power and Identity in a South African City.
London: Pluto Press. 
Bennett, John W. 1996. Applied and Action Anthropology: Ideological and Conceptual Aspects. Current
Anthropology 37: 23–53. 
Berreman, Gerald D. 1968. Is Anthropology Alive? Social Responsibility in Social Anthropology. Current
Anthropology 9(5): 391–396. 
Butler, Judith 2009. Frames of War: When is Life Grievable? New York: Verso. 
Castells, Manuel. 1989. The Informational City: Information Technology, Economic Restructuring and the
Urban-Regional Process. Oxford; Basil: Blackwell. 
Charnley, Susan and William H. Durham 2010. Anthropology and Environment Policy: What Counts?
American Anthropologist 112(3): 397–415. 
Checker, Melissa 2008. Anthropology in the Public Sphere, Special Section: 2008: Emerging Trends and
Significant Impacts. American Anthropologist 111: 162–170. 
Checker, Melissa 2014. Anthropological Superheros and the Consequences of Activist Ethnography.
American Anthropologist 116(2): 416–420. 
Checker, Melissa , Gary McDonogh and Cindy Isenhour 2016. Introduction: Urban Sustainability as Myth
and Practice. In Sustainability in the Global City. C. Isenhour , G. McDonogh and M. Checker , eds. New
York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–28. 
Chomsky, Noam 1997. The Cold War and the University: Toward an Intellectual History of the Postwar
Years. New York: The New Press. 
Clarke, Kamari 2010. Toward a Critically Engaged Ethnographic Practice. Current Anthropology 51(2):
S301–S312. 
Drake, St. Claire and Horace R. Clayton 1970. Black Metropolis: A Study of Negro Life in a Northern City,
Volume 1. Chicago: University of Chicago. 
Duyvendak, Jan Willem 2011. The Politics of Home. New York: Palgrave. 
Fassin, Didier 2013. Why Ethnography Matters: On Anthropology and Its Publics. Cultural Anthropology
28(4): 621–646. 
Fassin, Didier 2015. The Public Afterlife of Ethnography. American Ethnologist 42(4): 592–609. 
Fassin, Didier 2016. Prison World: Ethnography of the Carceral Condition. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Fischer, Edward F. 2014. The Good Life: Aspiration, Dignity, and the Anthropology of Wellbeing. Stanford:
Stanford University Press. 
Forman, Shepard 1993. Diagnosing America: Anthropology and Public Engagement. Ann Arbor: The
University of Michigan Press. 
Forte, Maxmilian C. 2011 Beyond Public Anthropology: Approaching Zero. Keynote Address, e 8th
Anthropology Public Anthropology Conference, “(Re)Defining Paradigms of Praxis,” American University,
Washington, D.C., October 14–16. 
Foucault, Michel 2007. Security, Territory, Population. New York: Picador. 
Freire, Paulo 1970. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Bloomsbury Academy. 
Glück, Zoltan and Setha Low 2017. A Sociospatial Framework for the Anthropology of Security.
Anthropological Theory 17(3): 281–296. 
Graeber, David 2009. Direct Action: An Ethnography. Edinburgh: AK Press. 
Hale, Charles 2006. Activist Research vs. Cultural Critique: Indigenous Land Rights and the Contradictions
of Politically Engaged Anthropology. Cultural Anthropology 21: 96–120. 
Hannam, Kevin , Mimi Sheller and John Urry 2006. Editorial: Mobilities, Immobilities and Moorings. Mobilities
1(1):1–22. 
Harvey, David 2008. The Right to the City. New Left Review 53: 23–40. 
Herskovits, Melville J. 1928. The American Negro: A Study in Race Crossing. New York: Alfred Knopf. 
Holston, James 2008. Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions of Democracy and Modernity in Brazil. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 
Hopper, Kim 2003. Reckoning with Homelessness. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Huggins, Martha K. and Marie-Louise Glebbeek 2009. Women Fielding Danger: Negotiation Ethnographic
Identities in Field Research. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers. 
Isenhour, Cindy , Gary McDonogh and Melissa Checker 2015. Sustainability in the Global City. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Jaffe, Rivke and Anouk de Koning 2016. Introducing Urban Anthropology. London and New York:
Routledge.. 
Juris, Jeffrey S. 2007. Practicing Militant Ethnography With the Movement for Global Resistance in
Barcelona. In Constituent Imagination. S. Shukaitis and D. Graeber , eds. Oakland: AK Press, pp. 164–176. 
Juris, Jeffrey S. 2014. Activism: Derivation. Field Notes on Activism. fieldsights/527-field-notes-on-activism,
accessed August 11, 2017. 
Kirsch, Stuart 2002. Anthropology and Advocacy. A Case Study of the Campaign Against the Ok Tedi Mine.
Critique of Anthropology 22: 175–200. 
Lassiter, Luke Eric 2005. Collaborative Ethnography and Public Anthropology. Current Anthropology 46:
83–106. 
Low, Setha 2003. Behind the Gates: Life Security and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America. New
York: Routledge. 
Low, Setha 2011 Claiming Space for Engaged Anthropology: Spatial Inequality and Social Exclusion.
American Anthropologist 113 (3): 389–407. 
Low, Setha (2014). Spatialities. In The Blackwell Companion to Urban Anthropology. D. Nonini , ed. London:
Blackwell Publishing, pp.19–43. 
Low, Setha 2017. Spatializing Culture: The Ethnography of Space and Place. London and New York:
Routledge. 
Low, Setha and Mark Maguire 2018. Spaces of Security. New York: New York University. 
Low, Setha and Sally Merry 2010. Engaged Anthropology: Diversity and Dilemmas. An Introduction. Current
Anthropology 51(2): S203–S226. 
Low, Setha and Kurt Iveson 2016. Propositions for More Just Urban Public Space. City 20 (1): 10–31. 
Low, Setha , Dana Taplin and Suzanne Scheld . 2005. Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural
Diversity. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Lutkehaus, Nancy C. 2008. Margaret Mead: The Making of an American Icon. Princeton: Princeton
University Press. 
Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2011. So Real It Hurts: Notes on Occupy Wall Street. Racialicioux, October
3, 2011. www.racialicious.com/2011/10/03/so-real-it-hurts-notes-on-occupy-wall-street/, accessed August
15, 2017. 
Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2012. PUKAR and the Human Right to Research. American Anthropologist
114(4): 682–683. 
Maharawal, Manissa McCleave 2017. Affective Afterlives: An Ethnography of Activism Between Movements.
CUNY Academic Works. http://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2259 
Maskovsky, Jeff 2013. Protest Anthropology. American Anthropologist 115(1): 126–129. 
Maskovsky, Jeff and Julian Brash 2014. Governance. In A Companion to Urban Anthropology. Don Nonini ,
ed. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 255–270. 
Mead, Margaret 1942. And Keep Your Powder Dry: An Anthropologist Looks at America. New York: Morrow. 
Mollenkopf, John and Manual Castells 1991. The Dual City: Restructuring of New York. New York: Russell
Sage. 
Molotch, Harvey 2012. Against Security. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Morris, Courtney Desiree 2015. Where It Hurts: 2014 Year in Review. American Anthropologist 117(3):
540–552. 
Nader, Laura 1997. The Phantom Factor: Impact of the Cold War on Anthropology. In The Cold War and the
University: Toward an Intellectual History of the Postwar Years. Noam Chomsky eds. New York: The New
Press, pp. 107–146. 
Pardue, Derek 2017. Cities as Migrant Emplacement. Anthropology News website. April 5, 2017, pp. 26–28.
doi:10.1111/AN.399. 
Patterson, Thomas 2001. Toward a Critical, Socially Engaged, Integrated Anthropology. Keynote Address,
John Young Colloquium. Manuscript from author. 
Peterson, Marina and Gary McDonogh 2012. Global Downtowns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press. 
Pierpont, Claudia Roth 2004. The Measure of America. The New Yorker. March 8, pp. 49–63. 
Roseberry, William 2002. Political Economy in the United States. In Culture/Economy/Power: Anthropology
as Critique/Anthropology as Praxis. Winnie Lem and Belinda Leach , eds. Albany: State University of New
York Press. 
Rylko-Bauer, Barbara , Merrill Singer and John Van Willigin 2006. Reclaiming Applied Anthropology: Its
Past, Present, and Future. American Anthropologist 108: 178–190. 
Sanford, Victoria and A. Angel-Ajani 2006. Engaged Observer: Anthropology, Advocacy, and Activism. New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy 1995. The Primacy of the Ethical: Propositions for a Militant Anthropology. Current
Anthropology 36: 409–420.
Silverman, Sydel 2007. American Anthropology in the Middle Decades: A View From Hollywood. American
Anthropologist 109: 519–528. 
Smith, Gavin 1999. Confronting the Present: Towards a Politically Engaged Anthropology. New York:
Oxford. 
Soja, Edward W. 2010. Seeking Spatial Justice. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press. 
Speed, Shannon 2006. At the Crossroads of Human Rights and Anthropology: Toward a Critically Engaged
Activist Research. American Anthropologist 108: 66–76. 
Susser, Ida . AIDS, Sex and Culture: Global Politics and Survival in Southern Africa. New York: Blackwell. 
Susser, Ida 2010. The Anthropologist as Social Critic: Working Toward a More Engaged Anthropology 51(2):
S227–S248. 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 2016. The World’s Cities in
2016: Data Booklet (ST/ESA/SER.A/392). 
West, Paige 2005. Translation, Value, and Space: Theorizing an Ethnographic and Engaged Environmental
Anthropology. American Anthropologist 107(4): 632–642. 
Young, Iris. 1990. Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 
Precarious detachment 
Berardi, Franco (Bifo) 2014 The Neuroplastic Dilemma: Consciousness and Evolution. Efflux 60. www.e-
flux.com/issues/60-december-2014 
Bhattacharya, Saumyajit 2014 Is Labour Still a Relevant Category for Praxis? Critical Reflections on Some
Contemporary Discourses on Work and Labour in Capitalism. Development and Change 45: 941–962. 
Cowen, Deborah 2014 The Deadly Life of Logistics: Mapping Violence in the Global Trade. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. 
Kirpatrick, Owen L. and Michael Peter Smith 2011 The Infrastructural Limits to Growth: Rethinking the Urban
Growth Machine in Times of Fiscal Crisis. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 35:
477–503. 
Martin, Craig 2012 Desperate Mobilities: Logistics, Security and the Extra-Logistical Knowledge of
“Appropriation”. Geopolitics 17: 355–376. 
Millar, Kathleen 2014 The Precarious Present: Wageless Labor and Disrupted Life in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Cultural Anthropology 29: 32–53. 
Munck, Ronaldo 2013 The Precariat: A View from the Global South. Third World Quarterly 34: 747–762. 
Rossiter, Ned 2014 Logistical Worlds. Cultural Studies Review 20: 53–76. 
de Sousa Santos, Boaventura 2001 Nuestra America: Reinventing a subaltern paradigm of recognition and
redistribution. Theory, Culture and Society 18: 185–218. 
Shukaitis, Stevphen 2013 Recomposing Precarity: Notes on the Laboured Politics of Class Composition.
Ephemera 13: 641–658. 
Standing, Guy 2014 Understanding the Precariat Through Labor and Work. Development and Change 45:
963–980. 
Toscano, Alberto 2014 Lineaments of the Logistical State. Viewpoint.
https://www.viewpointmag.com/2014/09/28/lineaments-of-the-logistical-state 
Valayden, Diren 2016 Racial Feralization: Racism and Ferality in the City. Theory, Culture and Society. 
Virno, Paolo 2009 Natural-Historical Diagrams: The “New Global” Movement and the Biological Invariant.
Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy 5: 92–104. 
Willis, Graham Denyer 2015 The Killing Consensus: Police, Organized Crime, and the Regulation of Life and
Death in Urban Brazil. Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
 
Precarious labor, inequality and public space 
Agier, Michel 2015 Anthropologie de La Ville. Paris: Puf. 
Alvarez Leguizamón, Sonia 2008 Pobreza Y Desarrollo En América Latina. Salta: Universidad Nacional de
Salta. 
Alvarez Leguizamón, Sonia , María Ángela Aguilar , and Mariano D. Perelman 2012 Desigualdad Urbana,
Pobreza Y Racismo: Las Recientes Tomas de Tierra En Argentina. In (Des)Encuentros Entre Reformas
Sociales, Salud, Pobreza Y Desigualdad En América Latina. Carlos Fidel and Enrique Valencia Lomelí , eds.
Pp. 196–231. Bernal, Pcia. de Buenos Aires: CLACSO-ASDI-Unqui.
Appadurai, Arjun 2015 El Futuro Como Hecho Cultural. Ensayos Sobre La Condición Global. Buenos Aires:
FCE. 
Bachiller, Santiago ed. 2015 Tomas de Tierras Y Dificultades de Acceso Al Suelo Urbano En La Patagonia
Central. Buenos Aires: UNPA-Miño y Dávila. 
Balbi, Fernando Alberto 2012 La Integración Dinámica de Las Perspectivas Nativas En La Investigación
Etnográfica. Intersecciones En Antropología 13: 485–499. 
Briones, Claudia , and Rosana Guber 2008 Argentina: Contagious Marginalities. In A Companion to Latin
American Anthropology. Deborah Pooleessor Director , ed. Pp. 11–31. Blackwell Publishing. 
Cardoso de Oliveira, Luis Roberto. 2004 Honor, dignidad y reciprocidad. Cuadernos de Antropología 20:
25–39. 
Cardoso de Oliveira, Roberto , and Luis Roberto Cardoso de Oliveira 1996 Ensaios antropológicos sobre
moral e ética. Río de Janeiro: Tampo Brasileiro. 
Comaroff, John , and Jaen Comaroff 1992 Ethnography and the Historical Imagination. Boulder: Westview
Press. 
Cosacov, Natalia , and Mariano D. Perelman 2015 Struggles Over the Use of Public Space: Exploring
Moralities and Narratives of Inequality. Cartoneros and Vecinos in Buenos Aires. Journal of Latin American
Studies 47(3): 521–542. 
Cravino, María Cristina 2006 Las villas de la ciudad. Mercado e informalidad urbana. Buenos Aires:
Prometeo. 
Danani, Claudia , and Estela Grassi 2008 Ni Error Y Ni Omisión. El Papel de La Política de Estado En La
Producción En Las Condiciones de Vida Y de Trabajo. El Caso Del Sistema Previsional de La Argentina
(1993–2008). In Trabajo, Ingresos Y Políticas En Argentina. Javier Lindenboim , ed. Pp. 259–298. Buenos
Aires: EUDEBA. 
De L’Estoile, Benoît 2014 “Money Is Good, But a Friend Is Better”: Uncertainty, Orientation to the Future,
and “the Economy.” Current Anthropology 55(S9): S62–S73. 
De L’Estoile, Benoit , Federico G. Neiburg , and Lygia Sigaud , eds. 2005 Empires, Nations, and Natives:
Anthropology and State-Making. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Duhau, Emilio , and Ángela Giglia 2004 Conflictos Por El Espacio Y Orden Urbano. Estudios Demograficos
Y Urbanos 56: 257–288. 
Edelman, Marc , and Angelique Haugerud , eds. 2004 The Anthropology of Development and Globalization:
From Classical Political Economy to Contemporary Neoliberalism. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Elias, Norbert 1990 Compromiso Y Distanciamiento. Ensayos de Sociología Del Conocimiento. Barcelona:
Península. 
Fassin, Didier 2000 La Supplique. Stratégies Rhétoriques et Constructions Identitaires Dans Les Demandes
D’aide D’urgence. Annales. Histoire, Sciences Sociales 55(5): 955–981. 
Fassin, Didier. 2008 Beyond Good and Evil?: Questioning the Anthropological Discomfort With Morals.
Anthropological Theory 8(4): 333–344. 
Faulk, Karen 2013 In the Wake of Neoliberalism: Citizenship and Human Rights in Argentina. Stanford:
Stanford University Press. 
Ferguson, James 2006 Global Shadows: Africa in the Neoliberal World Order. Durham: Duke University
Press. 
Fonseca, Claudia 2005 La Clase Social Y Su Recusación Etnográfica. Etnografías Contemporáneas (1):
117–138. 
Garbulsky, Edgardo 2003 La Antropología Argentina En Su Historia Y Perspectivas. El Tratamiento de La
Diversidad, Desde La Negación/Omisión a La Opción Emancipadora. In I Jornadas Experiencias de La
Diversidad- Centro de Estudios Sobre Diversidad Cultural. Rosario: Facultad de Humanidades y Artes,
Universidad Nacional de Rosario. 
Germani, Gino 1967 La ciudad como mecanismo integrador. Revista Mexicana de Sociología 29 (3):
387–406. 
Geertz, Clifford 1973 The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books, Inc., Publishers. 
Gordillo, Gastón R. 2004 Landscapes of Devils: Tensions of Place and Memory in the Argentinean Chaco.
Duke University Press Books. 
Grassi, Estela , Susana Hintze , and María Rosa Neufeld 1994 Políticas sociales, crisis y ajuste estructural:
un análisis del sistema educativo, de obras sociales y de las políticas alimentarias. Buenos Aires: Espacio
Editorial. 
Grimson, Alejandro , María Cecilia Ferraudi Curto , and Ramiro Segura 2009 La vida política en los barrios
populares de Buenos Aires. Buenos Aires: Prometeo. 
Hannerz, Ulf 1980 Exploring the City. Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology. New York: Columbia
University Press. 
Kessler, Gabriel 2012 Movilidades Laterales, Delito, Cuestión Social Y Experiencia Urbana En Las
Perisferias de Buenos Aires. Revista de Ciencias Sociales 25(31): 120–142.
Kessler, Gabriel 2014 Controversias Sobre La Desigualdad. Argentina, 2003–2013. Buenos Aires: FCE. 
Kessler, Gabriel , Maristella Svampa , and Inés González Bombal 2010 Introducción. Las reconfiguraciones
del mundo popular in Reconfiguraciones del mundo popular. El Conurbano Bonaerense en la
posconvertibilidad. Gabriel Kessler, Inés González Bombal y Maristella Svampa, coords. Buenos Aires:
Prometeo-UNGS. 
Lamont, Michèle , and Virág Molnár 2002 The Study of Boundaries in the Social Sciences. Annual Review of
Sociology 28(1): 167–195. 
Lewis, Oscar 1961 Antropología de la pobreza: Cinco familias. Mexico DF. FCE. 
Low, Setha 2000 On the Plaza: The Politics of Public Space and Culture. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Low, Setha M. , and Sally Engle Merry 2010 Engaged Anthropology: Diversity and Dilemmas: An
Introduction to Supplement 2. Current Anthropology 51(S2): S203–S226. 
Malinowski, Bronislaw 1922 Argonauts of the Western Pacific. London: G. Routledge & Sons. 
Matta, Juan Pablo , and Mariano D. Perelman 2016 La Relación Lástima-Limosna Como Una Variación Del
Intercambio. Un Análisis a Partir de Los Mendigos Urbanos Y Los Vendedores Ambulantes En Argentina. In
El Arte de Pedir. Villa María: Editorial universitaria Villa María. 
Mello, Kátia Sento Sé 2011 Cidade E Conflito: Guardas Municipais E Camelôs. Coleção Biblioteca EdUFF.
Niterói: Editora da UFF. 
Menéndez, Eduardo 1968 Solicitud Del Licenciado Eduardo Menéndez En El Marco Del Correo
Antropológico. Actualidad Antropológica (Suplemento ETNIA) 3: 48–51. 
Milanessio, Natialia 2010 Peronists and Cabecitas. Stereotypes and Anxieties at the Peak of Social Change.
In The New Cultural History of Peronism: Power and Identity in Mid-Twentieth-Century Argentina. Matthew
B. Karush and Oscar Chamosa , eds. Pp. 53–84. Durham, NC; London: Duke University Press. 
Narotzky, Susana , and Niko Besnier 2014 Crisis, Value, and Hope: Rethinking the Economy: An
Introduction to Supplement 9. Current Anthropology 55(S9): S4 – S16. 
Nun, José 2001 1969. La teoría de la masa marginal. In José Nun Marginalidad y exclusión social. Buenos
Aires: FCE. 
Ong, Aihwa 2006 Neoliberalism as Exception: Mutations in Citizenship and Sovereignty. Durham: Duke
University Press. 
Ortner, Sherry 2006 Anthropology and Social Theory: Culture, Power, and the Acting Subject. Durham: Duke
University Press. 
Perelman, Mariano D. 2007 Theorizing Unemployment: Toward an Argentine Anthropology of Work.
Anthropology of Work Review 28(1): 8–13. 
Perelman, Mariano D. 2011 La Construcción de La Idea de Trabajo Digno En Los Cirujas de La Ciudad de
Buenos Aires. Intersecciones En Antropología 12(1): 69–81. 
Perelman, Mariano D. 2013a Trabajar, Pedir, Vender. El Caso de Los Vendedores Ambulantes de La
Ciudad de Buenos Aires. The Journal of Latin American and de Caribbean Anthropology 18(2): 231–250. 
Perelman, Mariano D. 2013b Trabajar En Los Trenes. La Venta Ambulante En La Ciudad de Buenos Aires.
Horizontes Antropológicos 19(39): 179–204. 
Quijano, Anibal 2014 [1970] ‘Polo marginal’ y ‘mano de obra marginal’. In Anibal Quijano Cuestiones y
Horizontes. De la Dependencia Histórico-Estructural a la Colonialidad/Descolonialidad del Poder. Pp.
124–170. Buenos Aires: CLACSO. 
Ratier, Hugo 1971 El Cabecita Negra. Buenos Aires: CEAL. 
Ratier, Hugo 1985 Villeros Y Villas Miseria. Buenos Aires: CEAL. 
Ratier, Hugo , and Roberto Ringulet 1997 La Antropología Social En La Argentina. Un Producto de La
Democracia. Horizontes Antropológicos 3(7): 10–23. 
Reygadas, Luis 2008 La apropiación: destejiendo las redes de la desigualdad. Rubí, Barcelona; México, DF:
Anthropos; UAM, Unidad Iztapalapa, Division de Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades. 
Ruggiero, Vincenzo , and Nigel South 1997 The Late-Modern City as a Bazaar: Drug Markets, Illegal
Enterprise and the “Barricades”. The British Journal of Sociology 48(1): 54–70. 
Segato, Rita Laura 2007 La nación y sus otros: raza, etnicidad y diversidad religiosa en tiempos de políticas
de la identidad. Prometeo Libros Editorial. 
Segura, Ramiro 2015 Vivir afuera: antropología de la experiencia urbana. 1st ed. Ciencias sociales Serie
Investigaciones. San Martin, Buenos Aires: UNSAM. 
Sharma, Aradhana , and Akhil Gupta , eds. 2006 The Anthropology of the State: A Reader. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
Telles, Vera da Silva , and Daniel Hirata 2010 Ilegalismos E Jogos de Poder Em São Paulo. Tempo Social
22(2): 39–59. 
Vianna, Adriana de Resende B 2005 Direitos, Moralidades E Desigualdades: Considerações a Partir de
Processos de Guarda de Crianças. In Antropologia E Direitos Humanos 3. Roberto Kant de Lima , ed. Pp.
13–67. Niterói: Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense.
Visacovsky, Sergio Eduardo , and Rosana Gúber 2002 Historia y estilos de trabajo de campo en Argentina.
Buenos Aires: Editorial Antropofagia. 
Whitson, Risa 2011 Negotiating Place and Value: Geographies of Waste and Scavenging in Buenos Aires.
Antipode 43(4): 1404–1433. 
 
Homelessness and the city 
Amin, A. 2006. The good city. Urban Studies, 43 (5–6), 1009–1023. 
Bauman, Z. 2004. Work, Consumerism and the New Poor (second edition). Maidenhead: Open University
Press. 
Beresford, P. 2016. All Our Welfare: Towards Participatory Social Policy. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Bittner, E. 1967. The police on skid-row: A study of peace keeping. American Sociological Review, 32 (5),
699–715. 
Bourgois, P. and J. Schonberg . 2009. Righteous Dopefiend. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of
California Press. 
Cloke, P. , J. May and S. Johnsen . 2010. Swept Up Lives? Re-envisioning the Homeless City. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell. 
Desjarlais, R. 1997. Shelter Blues: Sanity and Selfhood Among the Homeless. Philadelphia, PA: University
of Pennsylvania Press. 
Duneier, M. 1999. Sidewalk. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss and Giroux. 
Engels, F. 1993. The Condition of the Working Class in England. (Oxford World’s Classics Edition). Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 
Fincham, B. , M. McGuinness and L. Murray . 2010. Mobile Methodologies. Basingstoke: Palgrave. 
Glasser, I. and R. Bridgman . 1999. Braving the Street: The Anthropology of Homelessness. New York, NY:
Barghahn Books. 
Goffman, E. 1991. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Inmates in Total Institutions. Harmondsworth:
Penguin. 
Gowan, T. 2010. Hobos, Hustlers and Backsliders: Homeless in San Francisco. Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press. 
Graham, S. and N. Thrift . 2007. Out of order: Understanding repair and maintenance. Theory, Culture &
Society, 24 (1), 1–25. 
Grillo, R. 1985. Ideologies and Institutions in Urban France: The Representation of Immigrants. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 
Hall, T. 2000. At home with the young homeless. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 3
(2), 121–133. 
Hall, T. 2003. Better Times than This: Youth Homelessness in Britain. London: Pluto Press. 
Hall, T. 2006. Out of work and house and home: Contested youth in an English homeless hostel. Ethnos, 7
(12), 143–163. 
Hall, T. 2013. Book review: ‘Professional Lives, Personal Struggles: Ethics and Advocacy in Research on
Homelessness’. T. Valado and R. Amster (eds.). Qualitative Research, 14 (3), 383–386. 
Hall, T. 2016. Footwork: Urban Outreach and Hidden Lives. London: Pluto Press. 
Hall, T. and R. J. Smith 2011. Walking, welfare and the good city. Anthropology in Action, 18 (3), 33–44. 
Hall, T. and R. J. Smith , 2013. Stop and go: A field study of pedestrian practice, immobility and urban
outreach work. Mobilities, 8 (2), 272–292. 
Hall, T. and R. J. Smith . 2015. Care and repair and the politics of urban kindness. Sociology 49 (1), pp.
3–18. 
Healy, J. 2008. The Grass Arena. London: Penguin. 
Hopper, K. 2003. Reckoning With Homelessness. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Hutson, S. and M. Liddiard . 1994. Youth Homelessness: The Construction of a Social Issue. Basingstoke:
Macmillan Press. 
Joyce, P. 2003. The Rule of Freedom: Liberalism and the Modern City. London: Verso. 
Keating, P. (ed.) 1976. Into Unknown England, 1866–1913: Selections From the Social Explorers. Glasgow:
Fontana. 
Kusenbach, M. 2003. Street phenomenology: The go-along as ethnographic research tool. Ethnography, 4
(3), 455–485. 
Lewis, C. 2013. The dean. In Christ Church, 2013. Oxford: Christ Church, Oxford University. 
Liebow, E. 1993. Tell them Who I Am: The Lives of Homeless Women. New York, NY: Free Press.
Makepeace, C. E. 2007. Manchester in the ’70s. Stroud: Sutton Publishing. 
Mills, C. W. 1959. The cultural apparatus. The Listener, 61, March 26, p. 553. 
Murray, C. 1990. The Emerging British Underclass. London: Health and Welfare Unit, Institute of Economic
Affairs. 
Murray, C. 1994. Underclass: The Crisis Deepens. London: Health and Welfare Unit, Institute of Economic
Affairs. 
Pelto, P. J. and G. H. Pelto . 1978. Anthropological Research: The Structure of Inquiry (second edition).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rowe, M. 1999. Crossing the Border: Encounters Between Homeless People and Outreach Workers.
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Sanjek, R. (ed.) 1990. Fieldnotes: The Makings of Anthropology. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Spradley, J. P. 1970. You Owe Yourself a Drunk: An Ethnography of Urban Nomads. Prospect Heights, IL:
Waveland Press. 
Strathern, M. 1987. The limits of auto-anthropology. In Anthropology at Home (ed. A. Jackson ). London:
Tavistock Publications. 
Thrift, N. 2005. But malice aforethought: Cities and the natural history of hatred. Transactions of the Institute
of British Geographers 30, pp. 133–150. 
Valado, T. and R. Amster (eds.) 2012. Professional Lives, Personal Struggles: Ethics and Advocacy in
Research on Homelessness. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 
Wade, P. (ed.) 1996. Advocacy in Anthropology. Manchester: Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory,
University of Manchester. 
Wade, P. 1997. Introduction. In Cultural Studies Will be the Death of Anthropology (ed. P. Wade ).
Manchester: Group for Debates in Anthropological Theory, University of Manchester. 
 
Disproportionate barriers and challenges 
Adams, Carolyn. 1993. Philadelphia: Neighborhoods, Division, and Conflict in a Post-Industrial City. Temple
University Press. Retrieved October 21, 2012
(http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=YhMtDgZaSrcC&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&dq=adams+philadelphia+n
eighborhoods&ots=i5RBHKuQzS&sig=cYH4RUKdsSF8nuhB7YMwN536RMo). 
Alexander, Michelle. 2012. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the  Age of Colorblindness  . New York: 
New Press. 
Anon. 2010. “Hunger in the first.” Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved October 31, 2010
(www.philly.com/philly/news/inq_HT_hunger.html). 
Anon. 2012. “Shadowy pro-voucher group continues attack on State Rep. Roebuck.” Philadelphia City
Paper, 03/30/2012. Retrieved April 3, 2012 (www.citypaper.net/blogs/nakedcity/Shadowy-pro-voucher-
group-continues-attack-on-State-Rep-Roebuck.html). 
Anon. n.d.-a “A parent guide to the Broad Foundation’s programs and policies.” Parents Across America.
Retrieved June 23, 2012 (http://parentsacrossamerica.org/2011/04/a-guide-to-the-broad-foundations-
training-programs-and-policies/). 
Anon. n.d.-b “Archdiocese hands over school management to independent foundation.” Retrieved August 21,
2012 (www.philly.com/philly/blogs/school_files/Archdiocese-hands-over-school-management-to-
independent-foundation.html). 
Anon. n.d.-c “Most toxic area? Philly, says Forbes.” Philadelphia Inquirer, 03/02/2011. Retrieved March 3,
2011(www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20110302_Most_toxic_area__Philly__says_Forbes.html). 
Anon. n.d.-d “Philadelphia’s project U-turn: Citywide efforts to address the dropout problem.” Retrieved
October 9, 2010 (www.aypf.org/forumbriefs/2007/fb030807.htm). 
Anon. n.d.-e “Table 6.” FBI. Retrieved October 23, 2012 (www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-inthe-
u.s/2010/crime-in-the-u.s.-2010/tables/table-6). 
Anon. n.d.-f “Task force cites high dropout rates for African American, Latino students.” Philadelphia Inquirer,
09/03/2010. Retrieved September 3, 2010 (www.philly.com/inquirer/education/20100903_
Task_force_cites_high_dropout_rates_for_African_American__Latino_students.html). 
Anon. n.d.-g “The other shoe drops – Metropolis.” Retrieved September 27, 2011
(www.phlmetropolis.com/2011/09/the-other-shoe-drops.php). 
Anon. n.d.-h “Wm. Penn Foundation gives $1.5m for Philly SD turnaround.” Retrieved February 22, 2012
(www.philly.com/philly/blogs/school_files/Wm-Penn-Foundation-to-give-district-14m-.html). 
Bandura, Albert. 1997. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. New York: Freeman. 
Barkan, Joanne. 2011. “Dissent magazine – Winter 2011 issue – got dough? How billion …” Retrieved
December 5, 2011 (http://dissentmagazine.org/article/?article=3781).
Bauman, John , Norman Hummon , and Edward Muller . 1991. “Public Housing, isolation, and the urban
underclass Philadelphia’s Richard Allen Homes, 1941–1965.” Journal of Urban History 17(3): 264–292.
Retrieved October 21, 2012. 
Black, David S. , Jerry L. Grenard , Steve Sussman , and Louise A. Rohrbach . 2010. “The influence of
school-based natural mentoring relationships on school attachment and subsequent adolescent risk
behaviors.” Health Education Research 25(5):892–902. 
Bowen, Natasha , and Gary Bowen . 1999. “Effects of crime and violence in neighborhoods and schools on
the school behavior and performance of adolescents.” Journal of Adolescent Research 14(3): 319–342.
Retrieved October 19, 2012. 
Bunch, Will. 2012. “Big money behind push for education tax credit program.” Retrieved June 27, 2012
(www. philly.com/philly/news/20120626_Big_money_behind_push_for_education_tax_credit_program.html). 
Coley, Rebekah , and Lois Hoffman . 1996. “Relations of parental supervision and monitoring to children’s
functioning in various contexts: Moderating effects of families and neighborhoods.” Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology 17(1): 51–68. Retrieved October 21, 2012. 
Couloumbie, Angela. 2011. “Corbett rolls out his school-voucher plan.” Philly.com. Retrieved October 19,
2012 (www.philly.com/philly/news/year-in-review/20111012_Corbett_rolls_out_his_school-
voucher_plan.html). 
Denvir, Daniel. 2012. “Who’s killing Philly public schools?” Philadelphia City Paper, 05/03/2012. Retrieved
May 9, 2012 (www.citypaper.net/news/2012-05-03-whos-killing-philly-public-schools.html?page=1&c=y). 
Fairbanks, Robert. 2009. How It Works: Recovering Citizens in Post-Welfare Philadelphia. University of
Chicago Press. Retrieved October 23, 2012
(http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=BB6Kjzma8XAC&oi=fnd&pg=PP8&dq=robert+fairbanks,+how
+it+works&ots=uZkv6bE375&sig=hSuZ0rHJfaLciwDZW2AqlOnF4OY). 
Farr, Stephanie. 2011. “Kill-adelphia: Yet again, city tops list of homicide rates.” Philadelphia Daily News,
12/30/2011. Retrieved December 30, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20111230_Kill-adelphia__
Yet_again__city_tops_list_of_homicide_rates.html?cmpid=125219969). 
Geringer, Dan. 2011. “City’s grass-roots fix for troubled areas a happy success.” Philadelphia Daily News,
03/03/2011. Retrieved March 3, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20110303_City_s_grass-roots_
fix_for_troubled_areas_a_happy_success.html). 
Geringer, Dan. 2012a. “Parents wary as swings, slides come to drug-plagued Kensington park.” Retrieved
September 25, 2012 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20120925_ALL_CAP_HED_KJJKJK.html). 
Geringer, Dan. 2012b. “Taking Kensington back from drug dealers, one block at a time.” Retrieved August
14, 2012 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20120814_Taking_Kensington_back_from_drug_dealers__
one_block_at_a_time.html). 
Gill, Brian , Ron Zimmer , Jolley Christman , and Suzanne Blanc . 2007. “State Takeover, School
Restructuring, Private Management, and Student Achievement in Philadelphia.” RAND Corporation.
Retrieved October 23, 2012 (www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/recordDetail?accno=ED495738). 
Glaeser, Edward , and Jacob Vigdor . 2012. “The End of the Segregated Century: Racial Separation in
America’s Neighborhoods, 1890–2010.” Manhattan Institute for Policy Research: Civil Report 66. Retrieved
October 23, 2012 (www.manhattan-institute.org/html/cr_66.htm/pdf/cr_66_appendix.pdf). 
Goode, Judith. 1994. Reshaping Ethnic Relations: Immigrants in a Divided City. Temple University Press.
Retrieved October 21, 2012
(http://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=iGYYI5nuuDcC&oi=fnd&pg=PR7&dq=goode+judith+reshapin
g&ots=_fv-r9h1gW&sig=E2-smL5QY4s8lQL92DL3CEuHmc). 
Graham, Kristen. 2011. “Armbister resigns from school reform commission”
(http://www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20111019_Armbrister_resigns_from_School_Reform_
Commission.html). 
Graham, Kristen. 2012a. “‘Compelling’ evidence of cheating in many Phila. schools.” Retrieved March 11,
2012 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20120311__Compelling__evidence_of_cheating_in_many_
Phila__schools.html). 
Graham, Kristen. 2012b. “Phila. School District sends 1,400 layoff notices to blue-collar union.” Philadelphia
Inquirer, 01/03/2012.” Retrieved January 3, 2012 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20120103_
Phila__School_District_sends_1_400_layoff_notices_to_blue-collar_union.html?cmpid=125219969). 
Graham, Kristen. 2012c. “Philadelphia school partnership halfway to $100 million goal.” Retrieved October
19, 2012 (www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/167272175.html). 
Graham, Kristen. 2012d. “SRC push for more power over unions riles legislators.” Retrieved June 8, 2012
(www.philly.com/philly/education/20120608_SRC_push_for_more_power_over_unions_riles_legislators.
html). 
Graham, Kristen. 2012e. “Charter expansions may cost Philadelphia schools $139M.” Retrieved July 14,
2012. (www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20120713_Charter_expansions_may_cost_Philadelphia_
schools__139M.html).
Graham, Kristen. 2012f. “Penn Foundation giving $15M for innovations in Philly schools.” Retrieved October
19, 2012
(www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20120705_Penn_Foundation_giving__15M_for_innovations_in_Philly_
schools.html). 
Herold, Benjamin. 2012a. “‘Significant barriers to entry’ at many Philadelphia charters, District report says.”
Philadelphia Public School Notebook. Retrieved August 3, 2012
(http://thenotebook.org/blog/125042/significant-barriers-entry-many-philadelphia-charter-schools-says-
district-report). 
Herold, Benjamin. 2012b. “William Penn Foundation bankrolling $160,000 communications campaign for
District.” Philadelphia Public School Notebook. Retrieved July 24, 2012
(http://thenotebook.org/blog/125021/william-penn-foundation-bankrolling-160000-pr-campaign-district-
transformation-plan). 
Hill, Mariam. 2012. “Parents band together to help a coalition of center city schools.” Retrieved February 20,
2012 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20120220_Parents_band_together_to_help_a_coalition_
of_Center_City_schools.html?cmpid=124488489). 
Hing, Julianne. 2012. “The remaking of Philadelphia public schools: Privatization or bust – Colorlines.”
Retrieved May 14, 2012 (http://colorlines.com/archives/2012/05/the_remaking_of_philadelphia_
public_schools_privatization_or_bust.html). 
Hurd, Noelle M. , Bernadette Sánchez , Marc A. Zimmerman , and Cleopatra H. Caldwell . 2012. “Natural
mentors, racial identity, and educational attainment among African American adolescents: Exploring
pathways to success.” Child Development 83(4): 1196–1212. 
Hurd, Noelle M. , Fatima A. Varner , and Stephanie J. Rowley . 2013. “Involved-vigilant parenting and socio-
emotional well-being among black youth: The moderating influence of natural mentoring relationships.”
Journal of Youth and Adolescence 42(10):1583–1595. 
Hurd, Noelle , and Marc Zimmerman . 2010. “Natural mentors, mental health, and risk behaviors: A
longitudinal analysis of African American adolescents transitioning into adulthood.” American Journal of
Community Psychology 46(1–2): 36–48. 
Jenkins, Esther , and Carl Bell . 1994. “Violence among inner city high school students and post-traumatic
stress disorder.” Retrieved October 21, 2012 (http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1994-98811-006). 
Keough, K.A. , Zimbardo, P.G. and Boyd, J.N. (1999) “Who’s smoking, drinking and using drugs? Time
perspective as a predictor of substance use.” Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 21: 149–164. 
Klaw, Elena L. , Jean E. Rhodes , and Louise F. Fitzgerald . 2003. “Natural mentors in the lives of African
American adolescent mothers: Tracking relationships over time.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 32(3):
223–232. 
Kogan, Steven M. , Gene H. Brody , and Yi-fu Chen . 2011. “Natural mentoring processes deter externalizing
problems among rural African American emerging adults: A prospective analysis.” American Journal of
Community Psychology 48(3–4): 272–283. 
Lucas, Phillip . 2011. “Doubt takes root in Kensington over city’s park-tree plan.” Philadelphia Daily News,
11/16/2011. Retrieved November 16, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20111116_Doubt_takes_
root_in_Kensington_over_city_s_park-tree_plan.html). 
Martin, John. 2011. “In Pennsylvania, activists pour millions into the fight for school vouchers.” Philadelphia
Inquirer, 05/08/2011. Retrieved May 8, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20110508_In_
Pennsylvania__activists_pour_millions_into_the_fight_for_school_vouchers.html?page=2&c=y). 
Maslow, Abraham. 1943. “A theory of human motivation.” Psychological Review, 50 (4), 370–396. 
Mezzacappa, Dale. 2010. “New data: Only 10% of Philly students earn a degree.” Philadelphia Public School
Notebook. Retrieved October 9, 2010 (www.thenotebook.org/october-2010/102930/new-data-only-10-philly-
students-earn-degree). 
Miner, Barbara. 2010. “The ultimate $uperpower.” Rethinking Schools. Retrieved October 22, 2012 (www.
rethinkingschools.org//cmshandler.asp?archive/25_02/25_02_miner.shtml). 
Moran, Robert. 2011. “Philadelphia lands No. 2 spot on dirty-city list.” Philadelphia Inquirer, 06/14/2011.
Retrieved June 14, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/news/local/20110614_Philadelphia_lands_No__2_
spot_on_dirty-city_list.html). 
Murtha, Tara. 2012. “Philadelphia gets two anti-violence grants from the Feds.” Philadelphia Weekly.
Retrieved September 28, 2012 (www.philadelphiaweekly.com/news-and-opinion/news/philadelphia_
gets_two_anti-violence_grants_from_the_feds-171230161.html). 
Sharkey, Patrick. 2010. “The acute effect of local homicides on children’s cognitive performance.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(26): 11733–11738. Retrieved October 19, 2012. 
Shaw, Julie. 2011. “Pocket of Kensington is the city’s poorest place.” Philadelphia Daily News, 12/08/2011.
Retrieved December 8, 2011 (www.philly.com/philly/news/20111208_Pocket_of_Kensington_is_the_
city_s_poorest_place.html). 
Thompson, Isaiah. 2012. “Philly’s syringe-exchange program faces a dangerous shortfall.” Philadelphia City
Paper, 08/22/2012. Retrieved August 25, 2012 (www.citypaper.net/authors/isaiah_thompson/167064305.
html). 
Timm, Jane. 2011. “Gates’ Agenda and Money Shape City Schools.” Gotham Gazette, October 2011.
Retrieved October 18, 2011 (www.gothamgazette.com/article/Education/20111013/6/3620). 
Useem, Elizabeth. 2009. “Big City Superintendent as Powerful CEO: Paul Vallas in Philadelphia.” Peabody
Journal of Education 84(3): 300. Retrieved October 7, 2010. 
Van Ryzin, Mark J. 2014. “Exploring relationships among boys and men: A retrospective, qualitative study of
a multi-year community-based group mentoring program.” Children and Youth Services Review 44(C):
349–355. 
Wigglesworth, Alex. 2012. “Metro – Despite crime crackdown, Kensington’s ‘Needle Park’ can’t quite shake
its habit.” Retrieved September 13, 2012 (www.metro.us/philadelphia/local/article/1150691 – despite-crime-
crackdown-kensington-s-needle-park-can-t-quite-shake-its-habit). 
Wolfman, Avi. 2011. “Gates: Philly charter ‘Compact’ not ready – yet.” Philadelphia Public School Notebook.
Retrieved December 9, 2011 (www.thenotebook.org/blog/114332/gates-philly-charter-compact-not-ready-
yet). 
Woodall, Martha. 2010a. “Critic: Halt new charters until funding is fixed.” Philadelphia Inquirer, 10/05/2010.
Retrieved October 5, 2010 (www.philly.com/philly/news/breaking/20101005_Critic__Halt_new_
charters_until_funding_is_fixed.html). 
Woodall, Martha. 2010b. “Philadelphia School Partnership pledges financial aid for turnarounds.”
Philadelphia Inquirer, 10/08/2010. Retrieved October 8, 2010 (www.philly.com/philly/news/local/20101008_
Philadelphia_School_Partnership_pledges_financial_aid_for_turnarounds.html). 
Woodall, Martha. 2012a. “How O’Neill organized effort to save four catholic high schools in Philadelphia.”
Retrieved February 26, 2012 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20120226_How_O_Neill_organized_
effort_to_save_four_Catholic_high_schools_in_Philadelphia.html?cmpid=124488469). 
Woodall, Martha. 2012b. “Philadelphia School Partnership awards $3.8 million in grants.” Retrieved July 19,
2012 (www.philly.com/philly/education/20120719_Philadelphia_School_Partnership_awards__3_8_
million_in_grants.html). 
Zalot, Morgan. 2012. “IT’S like GPS for gun thugs.” Retrieved September 27, 2012
(www.philly.com/philly/news/20120927_IT_S_LIKE_GPS_FOR_GUN_THUGS.html). 
Zimbardo, P. hillip , and J. John Boyd . (1999). “Putting time in perspective: A valid, reliable individual-
differences metric.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77(6): 1271–1288. 
Zimmerman, Marc A. , Jeffrey B. Bingenheimer , and Paul C. Notaro . 2002. “Natural mentors and
adolescent resiliency: A study with urban youth.” American Journal of Community Psychology 30(2):
221–243. 
 
Displaced, misplaced, re-placed 
Bank, L. (2015). City slums, rural homesteads: Migrant culture, displaced urbanism and the citizenship of the
Serviced House. Journal of Southern African Studies, 41(5), 1067–1081. 
Booyens, I. (2012). Creative industries, inequality and social development: Developments, impacts and
challenges in Cape Town. Urban Forum, 23(1), 43–60. 
Broadbridge, H. T. (2001). Negotiating post-apartheid boundaries and identities: An anthropological study of
the creation of a Cape Town suburb. Doctoral dissertation, Stellenbosch: Stellenbosch University. 
Chevalier, S. (2015). Food, malls and the politics of consumption: South Africa’s new middle class.
Development Southern Africa, 32(1), 118–129. 
Christopher, A. J. (1994). Atlas of apartheid. Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press. 
De Boeck, F. (2015). Divining the city: Rhythm, amalgamation and knotting as forms of urbanity. Social
Dynamics, 41(1), 47–58. 
De Neve, G. (2016). Hidden reflexivity: Assistants, informants and the creation of anthropological knowledge,
pp. 67–90. In: G. De Neve and M. Unnithan-Kumar (eds.), Critical Journeys: The Making of Anthropologists.
London: Routledge. 
Douglass, M. , Wissink, B. , and van Kempen, R. (2012). Enclave urbanism in China: Consequences and
interpretations. Urban Geography, 33(2), 167–182. 
Garside, J. (1993). Inner city gentrification in South Africa: The case of Woodstock, Cape Town. GeoJournal,
30(1), 29–35. 
Gupta, A. , and Ferguson, J. (1992). Beyond ‘culture’: Space, identity, and the politics of difference. Cultural
Anthropology, 7(1), 6–23. 
Hellmann, E. (1948). Rooiyard: A sociological survey of an urban native slum yard (No. 13). Oxford: Oxford
University Press, for Rhodes-Livingstone Institute, Livingstone, Northern Rhodesia.
Ignatieff, N. (1995). How the Irish became white. New York and London: Routledge. 
Jaffe, R. , and De Koning, A. (2015). Introducing urban anthropology. London: Routledge. 
James, D. (2014). Money from nothing: Indebtedness and aspiration in South Africa. Redwood City, CA:
Stanford University Press. 
Krige, D. (2012). The changing dynamics of social class, mobility and housing in black Johannesburg.
Alternation, 19(1), 19–45. 
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Lemanski, C. (2014). Hybrid gentrification in South Africa: Theorising across southern and northern cities.
Urban Studies, 51(14), 2943–2960. 
Lombard, M. , and Crankshaw, O. (2017). Deindustrialization and racial inequality: Social polarisation in
eThekwini? Cities, 60 A, 221–233. 
Low, S. (2001). The edge and the center: Gated communities and the discourse of urban fear. American
Anthropologist, 103(1), 45–58. 
Low, S. (2011). Claiming space for an engaged anthropology: Spatial inequality and social exclusion.
American Anthropologist, 113(3), 389–407. 
Mabin, A. (2005). Suburbanisation, segregation, and government of territorial transformations.
Transformation: Critical Perspectives on Southern Africa, 57(1), 41–63. 
Mamdani, M. (1996). Citizen and subject: Contemporary Africa and the legacy of late colonialism. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Mbembe, J. A. , and Nuttall, S. (Eds.). (2008). Johannesburg: The elusive metropolis. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Meyer, I. , and Meyer, P. (1961). Townsmen or tribesmen. Cape Town: Oxford University Press. 
Nilsson, S. (2016). Coloured by race: A study about the making of Coloured identities in South Africa.
Master’s thesis, Uppsala University, Department of Cultural Anthropology and Ethnology. http://uu.diva-
portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A939226&dswid=9738 (accessed 15.10.2016). 
Oldfield, S. , and Greyling, S. (2015). Waiting for the state: A politics of housing in South Africa. Environment
and Planning A, 47(5), 1100–1112. 
Parnell, S. , and Oldfield, S. (2014). The Routledge handbook on cities of the global south. London:
Routledge. 
Parnell, S. , and Pieterse, E. A. (Eds.). (2014). Africa’s urban revolution. London: Zed. 
Perez, M. A. (2011). The emergence of gated communities in the poor periphery: Reflections on the new
urban segregation and social integration in Santiago, Chile. Berkeley Planning Journal, 24(1). 
Poirier, S. (2013). The dynamic reproduction of hunter-gatherers’ ontologies and values, pp. 50–68. In:
Janice Boddy and Michael Lambek (eds.), A companion to the anthropology of religion. Oxford: Wiley-
Blackwell. 
Posel, D. (2001). Race as common sense: Racial classification in twentieth-century South Africa. African
Studies Review, 44(2), 87–114. 
Robinson, J. (2006). Ordinary cities: Between modernity and development. London and New York, NY:
Routledge. 
Roy, A. (2014). Worlding the South. Towards a post-colonial urban theory, pp. 9–20. In: S. Oldfield and S.
Parnell (eds.), Handbook on cities in the global South. London: Routledge. 
Schuermans, N. (2016). Enclave urbanism as telescopic urbanism? Encounters of Middle-class Whites in
Cape Town. Cities, 59, 183–192. 
Seekings, J. , and Nattrass, N. (2008). Class, race, and inequality in South Africa. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press. 
Sharp and Wyk Van . (2015). Beyond the market: White workers in Pretoria, pp. 120–136. In: K. Hart (ed.),
Economy for and against democracy (Vol. 2). New York: Berghahn Books. 
Simone, A. (2014). The missing people: Reflections on an urban majority in cities of the south, pp. 322–336.
In: S. Oldfield and S. Parnell (eds.), Handbook on cities in the global South. London: Routledge. 
Teppo, A. (2004). The making of a good white: A historical ethnography of the rehabilitation of poor whites in
a suburb of Cape Town. Helsinki: University of Helsinki.
https://helda.helsinki.fi/bitstream/handle/10138/23478/themakin.pdf?sequence=2 
Teppo, A. (2009). ‘My house is protected by a dragon’: White South Africans, magic and sacred spaces in
post-apartheid Cape Town. The Journal of Finnish Anthropological Society, 34(1), 19–41. 
Teppo, A. (2011). ‘Our spirit has no boundary’: White sangomas and mediation in Cape Town. Anthropology
and Humanism, 36(2), 225–247. 
Teppo, A. (2014). Introduction to the Special Issue of NJAS: Mediated African cities. Nordic Journal of
African Studies, 23(2), 57–65. 
Teppo, A. (2015). Church rules? The lines of ordentlikheid among Stellenbosch Afrikaners. Anthropology
Southern Africa, 38(3–4), 314–330.
Teppo, A. , and Millstein, M. (2015). The place of gentrification in Cape Town, pp. 419–440. In: Loretta Lees
(ed.), Global gentrifications: Uneven development and displacement. London: Policy Press. 
Wacquant, L. , Slater, T. , and Pereira, V. B. (2014). Territorial stigmatization in action. Environment and
Planning A, 46(6), 1270–1280. 
Werthmann, K. (2014). Sind Städte in Afrika ‘unkennbar’? Ethnologische Stadtforschung in Afrika/are cities
in Africa ‘unknowable’? Urban anthropology in Africa. Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, 139(2), 159. 
Western, J. (1981). Outcast Cape Town. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Williams, J. (2015). Poor men with money: On the politics of not studying the poorest of the poor in urban
South Africa. Current Anthropology, 56(S11), S24–S32. 
Wilson, M. , and Mafeje, A. (1963). Langa: A study of social groups in an African township. Cape Town:
Oxford University Press. 
Wissink, B. , Schwanen, T. , and van Kempen, R. (2016). Beyond residential segregation: Introduction.
Cities, 59, 126–130. 
 
Affect, race, and generative fieldsites in urban anthropology 
Ahmed, Sara . 2004. Affective Economies. Social Text, 22(2) Issue #79: 117–139. 
Allen, Jafari S. , and Ryan C. Jobson . 2016. The Decolonizing Generation: (Race and) Theory in
Anthropology Since the Eighties. Current Anthropology, 57(2): 129–148. 
Berg, Ulla D. 2015. Mobile Selves: Race, Migration, and Belonging in Peru and the US. New York and
London: New York University Press. 
Berg, Ulla D. , and Ana Ramos-Zayas . 2015. Racializing Affect: A Theoretical Proposition. Current
Anthropology, 56(5): 654–677. 
Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo , and Tukufu Zuberi . 2008. White Logic, White Methods: Race as a Methodology.
Plymouth, UK: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 
Briggs, Laura . 2002. Reproducing Empire: Race, Sex, Science, and US Imperialism in Puerto Rico. Vol. 11.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Clough, Patricia Ticineto , and Jean O’Malley Halley . 2007. The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
De la Cadena, Marisol . 2000. Indigenous Mestizos: The Politics of Race and Culture in Cuzco, Peru,
1919–1991. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Diaz-Quiñones, Arcadio . 1992. El Arte de Bregar. San Juan, PR: Ediciones Callejón. 
Duany, Jorge . 2003. The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move: Identities on the Island and in the United States.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 
Duany, Jorge , and Patricia Silver . 2010. The ‘Puerto Ricanization’ of Florida: Historical Background and
Current Status: Introduction. CENTRO: Journal of the Center for Puerto Rican Studies, 22(1): 4–32. 
Goffman, Alice . 2014. On the Run: Fugitive Life in an American City. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. 
Grosfoguel, Ramón . 1999. Puerto Ricans in the USA: A Comparative Approach. Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies, 25(2): 233–249. 
Gupta, Akhil , and James Ferguson . 1997. Anthropological Locations: Boundaries and Grounds of a Field
Science. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
Hartigan, John . 1997. Establishing the Fact of Whiteness. American Anthropologist, 99(3): 495–505. 
Jackson Jr, John L. 2005. Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. 
Larson, Brooke . 2005. Redeemed Indians, Barbarized Cholos. In Political Cultures in the Andes,
1750–1950, edited by Nils Jacobsen and Cristóbal Aljovín de Losada , 230–252. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Lefebvre, Henri . 1991. The Production of Space. Vol. 142. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Leys, Ruth . 2011. The Turn to Affect: A Critique. Critical Inquiry, 37(3): 434–472. 
Marcus, George E. 1998. Ethnography Through Thick and Thin. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Mazzarella, William . 2009. Affect: What Is It Good for? In Enchantments of Modernity: Empire, Nation,
Globalization, edited by S. Dube , 291–309. London and New York, NY: Routledge. 
McClintock, Cynthia , and Fabian Vallas . 2003. The United States and Peru: Cooperation at a Cost. New
York and London: Routledge. 
McElhinny, Bonnie . 2010. The Audacity of Affect: Gender, Race, and History in Linguistic Accounts of
Legitimacy and Belonging. Annual Review of Anthropology, 39: 309–328.
Muehlebach, Andrea . 2012. The Moral Neoliberal: Welfare and Citizenship in Italy. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 
Nouvet, Elysée . 2014. Some Carry on, Some Stay in Bed: (In)convenient Affects and Agency in Neoliberal
Nicaragua. Cultural Anthropology, 29(1): 80–102. 
Omi, Michael , and Howard Winant . 1984. Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the
1990s. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Pérez, Gina . 2004. The Near Northwest Side Story: Migration, Displacement, and Puerto Rican Families.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Ramos-Zayas, Ana Y. 2001. Racializing the Invisible Race: Latinos and ‘Whiteness’ in Chicago. Urban
Anthropology, 30(4): 341–380. 
Ramos-Zayas, Ana Y. 2003. National Performances: Race, Class, and Space in Puerto Rican Chicago.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. 
Ramos-Zayas, Ana Y. 2004. Delinquent Citizenship, National Performances: Racialization, Surveillance, and
the Politics of ‘Worthiness’ in Puerto Rican Chicago. Latino Studies, 2(1): 26–44. 
Ramos-Zayas, Ana Y. 2012. Street Therapists: Race, Affect, and Neoliberal Personhood in Latino Newark.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Richard, Analiese , and Daromir Rudnyckyj . 2009. Economies of affect. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute, 15(1): 57–77. 
Stoler, Ann . 2002. Carnal Knowledge and Imperial Power: Race and the Intimate in Colonial Rule. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press. 
Thomas, Deborah , and Kamari Clarke . 2013. Globalization and Race: Structures of Inequality, New
Sovereignties, and Citizenship in a Neoliberal Era. Annual Review of Anthropology, 42: 305–325. 
Tsing, Anna . 2000. The Global Situation. Cultural Anthropology: 327–360. 
Wagenheim, Kal , and Olga Jimenez De Wagenheim . 2008. The Puerto Ricans: A Documentary History.
Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener Publishers. 
Williams, Raymond . 1977. Marxism and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Zavella, Patricia . 2011. I’m Neither Here Nor There: Mexicans’ Quotidian Struggles With Migration and
Poverty. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
 
(Im)mobilizing Bangkok 
Bestor, Theodore C. 1989. Neighborhood Tokyo, Studies of the East Asian Institute, Columbia University.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Bestor, Theodore C. . 2004. Tsukiji: The Fish Market at the Center of the World, California Studies in Food
and Culture. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Bourgois, Philippe I. 1995. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio, Structural Analysis in the Social
Sciences. Cambridge and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Bourgois, Philippe I. , and Jeff Schonberg . 2009. Righteous Dopefiend, California Series in Public
Anthropology. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Caldeira, Teresa Pires do Rio. 2000. City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in Sã o Paulo.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Clifford, James . 1997. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. 
Comaroff, Jean , and John Comaroff . 2003. “Ethnography on an awkward scale Postcolonial anthropology
and the violence of abstraction.” Ethnography, 4 (2): 147–179. 
Cronon, William . 2009. Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York, NY: WW Norton &
Company. 
De Certeau, Michel . 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Elyachar, Julia . 2010. “Phatic labor, infrastractures, and the question of empowerment in Cairo.” American
Ethnologist, 37 (3): 452–464. 
Foucault, Michel . 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. 1st American ed. New York, NY:
Pantheon Books. 
Foucault, Michel , Michel Senellart , François Ewald , and Alessandro Fontana . 2007. Security, Territory,
Population: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–78. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ghannam, Farha . 2011. “Mobility, liminality, and embodiment in urban Egypt.” American Ethnologist, 38 (4):
790–800. 
Gledhill, John . 2009. “Power in political anthropology.” Journal of Power, 2 (1): 9–34.
Gupta, Akhil , and James Ferguson . 1997. Culture, Power, Place: Explorations in Critical Anthropology.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Hannerz, Ulf . 1980. Exploring the City: Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press. 
Harvey, David . 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry Into the Origins of Cultural Change.
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2009. Evicted From Eternity: The Restructuring of Modern Rome. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press. 
Latour, Bruno . 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-network-theory, Clarendon Lectures
in Management Studies. Oxford and New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Levitt, Peggy . 2001. The Transnational Villagers. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Low, Setha M. 2003. Behind the Gates: Life, Security, and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America.
New York, NY: Routledge. 
Luque-Ayala, Andrés , and Simon Marvin . 2016. “The maintenance of urban circulation: An operational logic
of infrastructural control.” Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 34 (2): 191–208. 
Marx, Karl , Samuel Moore , Edward Bibbins Aveling , Friedrich Engels , and Ernest Untermann . 1906.
Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. 3 vols. Chicago, IL: C.H. Kerr & Company. 
Mathews, Gordon . 2011. Ghetto at the Center of the World: Chungking Mansions, Hong Kong. Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press. 
Park, Robert . 1925. The City: Suggestions for Investigation of Human Behavior in the Urban Environment.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Ralph, Laurence . 2014. Renegade Dreams: Living Through Injury in Gangland Chicago. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. 
Sandburg, Carl , and Walter Lippmann . 2013. The Chicago Race Riots, July, 1919. Chicago: Courier
Corporation. 
Scott, James C. 1990. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press. 
Scott, James C. . 1993. Everyday Forms of Resistance, Occasional Papers Series. Yokohama, Japan:
PRIME (International Peace Research Institute Meigaku). 
Scott, James C. . 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Shortell, Timothy , and Evrick Brown . 2016. Walking in the European City: Quotidian Mobility and Urban
Ethnography. London: Routledge. 
Simone, Abdoumaliq . 2005. “Urban circulation and the everyday politics of African urban youth: The case of
Douala, Cameroon.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 29 (3): 516–532. 
Smith, Neil . 1992. “Contours of a spatialized politics: Homeless vehicles and the production of geographical
scale.” Social Text, 33: 55–81. 
Sopranzetti, Claudio . 2012. “Burning red desires: Isan migrants and the politics of desire in contemporary
Thailand.” Journal of Southeast Asia Research, 20 (3). 
Sopranzetti, Claudio . 2014. “The owners of the map: Mobility and mobilization among motorcycle taxi
drivers in Bangkok.” City & Society, 26 (1): 120–146. 
Sopranzetti, Claudio . 2017a. “Framed by freedom: Emancipation and oppression in Post-Fordist Thailand.”
Cultural Anthropology. 
Sopranzetti, Claudio . 2017b. Owners of the Map: Motorcycle Taxi Drivers, Mobility, and Politics in Bangkok.
Oakland, CA: University of California Press. 
Spear, Allan H. 1967. Black Chicago: The Making of a Negro Ghetto, 1890–1920. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 
Stoller, Paul . 2002. Money Has No Smell: The Africanization of New York City. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 
Thongchai, Winichakul . 1994. Siam Mapped: A History of the Geo-body of a Nation. Honolulu, HI: University
of Hawaii Press. 
Truitt, Allison . 2008. “On the back of a motorbike: Middle-class mobility in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.”
American Ethnologist, 35 (1): 3–19. 
Tuttle, William M. 1970. Race Riot: Chicago in the Red Summer of 1919. Vol. 82. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press. 
Urry, John . 2007. Mobilities. Cambridge: Polity. 
 
Moving through the contested city 
Abu-Lughod, Lila . 1990. “The Romance of Resistance: Tracing Transformations of Power Through Bedouin
Women.” American Ethnologist 17(1): 41–55. 
Allen, Lori . 2008. “Getting by the Occupation: How Violence Became Normal During the Second Palestinian
Intifada.” Cultural Anthropology 23(3): 453–487. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1360.2008.00015.x. 
Aoun, Alisar , Maya Abou-Zeid , Isam Kaysi , and Cynthia Myntti . 2013. “Reducing Parking Demand and
Traffic Congestion at the American University of Beirut.” Transport Policy 25: 52–60. 
Baldwin, Peter C. 1999. Domesticating the Street: The Reform of Public Space in Hartford. Columbus, OH:
Ohio State University Press. 
Berger, Michael I. 1979. The Devil Wagon in God’s Country: The Automobile and Social Change in Rural
America, 1893–1929. Hamden, CT: Archon Books. 
Bishara, Amahl . 2015. “Driving While Palestinian in Israel and the West Bank: The Politics of Disorientation
and the Routes of a Subaltern Knowledge.” American Ethnologist 42(1): 33–54. doi:10.1111/amet.12114. 
Blanke, David . 2007. Hell on Wheels: The Promise and Peril of America’s Car Culture, 1900–1940.
Lawrence, KS: The University of Kansas Press. 
Caldeira, Teresa . 2000. City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in São Paulo. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. 
Caldeira, Teresa .. 2012. “Imprinting and Moving Around: New Visibilities and Configurations of Public Space
in São Paulo.” Public Culture 24(2): 385–419. doi:10.1215/08992363-1535543. 
Chelcea, Liviu , and Ioana Iancu . 2015.“An Anthropology of Parking: Infrastructures of Automobility, Work,
and Circulation.” Anthropology of Work Review 36(2): 62–73. doi:10.1111/awr.12068. 
Clarsen, Georgine . 2008. Eat My Dust: Early Women Motorists. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins
University Press. 
Cuzzocrea, Valentina , and Giuliana Mandich . 2015. “Fragments of ‘Cultures of Mobility’: Everyday
Movement of Parents With Children in Cagliari, Southern Italy.” City & Society 27(1): 51–69.
doi:10.1111/ciso.12052. 
Czeglédy, André . 2004. “Getting Around Town: Transportation and the Built Environment in Post-Apartheid
South Africa.” City & Society 16(2): 63–92. 
Daffy, Edna . 2009. The Speed Handbook: Velocity, Pleasure, Modernism. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press. 
Foucault, Michel . 2007. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977–78.
Translated by G. Burchell . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Ghannam, Farha . 2002. Remaking the Modern: Space, Relocation, and the Politics of Identity in a Global
Cairo. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Ghannam, Farha .. 2013. Live and Die Like a Man: Gender Dynamics in Urban Egypt. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. 
Gudis, Catherine . 2004. Buyways: Billboards, Automobiles, and the American Landscape. New York, NY:
Routledge. 
Hannam, Kevin , Mimi Sheller , and John Urry . 2006. “Mobilities, Immobilities and Moorings.” Mobilities 1(1):
1–22. doi:10.1080/17450100500489189. 
Harvey, Penny , and Hannah Knox . 2015. Roads: An Anthropology of Infrastructure and Expertise. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press. 
Helper, Rose . 1969. Racial Policies and Practices of Real Estate Brokers. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press. 
Jacobs, Jane . 1961. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York, NY: Random House. 
Jain, S. Lochlann . 2004. “‘Dangerous Instrumentality’: The Bystander as Subject in Automobility.” Cultural
Anthropology 19(1): 61–94. doi:10.1525/can.2004.19.1.61. 
Joseph, Suad .1983. “Working Class Women’s Networks in a Sectarian State: A Political Paradox.”
American Ethnologist 10(1): 1–22. www.jstor.org/stable/644701. 
Kidder, Jeffrey L. 2011. Urban Flow: Bike Messengers and the City. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Larkin, Brian . 2013. “The Politics and Poetics of Infrastructure.” Annual Review of Anthropology 42:
327–343. doi:10.1146/annurev-anthro-092412-155522. 
Lesseig, Corey T. 2001. Automobility: Social Changes in the American South, 1909–1939. New York, NY:
Routledge. 
Low, Setha . 2004. Behind the Gates: Life, Security, and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America. New
York, NY: Routledge.
Lutz, Catherine . 2014a. “Cars and Transport: The Car-Made City.” In A Companion to Urban Anthropology,
edited by Donald M. Nonini , 142–154. West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Lutz, Catherine .. 2014b. “The U.S. Car Colossus and the Production of Inequality.” American Ethnologist
41(2): 232–245. 
Merriman, Peter . 2009. “Automobility and the Geographies of the Car.” Geography Compass 3(2): 586–599.
doi:10.1111/j.1749-8198.2009.00219.x. 
Miller, Daniel , ed. 2001. Car Cultures. London: Bloomsbury. 
Moline, Norman T. 1971. Mobility and the Small Town, 1900–1930: Transportation Change in Oregon,
Illinois. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Printing Department. 
Notar, Beth E. 2012. “‘Coming Out’ to ‘Hit the Road’: Temporal, Spatial and Affective Mobilities of Taxi
Drivers and Day Trippers in Kunming, China.” City & Society 24(3): 281–301. doi:10.1111/ciso.12001. 
Pellow, Deborah . 2002. Landlords and Lodgers: Socio-Spatial Organization in an Accra Community.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Peteet, Julie . 2017. Space and Mobility in Palestine. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. 
Quilty, Jim . 2007. “Winter of Lebanon’s Discontents.” Middle East Research and Information Project,
January 26. www.merip.org/mero/mero012607, accessed April 30, 2014. 
Ross, Kristin . 1995. Fast Cars, Clean Bodies: Decolonization and the Reordering of French. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. 
Scharff, Virginia . 1991. Taking the Wheel: Women and the Coming of the Motor Age. New York, NY: The
Free Press. 
Seiler, Cotten . 2008. Republic of Drivers: A Cultural History of Automobility in America. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. 
Sheller, Mimi . 2015. “Racialized Mobility Transitions in Philadelphia: Connecting Urban Sustainability and
Transport Justice.” City & Society 27(1): 70–91. doi:10.1111/ciso.12049. 
Smith, Neil . 2000. “What Happened to Class?” Environment and Planning A 32(6): 1011–1032. 
Truitt, Allison . 2008. “On the Back of a Motorbike: Middle-Class Mobility in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.”
American Ethnologist 35(1): 3–19. 
Zhang, Li . 2010. In Search of Paradise: Middle-Class Living in a Chinese Metropolis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press. 
 
Security and technology 
Caldeira, Teresa (2000) City of Walls: Crime, Segregation and Citizenship in São Paulo. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. 
Collier, Stephen J. (2011) Post-Soviet Social: Neoliberalism, Social Modernity, Biopolitics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. 
Diphoorn, Tessa (2016) Twilight Policing: Private Security in South Africa. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. 
Goldstein, Daniel (2004) The Spectacular City: Violence and Performance in Urban Bolivia. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. 
Goldstein, Daniel (2012) Outlawed: Between security and Rights in a Bolivian City. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Harvey, Francis , and Nick Chrisman (1998) Boundary objects and the social construction of GIS technology.
Environment and Planning A 30(9): 1683–1694. 
Jaffe, Rivke (2013) The hybrid state: Crime and citizenship in urban Jamaica. American Ethnologist 40(4):
734–748. 
Koster, Martijn (2014) Brazilian brokers, boundaries and buildings: A material culture of politics. Journal of
Material Culture 19(2): 125–144. 
Larkin, Brian (2013) The politics and poetics of infrastructure. Annual Review of Anthropology 42: 327–343. 
Low, Setha M. (2003) Behind the Gates: Life, Security and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America.
New York and London: Routledge. 
Morozov, Evgeny (2013) To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of Technological Solutionism.
Philadelphia, PA: PublicAffairs. 
Star, Susan Leigh , and James R. Griesemer (1989) Institutional ecology, translations and boundary objects:
Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907–39. Social Studies of
Science 19(3): 387–420. 
Von Schnitzler, Antina (2013) Traveling technologies: Infrastructure, ethical regimes, and the materiality of
politics in South Africa. Cultural Anthropology 28(4): 670–693.
Airports, from vital systems to nervous systems 
Augé, Marc . (1995). Non-places: Introduction to an anthropology of supermodernity, trans. John Howe .
London and New York, NY: Verso. 
Augé, Marc . (2000). ‘Airports’, in City A-Z, ed. Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift , pp. 8–9. London: Routledge. 
Augé, Marc . (2004). ‘Key informants on the history of anthropology: An itinerary’, Ethnos, Vol. 69, No. 4,
534–551. 
Chalfin, Brenda . (2008). ‘Sovereigns and citizens in close encounter: Airport anthropology and customs
regimes in neoliberal Ghana’, American Ethnologist, Vol. 35, No. 4, 519–538. 
Collier, Stephen J. , and Lackoff, Andrew . (2015). ‘Vital systems security: Reflexive biopolitics and the
government of emergency,’ Theory, Culture & Society, Vol. 32, No. 2, 19–51. 
Council Directive, 2008/114/EC of 8 December 2008 on the identification and designation of European
critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection. Official Journal of the
European Union L 345/75. 
Endsley, Mica R. (1988). ‘Design and evaluation for situation awareness enhancement’, Proceedings of the
Human Factors Society 32nd Annual Meeting, Vol. 32, No. 2, 97–101. 
Ewald, François . (2002). ‘The return of Descartes’s malicious demon: An outline of a philosophy of
precaution’, in Embracing Risk, eds. Tom Baker and Jonathan Simon , pp. 273–301. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press. 
Fassin, Didier . (2013). ‘The stranger and the enemy: Comment on Clara Han’s essay’, Social
Anthropology/Anthropologie Sociale, Vol. 21, No. 3, 385–386. 
Ferguson, Jane M. (2014). ‘Terminally haunted: Aviation ghosts, hybrid Buddhist practices, and disaster
aversion strategies amongst airport workers in Myanmar and Thailand’, The Asia Pacific Journal of
Anthropology, Vol. 15, No. 1, 47–64. 
Foucault, Michel . (1991). ‘Truth and power’, in Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings,
1972–1977, ed. Colin Gordon , pp. 109–134. New York, NY: Pantheon Books. 
Goldstein, Daniel M. (2012). Outlawed: Between security and rights in a Bolivian city. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Holmes, Douglas , and Marcus, George E. (2005). ‘Cultures of expertise and the management of
globalization: Toward the re-functioning of ethnography’, in Global Assemblages, eds. A. Ong and S.J.
Collier , pp. 235–252. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Ingold, Tim . (2013). Making. London: Routledge. 
Klein, Gary A. (1998). Sources of power: How people make decisions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Larkin, Brian . (2013). ‘The politics and poetics of infrastructure’, Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 42,
327–343. 
Lefebvre, Henri . (1991). The production of space. Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Lefebvre, Henri . (2003). The urban revolution. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press. 
Maguire, Mark . (2014). ‘Counter-terrorism in European Airports’, in The anthropology of security:
Perspectives from the frontline of policing, counter-terrorism and border control, eds. Mark Maguire ,
Catriona Frois , and Nils Zurawski , pp. 118–138. London and New York, NY: Pluto Books. 
Maguire, Mark , and Fussey, Peter . (2016). ‘Sensing evil: Counterterrorism, techno-science, and the cultural
reproduction of security’, Focaal, 75, No. 3, 31–45. 
Masco, Joseph. P. (2006). The nuclear borderlands: The Manhattan project in Post-Cold War New Mexico.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Polanyi, Michael . (1958). Personal knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy. London: Routledge. 
Rabinow, Paul , and Bennett, Gaymon . (2007). ‘The work of equipment: 3 modes’, ARC Working Paper, No.
10. 
Sluka, Jeffrey . (2008). ‘Terrorism and taboo: An anthropological perspective on political violence against
civilians,’ Critical Studies on Terrorism, Vol. 1, No. 2, 167–183. 
Soja, Edward W. (1999). ‘History: Geography: Modernity’, in The Cultural Studies Reader, ed. Simon During
, pp. 113–126. London and New York, NY: Routledge. 
Williams, Raymond . (1976). Keywords. London: Fontana. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig . (1997). The philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell. 
 
Security and insecurity in fragile urban fabrics 
Alghasi, S. (2012) Mediebruk og medietolkninger i et flerkulturelt borettslag. In S. Alghasi , E. Eide and T. H.
Eriksen , eds., Den globale drabantbyen: 232–247. Oslo: Cappelen Damm. 
Alghasi, S. , E. Eide and T. H. Eriksen , eds. (2012) Den globale drabantbyen (‘The global suburb’). Oslo:
Cappelen Damm. 
Amit, V. and N. Rapport (2012) Community, Cosmopolitanism and the Problem of Human Commonality.
London: Pluto. 
Andersen, B. (2014) Westbound and Eastbound: Making Sameness and the Making of Separations in Oslo.
PhD dissertation. Oslo: Department of Social Anthropology. 
Andersen, B. and H. Biseth (2013) The myth of failed integration: The case of eastern Oslo. City and
Society, 25(1), 5–24. 
Anderson, B. (1983) Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism. London:
Verso. 
Bangstad, S. (2014) Anders Breivik and the Rise of Islamophobia. London: Zed. 
Barnes, J. (1954) Class and committees in a Norwegian island parish. Human Relations, 7, 39–58. 
Barth, F. (1963) Introduction. In F. Barth , ed., The Role of the Entrepreneur in Social Change in Northern
Norway: 5–18. Bergen: Universitetsforlaget. 
Barth, F. , ed. (1969) Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. 
Beck, U. (1992) Risk Society. Cambridge: Polity. 
Blommaert, J. (2013) Ethnography, Superdiversity and Linguistic Landscapes: Chronicles of Complexity.
Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
Brubaker, R. (2004) Ethnicity Without Groups. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Caldeira, T. (2001) City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in São Paulo. Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press. 
Cohen, A. P. (1969) Custom and Politics in Urban Africa. London: Routledge. 
Cohen, A. P. (1994) Self Consciousness. London: Routledge. 
Cresswell, T. (2004) Place: A Short Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Eikenes, I. (2012) Puck og punjabi: Førti år med frivillig engasjement på Furuset [Puck and Punjabi: Forty
years of voluntary engagement in Furuset]. In S. Alghasi , E. Eide and T. H. Eriksen , eds., Den globale
drabantbyen: 213–227. Oslo: Cappelen Damm. 
Epstein, A. L. (1958) Politics in an Urban African Community. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Eriksen, T. H. (1992) Us and Them in Modern Societies. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. 
Eriksen, T. H. (1998) Et langt, kaldt land nesten uten mennesker [A long, cold country nearly without people].
Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. 
Eriksen, T. H. (2010) Samfunn [Society]. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. 
Eriksen, T. H. (2014) Who or what to blame: Competing interpretations of the Norwegian terrorist attack.
European Journal of Sociology, 55, 275–294. 
Eriksen, T. H. (2015) Rebuilding the ship at sea: Super-diversity, person and conduct in eastern Oslo. Global
Networks, 15(1), 1–20. 
Eriksen, T. H. (2016) Overheating: An Anthropology of Accelerated Change. London: Pluto. 
Erstad, I. (2015) Here, Now and into the Future: Child Rearing Among Norwegian-Pakistani Mothers in Oslo,
Norway. PhD dissertation. Oslo: Department of Social Anthropology. 
Furnivall, J. S. (1947) Colonial Policy and Practice: A Comparative Study of Burma and Netherlands India.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gammelsrud, T. (1975) Stovnerrapporten [The Stovner report]. Sinnets helse, no. 5. 
Glick Schiller, N. , L. Basch and C. Blanc-Szanton , eds. (1992) Towards a Transnational Perspective on
Migration: Race, Class, Ethnicity, and Nationalism Reconsidered. New York, NY: New York Academy of
Sciences. 
Glick Schiller, N. , L. Basch and C. Blanc-Szanton (1995) From immigrant to transmigrant: Theorizing
transnational migration. Anthropological Quarterly, 68(1), 48–63. 
Granovetter, M. (1973) The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6), 1360–1380. 
Gullestad, M. (1992) The Art of Social Relations: Essays on Culture, Social Action, and Everyday Life in 
Modern  Norway. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.  
Hall, A. and L. Josephides , eds. (2013) We the Cosmopolitans. Oxford: Berghahn. 
Handelman, D. (1977) The organization of ethnicity. Ethnic Groups, 1, 187–200. 
Hannerz, U. (1980) Exploring the City: Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press. 
Hannerz, U. (1996) Transnational Connections. London: Routledge. 
Hansen, T. and A. Sæterdal (1969) Ammerud I. Planlegging av en ny bydel. Oslo: Norges
Byggforskningsinstitutt.
Herzfeld, M. (2014) Cultural Intimacy, 2nd edition. London: Routledge. 
Lazar, S. , ed. (2014) The Anthropology of Citizenship: A Reader. London: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Low, S. (2004) Behind the Gates: Life, Security, and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America. London:
Routledge. 
Low, S. and D. Lawrence-Zuñiga , eds. (2004) The Anthropology of Space and Place: Locating Culture.
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Mayer, P. (1961) Townsmen or Tribesmen: Conservatism and the Process of Urbanization in a South African
Town. With contributions from I. Mayer . Cape Town: Oxford University Press. 
Mintz, S. W. (2008) Creolization and Hispanic exceptionalism. Review, 31(3), 251–265. 
Mitchell, J. C. (1956) The Kalela Dance. Manchester: Manchester University Press, Rhodes-Livingstone
Papers, no. 27. 
Olwig, K. F. (2007) Caribbean Journeys: An Ethnography of Migration and Home in Three Family Networks.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Park, R. (1955 [1921]) Society, Collective Behaviour, News and Opinion, Sociology and Modern Society.
Glencoe, IL: Free Press. 
Parkin, D. (1969) Neighbours and Nationals in an African City Ward. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
Putnam, R. D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York, NY:
Simon & Schuster. 
Rosten, M. (2015) ‘Nest siste stasjon, linje 2’: Sted, tilhørighet og unge voksne i Groruddalen  [Last station 
but one, metro line 2: Place, belonging and young adults in Grorud Valley]. PhD dissertation. Oslo:
Department of Social Anthropology. 
Sæter, O. (2003) Stedsblikk, stedsfortellinger og stedsstrider: En sosiologisk analyse av tre kasus  [Place 
gaze, place stories and place contestations: A sociological analysis of three cases]. PhD dissertation. Oslo:
Department of Sociology and Human Geography. 
Sanjek, R. (2000) The Future of Us All: Race and Neighborhood Politics in New York City. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press. 
Smith, M. G. (1965) The Plural Society of the British West Indies. London: Sangster’s. 
Stambøl, L. S. (2013) Flytting til og fra Oslos bydeler  [Mobility in and out of Oslo’s suburbs]. Oslo: SSB.  
Stewart, C. , ed. (2007) Creolization: History, Ethnography, Theory. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. 
Tönnies, F. (1957 [1887]) Community and Society. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press. 
Vertovec, S. (2007) Super - diversity and its implications. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 30, 1024–1054. 
Vestel, V. (2012) Pionerer i det nye Norge? [Pioneers in the new Norway?] In S. Alghasi , E. Eide and T. H.
Eriksen , eds., Den globale drabantbyen: 35–57. Oslo: Cappelen Damm. 
Villa, M. (1999) Bygda – sosial konstruksjon av ‘trygt og godt’ [The rural community – a social construction of
‘safe and cozy’]. Sosiologi i dag, 29(1), 31–53. 
Wallman, S. (1986) Ethnicity and the boundary process in context. In D. Mason and J. Rex , eds., Theories
of Race and Ethnic Relations: 226–235. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Wessendorf, S. (2014) Commonplace Diversity: Social Relations in a Super-Diverse Context. London:
Palgrave. 
Wilson, G. (1942) An Essay on the Economics of Detribalization in Northern Rhodesia, Parts I–II. Livingston:
Rhodes-Livingstone Institute. 
 
Making sense of the New Europe 
Baumann, G. (1996). Contesting Culture: Discourses of Identity in Multi-Ethnic London. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. 
Berg, M. L. , and Sigona, N. (2013). Ethnography, diversity and urban space. Identities, 20(4), 347–360. 
Bowen, J. R. (2007). Why the French Don’t Like Headscarves: Islam, the State, and Public Space.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
De Koning, A. (2013). Creating an exceptional problem neighbourhood: Media, policy, and Amsterdam’s
“notorious” Diamantbuurt. Etnofoor, 25(2), 13–30. 
De Koning, A. (2015a). “This neighbourhood deserves an espresso bar too”: Neoliberalism, racialization, and
urban policy. Antipode, 47(5). 
De Koning, A. (2015b). Citizenship agendas for the abject: Amsterdam’s youth and security assemblage in
action. Citizenship Studies, 19(2). 
De Koning, A. (2016). Tracing anxious politics in Amsterdam. Patterns of Prejudice, 50(2), 109–128. 
Epstein, B. (2011). Collective Terms: Race, Culture, and Community in a State-planned City in France.
Berghahn Books.
Fassin, D. (2013). Enforcing Order: An Ethnography of Urban Policing. Cambridge, UK and Malden, MA:
Polity. 
Fassin, D. (2015). Introduction: Governing precarity. In: Fassin, D. (ed.), At the Heart of the State: The Moral
World of Institutions. London: Pluto Press. 
Fernando, M. (2009). Exceptional citizens: Secular Muslim women and the politics of difference in France.
Social Anthropology, 17(4), 379–392. 
Geschiere, P. (2009). The Perils of Belonging: Autochthony, Citizenship, and Exclusion in Africa and Europe.
Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. 
Gilroy, P. (2004). After Empire: Multiculture or Postcolonial Melancholia. London: Routledge. 
Grillo, R. D. (2003). Cultural essentialism and cultural anxiety. Anthropological Theory, 3(2), 157–173. 
Hyatt, S. (2011) What was Neoliberalism and what comes next? The transformation of citizenship in the law-
and-order state. In: Shore, C. , Wright, S. , and Però, D. (eds.), Policy Worlds: Anthropology and the Analysis
of Contemporary Power. New York and Oxford: Berghahn, pp. 105–123. 
Keith, M. (2005). After the Cosmopolitan? Multicultural Cities and the Future of Racism. Abingdon and New
York, NY: Routledge. 
Lentin, A. , and Titley, G. (2011). The Crises of Multiculturalism: Racism in a Neoliberal Age. London: Zed
Books. 
Mepschen, P. (2016). Sexual democracy, cultural alterity and the politics of everyday life in Amsterdam.
Patterns of Prejudice, 50(2), 150–167. 
Mepschen, P. , Duyvendak, J. W. , and Tonkens, E. H. (2010). Sexual politics, orientalism and multicultural
citizenship in the Netherlands. Sociology, 44(5), 962–979. 
Modest, W. , and de Koning, A. (2016). Anxious politics in the European city: An introduction. Patterns of
Prejudice, 50(2), 97–108. 
Newman, A. (2015) Landscape of Discontent: Urban Sustainability in Immigrant Paris. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press. 
Nowicka, M. , and Vertovec, S. (2013). Comparing convivialities: Dreams and realities of living-with-
difference. European Journal of Cultural Studies, 17(4), 341–356. 
Ortner, S. B. (2010). Access: Reflections on studying up in Hollywood. Ethnography, 11(2), 211–233. 
Pakes, F. (2010). Global forces and local effects in youth justice: The case of Moroccan youngsters in
Netherlands. International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice, 38(3), 109–119. 
Prins, B. (2002). The nerve to break taboos: New realism in the Dutch discourse on multiculturalism. Journal
of International Migration and Integration/Revue de L’integration et de La Migration Internationale, 3(3–4),
363–379. 
Schinkel, W. (2010). The virtualization of citizenship. Critical Sociology, 36(2), 265–283. 
Schinkel, W. , and Van Houdt, F. (2010). The double helix of cultural assimilationism and neo-liberalism:
Citizenship in contemporary governmentality. British Journal of Sociology, 61(4), 696–715. 
Scott, J. W. (2009). The Politics of the Veil. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Silverstein, P. A. (2004). Algeria in France: Transpolitics, Race, and Nation. Bloomington and Indianapolis,
IN: Indiana University Press. 
Silverstein, P. A. (2005). Immigrant racialization and the new savage slot: Race, migration, and immigration
in the New Europe. Annual Review of Anthropology, 34(1), 363–384. 
Stolcke, V. (1995). Talking culture: New boundaries, new rhetorics of exclusion in Europe. Current
Anthropology, 36(1), 1–24. 
Van Reekum, R. , and Duyvendak, J. W. (2012). Running from our shadows: The performative impact of
policy diagnoses in Dutch debates on immigrant integration. Patterns of Prejudice, 46(5), 445–466. 
Vertovec, S. , and Wessendorf, S. (2010). The Multiculturalism Backlash: European Discourses, Policies and
Practices. Abingdon and New York, NY: Routledge. 
Vollebergh, A. (2016). The other neighbour paradox: Fantasies and frustrations of “living together” in
Antwerp. Patterns of Prejudice, 50(2), 129–149. 
Wedel, J. R. , Shore, C. , Feldman, G. , and Lathrop, S. (2005). Toward an anthropology of public policy. The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 600(1), 30–51. 
Yanow, D. , and van der Haar, M. (2012). People out of place: Allochthony and autochthony in the
Netherlands’ identity discourse – metaphors and categories in action. Journal of International Relations and
Development, 16(2), 227–261. 
 
Environmental gentrification 
Adams, Michael Henry . 2016. “The End of Black Harlem.” The New York Times, May 27.
www.nytimes.com/2016/05/29/opinion/sunday/the-end-of-black-harlem.html. 
Alley, Kelly D. 2002. On the Banks of the Ga ṅ gā: When Wastewater Meets a Sacred River. University of
Michigan Press. http://books.google.ca/books?id=gVOryDX8KdUC. 
Angotti, Tom . 2008. New York For Sale: Community Planning Confronts Global Real Estate. Boston, MA:
MIT Press. 
Auyero, Javier and Debora Swistun . 2009. Flammable: Environmental Suffering in an Argentine
Shantytown. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bennett, Ira E. 1915. History of the Panama Canal. Washington, DC: Historical Publishing Company. 
Beveridge, Andy A. 2008. “An Affluent, White Harlem?” Gotham Gazette.
http://www.gothamgazette.com/demographics/4062-an-affluent-white-harlem, accessed October 13, 2017. 
Bonanos, Christopher . 2009. “A Brief History of the Gowanus Canal – New York Magazine.” New York
Magazine, July 12. http://nymag.com/news/intelligencer/topic/57886/. 
Brash, Julian . 2011. Bloomberg’s New York: Class and Governance in the Luxury City. Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press. 
Brash, Julian , and Neil Smith . 2001. “Harlem: The New Frontier? A Brief History of Gentrification Uptown.”
Firstofthemonth, April 1. http://www.firstofthemonth.org/harlem-the-new-frontier-2/ (accessed April 29, 2018). 
Buiso, Gary . 2011. “THIS JUST IN: Feds Finally State What We All Know – The Gowanus Is a Cancer-
Causing Toilet.” February 2. www.brooklynpaper.com/stories/34/5/dtg_gowanusmess_2011_2_4_bk.html. 
Bullard, Robert , Paul Mohai , Robin Saha , and Beverly Wright . 2007. “Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty,
1987–2007: A Report Prepared for the United Church of Christ Justice & Witness Ministries.” Cleveland:
United Church of Christ. 
Caro, Robert A. 1975. The Power Broker: Robert Moses and the Fall of New York. New York: Vintage. 
Checker, Melissa . 2005. Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism and the Search for Justice in a Southern
Town. New York: NYU Press. 
Checker, Melissa .. 2009. “Staten Island’s Toxic Stew.” Gotham Gazette.
http://old.gothamgazette.com/article/environment/20090526/7/2923, accessed April 7, 2013. 
Checker, Melissa .. 2011. “Wiped Out by the ‘Greenwave’: Environmental Gentrification and the Paradoxical
Politics of Urban Sustainability.” City & Society 23: 210–229. 
Checker, Melissa .. 2013. “A Year After Superstorm Sandy, Turmoil Continues on Staten Island.” Gotham
Gazette. www.gothamgazette.com/index.php/environment/4684-a-year-after-superstorm-sandy-turmoil-
continues-on-staten-island. 
Checker, Melissa , Gary McDonogh , and Cynthia Isenhour . 2015. “Introduction.” In Sustainability in the
Global City: Myth and Practice. Edited by Cynthia Isenhour , Gary McDonogh , and Melissa Checker . New
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Dietrich, Alexa . 2013. The Drug Company Next Door: Pollution, Jobs, and Community Health in Puerto
Rico. New York: NYU Press. 
Dobkin, Jake . 2013. “Environmental Racism? Toxic Gowanus Sludge Is Heading For Red Hook: Gothamist.”
Gothamist, April 26. http://gothamist.com/2013/04/26/gowanus_red_hook_racism.php. 
Dooling, Sarah . 2009. “Ecological Gentrification: A Research Agenda Exploring Justice in the City.”
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33(3): 621–639. 
Eisinger, Peter K. 1988. The Rise of the Entrepreneurial State: State and Local Economic Development
Policy in the United States. University of Wisconsin Press. 
EPA Office of Inspector General . 2004. “EPA Needs to Consistently Implement the Intent of the Executive
Order on Environmental Justice.” Evaluation Report 2004-P-00007. Washington, DC: US EPA.
www.epa.gov/oig/reports/2004/20040301-2004-P-00007.pdf. 
EPA Office of Inspector General . 2006. “EPA Needs to Conduct Environmental Justice Reviews of Its
Programs, Policies, and Activities.” Evaluation Report 2006-P-00034. Washington, DC: US EPA.
www.epa.gov/oig/reports/2006/20060918-2006-P-00034.pdf. 
Escobar, Arturo . 1995. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. http://books.google.ca/books?id=Z887lsgjLuwC. 
Faber, Daniel , and Shelley McDonough Kimelberg . 2014. “Sustainable Urban Development and
Environmental Gentrification.” In Uprooting Urban America: Multidisciplinary Perspectives on Race, Class
and Gentrification. 1st new edition. Edited by Horace R. Hall , Cynthia Cole Robinson , and Amor Kohli . New
York: Peter Lang, International Academic Publishers. 
FEMA. 2016. Accessed June 13. http://training.fema.gov/hiedu/docs/fmc. 
Fitzgerald, Joan . 2010. Emerald Cities. London; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
https://global.oup.com/academic/product/emerald-cities-9780195382761. 
Florida, Richard . 2002. The Rise of the Creative Class: And How It’s Transforming. Work, Leisure,
Community, and Everyday Life. New York City, NY: Basic Books.
Furman Center . 2015. “State of New York City’s Housing & Neighborhoods – 2015 Report.” New York: NYU
Furman Center. http://furmancenter.org/files/sotc/Part_1_Gentrification_SOCin2015_9JUNE2016.pdf. 
Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy . 2009. “State of New York City’s Housing and
Neighborhoods Report.” http://furmancenter.org/research/sonychan/2009-report/. 
Gotham, Kevin Fox , and Miriam Greenberg . 2014. Crisis Cities: Disaster and Redevelopment in New York
and New Orleans. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gould, Kenneth , and Tammy Lewis . 2012. “The Environmental Injustice of Green Gentrification: The Case
of Brooklyn’s Prospect Park.” In The World in Brooklyn: Gentrification, Immigration, and Ethnic Politics in a
Global City, edited by Judith DeSena Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 
Greenberg, Miriam . 2015. “‘The Sustainability Edge’: The Post-Crisis Promise of Eco-City Branding.” In
Sustainability in the Global City: Myth and Practice, edited by Cindy Isenhour , Gary McDonogh , and
Melissa Checker . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Greene, Julie . 2009. The Canal Builders: Making America’s Empire at the Panama Canal. New York:
Penguin Books. 
Hagerman, Chris . 2007. “Shaping Neighborhoods and Nature: Urban Political Ecologies of Urban Water-
front Transformations in Portland, Oregon.” Cities 24: 285–297. 
Hale, Charles R. , ed. 2008. Engaging Contradictions: Theory, Politics, and Methods of Activist Scholarship.
1st ed. University of California Press. 
Hannah-Jones, Nikole . 2012. “Living Apart: How the Government Betrayed a Landmark Civil Rights Law.”
ProPublica. www.propublica.org/article/living-apart-how-the-government-betrayed-a-landmark-civil-rights-
law. 
Harlem Community Development Corporation (HCDC) . 2010. “February Newsletter.”
www.harlemcdc.org/PDFs/January10.pdf. 
Harvey, David . 2005. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Harvey, David .. 2007. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New York City: Oxford University Press. 
Harvey, David .. 2009. Social Justice and the City. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press. 
Isenhour, Cindy . 2015. “Green Capitals Reconsidered: The Carbon Emissions Associated With Urban
Consumption.” In Sustainability in the Global City: Myth and Practice, edited by Cindy Isenhour , Gary
McDongogh , and Melissa Checker . London and New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Jackson, Kenneth T. 1985. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press. 
Kanter, James . 2007. “Are Dell, Wal-Mart, Philips Going Green or Just Re-Branding?” New York Times, sec.
Blogs. http://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/09/27/are-dell-wal-mart-philips-going-green-or-just-re-branding/. 
Kaysen, Ronda . 2014. “Gowanus Is Counting on a Cleanup.” The New York Times, October 3.
www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/realestate/gowanus-is-counting-on-a-cleanup.html. 
Kingfisher, Catherine , and Jeff Maskovsky . 2008. “Introduction: The Limits of Neoliberalism.” Critique of
Anthropology 28(2): 115–126. doi:10.1177/0308275X08090544. 
Kramer, Daniel , and Richard Flanagan . 2012. Staten Island: Conservative Bastion in a Liberal City.
University Press of America. 
Little, Peter C. 2014. Toxic Town: IBM, Pollution, and Industrial Risks. New York: NYU Press. 
Ljungkvist, Kristin . 2015. The Global City 2.0: From Strategic Site to Global Actor. New York: Routledge. 
Logan, John , and Harvey Molotch . 1987. Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. 
Maantay, Julianna . 2002. “Industrial Zoning Changes in New York City: A Case Study of ‘Expulsive Zoning’.”
Projections 3: 63–108. 
Mansour, Iris . 2012. “Staten Island: Towards a New Normal.” The Brooklyn Ink, November 5.
http://thebrooklynink.com/2012/11/05/49979-staten-island-toward-a-new-normal/. 
Massey, Douglas S , and Nancy A. Denton . 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the
Under-class. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Miller, Jessica . 2013. “The Production of Nature, Gentrification and Displacement on the Gowanus Canal of
Brooklyn, New York.” Presented at the Dimensions of Political Ecology Conference, Lexington, KY.
https://resources.as.uky.edu/podcasts/production-nature-gentrification-and-displacement-gowanus-canal-
brooklyn-new-york-jessica. 
Monbiot, George . 2007. “Eco-Junk – Green Consumerism Will Not Save the Biosphere.” Celsias, August 3.
www.celsias.com/article/eco-junk-green-consumerism-will-not-save-the-biosp/. 
Navarro, Mireya . 2012. “New York Faces Rising Seas and Slow City Action.” New York Times, September
10. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/11/nyregion/new-york-faces-rising-seas-and-slow-city-action.html,
accessed December 28, 2014. 
New York City Economic Development Corporation, and New York City Department of City Planning 2011.
“North Shore 2030: Improving and Reconnecting the North Shore’s Unique and Historic Assets.”
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/html/north_shore/index.shtml, accessed April 7, 2013.
New York City IBZ Commission . 2013. “Industrial Business Zone Boundary Commission: Staff
Recommendations.” New York City.
www.nycedc.com/sites/default/files/filemanager/Industries/Industrial/Industrial_Business_Zone/IBZ_BC_Mee
ting_11-21-13_Materials_for_BC_Members_FINAL.pdf. 
North Shore Waterfront Conservancy of Staten Island (NSWC) 2007. “Staten Island’s Gold Coast 5.2 Miles
From St. George to Arlington.” On file with author. 
Ottinger, Gwen . 2013. Refining Expertise How Responsible Engineers Subvert Environmental Justice
Challenges. New York, NY: New York University Press. 
Pearsall, Hamil . 2013. “Superfund Me: A Study of Resistance to Gentrification in New York City.” Urban
Studies 50(11): 2293–2310. 
Plitt, Amy . 2015. “Harlem Is Becoming As Expensive As the Rest of Manhattan.” Curbed NY, August 27.
http://ny.curbed.com/2015/8/27/9926634/harlem-is-becoming-as-expensive-as-the-rest-of-manhattan. 
Rizzi, Nicholas . 2013. “Staten Island Residents Oppose Plan to Dump Dredged Material on Barge – Port
Richmond.” DNAinfo.com New York, September 26. www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20130926/port-
richmond/staten-island-residents-oppose-plan-dump-dredged-material-on-barge. 
Sze, Julie . 2006. Noxious New York: The Racial Politics of Urban Health and Environmental Justice.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Terry, Virginia . 2003. “Imaging the City: Gowanus Canal.” Metropolitan Waterfront Alliance, April 16.
http://waterwire.net/Resources/archives.cfm?ContID=1355. 
U.S. GAO (General Accounting Office) . 1983. “Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills and Their Correlation
with Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Communities.” Washington DC: US GAO. 
Williams, Timothy . 2006. “After Almost 50 Years, New Harlem Piers Are Rising.” New York Times, May 12. 
World Commission on Environment Development . 1987. Our Common Future. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. www.amazon.com/Our-Common-Future-Oxford-Paperbacks/dp/019282080X. 
Zukin, Sharon . 2010. Naked City. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
 
Incremental gentrification 
Angel, S. and S. Boonyabancha . 1988. “Land Sharing as an Alternative to Eviction. The Bangkok
Experience.” Third World Planning Review 10(2): 107–127. 
Anjaria, J. S. 2009. “Guardians of the Bourgeois City. Citizenship, Public Space, and Middle Class Activism
in Mumbai.” City and Community 8(4): 391–406. 
Anjaria, J. S. 2016. The Slow Boil: Street Food, Rights, and Public Space in Mumbai. Stanford, Stanford
University Press. 
Appadurai, A. 2002. “Deep Democracy. Urban Governmentality and the Horizon of Politics.” Public Culture
14(1): 21–47. 
Baviskar, A. 2003. “Between Violence and Desire: Space, Power, and Identity in the Making of Metropolitan
Delhi.” International Social Science Journal 55(175): 89–98. 
Bhan, G. 2009. “‘This Is No Longer the City I Once Knew’. Evictions, the Urban Poor and the Right to the
City in Millennial Delhi.” Environment and Urbanization 21(1): 127–142. 
Bhan, G. 2013. “ Planned Illegalities . Housing and the ‘Failure’ of Planning Delhi: 1947–2010.” Economic 
and Political Weekly 68(24): 58–70. 
Bhan, G. 2014. “Categorizing Hierarchies.” Seminar 663: 18–22. 
Bhattacharjee, P. 2014. “Delhi Experiments With Water ATMs, Reignites Debate”. Governance Now, 4
August, accessed on 16 November 2014. www.governancenow.com/news/regular-story/delhi-experiments-
water-atms-reignites-debate#sthash.J3tTp5dA.dpuf. 
Brosius, C. 2010. India’s New Middle Class: Urban Forms of Leisure, Consumption and Prosperity. London,
Routledge. 
Brown-Saraci, J. , Ed. 2010. The Gentrifications Debates. New York, Routledge. 
Chakrabarty, D. 1992. “Of Garbage, Modernity and the Citizen’s Gaze.” Economic and Political Weekly
27(10/11): 541–547. 
Chakravarty, S. and R. Negi , Eds. 2016. Space, Planning and Everyday Contestations in Delhi. Delhi,
Spring. 
Chatterjee, P. 2004. The Politics of the Governed: Reflections on Popular Politics in Most of the World. New
York, Columbia University Press. 
Checker, M. 2011. “Wiped Out by the “Greenwave”: Environmental Gentrification and the Paradoxical
Politics of Urban Sustainability.” City and Society 23(2): 210–229. 
Davis, M. 2006. Plant of Slums. New York, Verso. 
De Soto, H. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else.
London, Bantam. 
Desai, V. and A. Loftus . 2012. “Speculating on Slums: Infrastructural Fixes in Informal Housing in the Global
South.” Antipode 45(4): 789–808. 
Donald, J. 1999. Imagining the Modern City. Minneapolis, Minnesota University Press. 
Eckerd, A. 2011. “Cleaning Up Without Clearing Out? A Spatial Assessment of Environmental
Gentrification.” Urban Affairs Review 47(1): 31–59. 
Eckert, J. 2006. “From Subjects to Citizens. Legalism From Below and the Homogenisation of the Legal
Sphere.” Journal of Legal Pluralism 53–54: 45–76. 
El-Khoury, R. 1996. “Polish and Deodorize. Paving the City in Late-Eighteenth-Century France.” Assemblage
31: 6–15. 
Elwood, S. 2006. “Beyond Cooptation or Resistance: Urban Spatial Politics, Community Organizations, and
GIS-Based Spatial Narratives.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 96(2): 323–341. 
Engels, F. 1995 [1872]. The Housing Question, available at:
https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1872/housing-question/, accessed on 13.04.2018. 
Ferguson, B. and J. Navarrete . 2003. “New Approaches to Progressive Housing in Latin America: A Key to
Habitat Programs and Policy.” Habitat International 27(2): 309–323. 
Gans, H. 1962. The Urban Villagers: Groups and Class in the Life of Italian-Americans. New York, Free
Press of Glencoe. 
Ghertner, D. A. 2010. “Calculating Without Numbers: Aesthetic Governmentality in Delhi’s Slums.” Economy
and Society 39(2): 185–217. 
Grant, R. and J. Nijman . 2002. “Globalization and the Corporate Geography of Cities in the Less-Developed
World.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92: 320–340. 
Grass, R. 1964. London: Aspects of Change. London, Centre for Urban Studies and MacGibbon and Kee. 
Hall, P. 1988. Cities of Tomorrow: An Intellectual History of Urban Planning and Design in the Twentieth
Century. Malden, Blackwell Publishing. 
Harvey, D. 2008. “The Right to the City.” New Left Review 53: 23–40. 
Huchzermeyer, M. 2011. Cities With Slums. From Informal Settlement Eradication to a Right to the City in
Africa. Claremont, UTC Press. 
Imparato, I. and J. Ruster . 2003. Slum Upgrading and Participation. Lesson From Latin America.
Washington, DC, Wold Bank. 
Kingwill, R. , B. Cousins , T. Cousins , D. Hornby , L. Royston , and W. Smit . 2006. “Mysteries and Myths:
De Soto, Property and Poverty in South Africa.” Gatekeeper 124: 1–24. 
Koonings, K. and D. Kruijt , Eds. 2007. Fractured Cities: Social Exclusion, Urban Violence & Contested
Spaces in Latin America. London, Zed Books. 
Kumar, S. 2014. “The Water Card. Can Water ATMs Help Solve the Acute Drinking Water Shortage Faced
By Slum Dwellers?” Livemint, 9 May 2014, accessed on 16 November 2014.
www.livemint.com/Leisure/v01tQZgQMFr1rwhFzEvBFO/Photo-Essay–The-
watercard.html?utm_source=copy. 
Lake, R. and K. Newman . 2002. “Differential Citizenship in the Shadow State.” GeoJournal 58: 109–120. 
Lefebvre, H. 1974. The Urban Revolution. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press. 
Llanto, G. M. 2007. “Shelter Finance Strategies for the Poor. Philippines.” Environment and Urbanization
19(2): 409–423. 
Low, S. M. 2001. “The Edge and the Center: Gated Communities and the Discourse of Urban Fear.”
American Anthropologist 103(1): 45–58. 
Mathur Committee Report . 2006. Report of the K.K. Mathur Committee of Experts Set Up by the
Government of India to Look into the Issues With Regard to the Unauthorized Development in the Form of
‘Farm Houses’ as well as ‘Unauthorized Colonies Inhabited by Affluent Sections’ of the Society.”
Government of New Delhi, 29 December 2006. www.urbanindia.nic.in/programme/dd/mathurc.pdf. 
Menon, G. A. 2010. “Recoveries of Space and Subjectivity in the Shadow of Violence: The Clandestine
Politics of Pavement Dwellers in Mumbai.” In Contesting Development: Critical Struggles for Social Change.
P. McMichael . New York, Routledge: 151–165. 
Menon-Sen, K. 2010. “Delhi and the CWG2010: The Games Behind the Games.” The Journal of Asian
Studies 69(3): 677–681. 
Mitchell, T. 2007. “The Properties of Markets.” In Do Economists Make Markets. D. MacKenzie , Princeton
University Press: 244–275. 
Mukhija, V. 2003. Squatters as Developers? Slum Redevelopment in Mumbai. London, Ashgate. 
Mukhija, V. 2012. “Cities With Slums.” In The Oxford Handbook of Urban Planning. R. Weber and R. Crane .
Oxford, Oxford University Press: 524–538.
Nielsen, M. 2011. “Inverse Governmentality: The Paradoxical Production of Peri-Urban Planning in Maputo,
Mozambique.” Critique of Anthropology 31(4): 329–358. 
Nijman, J. 2008. “Against the Odds: Slum Rehabilitation in Neoliberal Mumbai.” Cities 25(2): 73–85. 
Nuijten, M. 2013. “The Perversity of the ‘Citizenship Game’: Slum-Upgrading in the Urban Periphery of
Recife, Brazil.” Critique of Anthropology 33(1): 8–25. 
Payne, G. 2001a. “Lowering the Ladder: Regulatory Frameworks for Sustainable Development.”
Development in Practice 11(2–3): 308–318. 
Payne, G. 2001b. “Urban Land Tenure Policy Options: Titles or Rights?” Habitat International 25(3):
415–429. 
Peattie, L. R. 1994. “An Argument for Slums.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 13(2): 136–143. 
Polanki, P. 2014. “Faced With a Growing Water Crisis, Delhi Govt Hard-Sells Water ATMs.” Firstpost, 20
July 2014, accessed on 18 November 2014. www.firstpost.com/india/faced-growing-water-crisis-delhi-govt-
hard-sells-water-atms-1581181.html. 
Prakash, G. , Ed. 2010. Noir Urbanisms. Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Rajagopal, A. 2001. “The Violence of Commodity Aesthetics. Hawkers, Demolition Raids, and a New
Regime of Consumption.” Social Text 19(3): 91–113. 
Ramanathan, U. 2006. “Illegality and the Urban Poor.” Economic and Political Weekly, 22 July 2006:
3193–3197. 
Rao, U. 2010. “Making the Global City: Urban Citizenship at the Margins of Delhi.” Ethnos 75(4): 402–424. 
Rao, U. 2013. “Tolerated Encroachment. Resettlement Policies and the Negotiation of the Licit/Illicit Divide in
an Indian Metropolis.” Cultural Anthropology 28(4): 760–779. 
Rigon, A. 2014. “Building Local Governance: Participation and Elite Capture in Slum-upgrading in Kenya.”
Development and Change 45(2): 257–283. 
Rose, N. 1996. “Governing ‘Advanced’ Liberal Democracies.” In Foucault and Political Reason. A. Barry , T.
Osborne and N. Rose . Chicago, Chicago University Press. 
Roy, A. 2003. City Requiem, Calcutta. Gender and the Politics of Poverty. Minneapolis, University of
Minnesota Press. 
Sharma, A. 2008. Logics of Empowerment. Development, Gender, and Governance in Neoliberal India.
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press. 
Sheikh, S. , S. Banda , and B. Mandelkern . 2014. “Planning the Slum.” Cities of Delhi, Centre for Policy
Research. http://citiesofdelhi.cprindia.org/reports/planning-the-slum-jjc-resettlement-in-delhi-andthe-case-of-
savda-ghevra/. 
Smith, N. 1996. The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and Revanchist City. London, Routledge. 
Soja, E. W. 1989. Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory. London,
Verso. 
Stroke, C. 1962. “A Theory of Slums.” Land Economics 38(3): 187–197. 
Tejendra Khanna Committee of Experts. 2006. Government of India, New Delhi, 13 May. 
Turner, J. 1968. “Housing Priorities, Settlement Patterns, and Urban Development in Modernizing
Countries.” Journal of the American Institute of Planners 34(6): 354–363. 
UN Habitat . 2003. Slums of the World: The Face of Urban Poverty in the New Millennium? UN Habitat. 
Varley, A. 2002. “Private or Public. Debating the Meaning of Tenure Legalization.” International Journal of
Urban and Regional Research 26(3): 449–461. 
Wacquant, L. 1988. Urban Outcasts: A Comparative Sociology of Advanced Marginality. London, Polity. 
Wallace, T. 2003. “Trojan Horses for Global Neoliberalism?” Socialist Register 2003(202–219). 
Weinstein, L. 2014. The Durable Slum: Dharavi and the Right to Stay Put in Globalizing Mumbai.
Minneapolis, Minnesota University Press. 
World Bank and UN-Habitat . 1999. Cities Alliance for Cities Without Slums.
www.citiesalliance.org/sites/citiesalliance.org/files/ActionPlan.pdf. 
 
Tackling pollution with care 
Agrawal, Arun. 2005. Environmentality: Technologies of Government and the Making of Subjects.
Durham/London: Duke University Press. 
Anderson, Warwick. 2006. Colonial Pathologies: American Tropical Medicine, Race and Hygiene in the
Philippines. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Auckland Council . 2012. Getting Auckland’s Waste Sorted: Auckland Waste Management and Minimisation
Plan. Auckland: Auckland Council Waste Assessment.
Auyero, Javier and Débora Alejandra Swistun . 2009. Flammable: Environmental Suffering in an Argentine
Shantytown. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Beamish, Thomas D. 2002. Silent Spill: The Organization of an Industrial Crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Bell, Claudia and Steven Matthewman (eds.). 2004. Cultural Studies in Aotearoa New Zealand: Identity,
Space and Place. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bennett, Adam. 2011. Auckland Air Just as Polluted as Tokyo’s. New Zealand Herald, 28.09.11. 
Bullard, Robert D. 2000. Dumping in Dixie: Race, Class and Environmental Quality. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press. 
Bullard, Robert D. 2007. Growing Smarter: Achieving Liveable Communities, Environmental Justice and
Regional Equity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Checker, Melissa. 2005. Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism and the Search for Justice in a Southern
Town. New York: New York University Press. 
Chen, Don. 2007. Linking Transportation Equity and Environmental Justice with Smart Growth. In Growing
Smarter: Achieving Liveable Communities, Environmental Justice, and Regional Equity. Robert Bullard , ed.,
pp. 299–322. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cox, Rosie. 2010. Some Problems and Possibilities of Caring. Ethics, Place and Environment 13(2):
113–130. 
Craddock, Susan. 2000. City of Plagues: Disease, Poverty, and Deviance in San Francisco. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Crothers, Charles and Deb Schwarz . 2011. Macro Auckland. Informing and Inspiring Generosity. Summary
Report. www.aucklandcf.org.nz/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/MacroAuckland-Summary-Report-2011.pdf,
accessed 29 June 2016. 
Di Chiro, Giovanna. 1998. Environmental Justice From the Grassroots: Reflections of History, Gender and
Expertise. In The Struggle for Ecological Democracy: Environmental Justice Movements in the United
States. Daniel J. Faber , ed., pp. 104–135. New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Dürr, Eveline. 2010. “Tidy Kiwis, Dirty Asians”: Cultural Pollution and Migration in Auckland, New Zealand. In
Urban Pollution: Cultural Meanings, Social Practices. Eveline Dürr and Rivke Jaffe , eds., pp. 30–56. Oxford:
Berghahn Books. 
Dürr, Eveline and Gordon Winder . 2016. Garbage at Work: Ethics, Subjectivation and Resistance. In Purity
and Danger Now: New Perspectives. Robbie Duschinsky , Simone Schnall and Daniel Weiss , eds., pp.
52–68. London: New York: Routledge. 
Forester, John. 1989. Planning in the Face of Power. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Greenpeace 2006. History of the Anti-Nuclear Movement in New Zealand. www.greenpeace.org/new-
zealand/en/campaigns/nuclear/nuclear-free-nz/anti-nuke-history-NZ/, accessed 29 June 2016. 
Gunder, Michael. 2006. Sustainability: Planning’s Saving Grace or Road to Perdition. Journal of Planning
Education and Research 26(2): 208–221. 
Guyer, Jane I. 2007. Prophecy and the Near Future: Thoughts on Macroeconomic, Evangelical and
Punctuated Time. American Ethnologist 34(3): 409–421. 
Hyatt, Susan Brin. 2001. From Citizen to Volunteer. Neoliberal Governance and the Erasure of Poverty. In
The New Poverty Studies. The Ethnography of Power, Politics, and Impoverished People in the United
States. Judith Goode and Jeff Maskovsky , eds., pp. 210–235. New York/London: New York University
Press. 
Isenhour, Cindy , Gary McDonogh , and Melissa Checker (eds.). 2015. Sustainability in the Global City: Myth
and Practice. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Jaffe, Rivke. 2016. Concrete Jungles: Urban Pollution and the Politics of Difference in the Caribbean.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Jamieson, Dale . 2012. Ethics, Public Policy, and Global Warming. In Ethical Adaption to Climate Change.
Human Virtues of the Future. Allen Thompson and Jeremy Bendik-Keymer , eds., pp. 187–202. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. 
Kaika, Maria. 2005. City of Flows: Modernity, Nature and the City. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Lambek, Michael. 2010. Introduction. In Ordinary Ethics. Anthropology, Language, and Action. Michael
Lambek , ed., pp. 1–38. New York, NY: Fordlan University Press. 
McKay, George. 2011. Radical Gardening: Politics, Idealism and Rebellion in the Garden. London: Frances
Lincoln. 
Mercer . 2016. Western European Cities Top Quality of Living Ranking.
www.mercer.com/newsroom/western-european-cities-top-quality-of-living-ranking-mercer.html, accessed 26
September 2016. 
Ministry of the Environment and Statistics New Zealand . 2015. New Zealand’s Environmental Reporting
Series: Environment Aotearoa 2015.
www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Environmental%20reporting/environment-aotearoa-final.pdf,
accessed 29 June 2016.
Moore, Henrietta. 2011. Still Life: Hopes, Desires and Satisfactions. Cambridge/Malden: Polity Press. 
Moore, Steve A. 2007. Alternative Routes to the Sustainable City. Austin, TX: Lexington Books. 
Morton, Jamie. 2015. NZ’s ‘Clean Environment’ Under Threat. New Zealand Herald, 21.10.15. 
Mühlebach, Andrea. 2012. The Moral Neoliberal: Welfare and Citizenship in Italy. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 
Peeples, Jennifer A. and Kevin M. DeLuca . 2006. The Truth of the Matter: Motherhood, Community and
Environmental Justice. Women’s Studies in Communication 29: 59–87. 
Pellow, David N. 2002. Garbage Wars: The Struggle for Environmental Justice in Chicago. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 
Prakash, Swati. 2007. Beyond Dirty Diesels: Clean and Just Transportation in Northern Manhattan. In
Growing Smarter: Achieving Livable Communities, Environmental Justice, and Regional Equity. Robert D.
Bul-lard , ed., pp. 273–298. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2010. Ethical Doings in Naturecultures. Ethics, Place and Environment 13(2):
151–169. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care.
Social Studies of Science 45(5): 691–716. 
Shah, Nayan. 2001. Contagious Divides: Epidemics and Race in San Francisco’s Chinatown. Berkeley/Los
Angeles, CA: University of California Press. 
Spoonley Paul , Carina Meares , and Trudie Cain . 2015. Immigrant Economies in Action: Chinese ethnic
precincts in Auckland. In Asians and the New Multiculturalism in Aotearoa New Zealand. Ghosh Gautam and
Jacqueline Leckie , eds., pp. 237–264. Dunedin: Otage University Press. 
Statistics New Zealand . 2013. 2013 Census Usually Resident Population Counts.
www.stats.govt.nz/browse_for_stats/population/census_counts/2013CensusUsuallyResidentPopulationCoun
ts_HOTP2013Cen sus.aspx, accessed 29 June 2016. 
Sze, Julie. 2007. Noxious New York: The Racial Politics of Urban Health and Environmental Justice.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sze, Julie and Yi Zhou . 2011. Imagining a Chinese Eco-City. In Environmental Criticism for the Twenty-First
Century. Stephanie LeMenager , Teresa Shewry , and Ken Hiltner , eds., pp. 216–230, New York/London:
Routledge. 
Throop, William M. 2012. Environmental Virtues and the Aims of Restoration. In Ethical Adaption to Climate
Change: Human Virtues of the Future. Allen Thompson and Jeremy Bendik-Keymer , eds., pp. 47–62.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Tilly, Charles and Sidney Tarrow . 2006. Contentious Politics. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers. 
 
Engaging with sustainable urban mobilities in Western Europe 
Adey, Peter , David Bissell , Kevin Hannam , Peter Merriman , and Mimi Sheller . 2013. The Routledge
Handbook of Mobilities, edited by Peter Adey , David Bissel , Kevin Hannam , Peter Merriman , and Mimi
Sheller . London: Routledge. 
Aldred, Rachel. 2010. “On the Outside: Constructing Cycling Citizenship.” Social Cultural Geography 11 (1):
35–52. 
Aldred, Rachel. 2012. “Governing Transport From Welfare State to Hollow State: The Case of Cycling in the
UK.” Transport Policy 23: 95–102. 
Aldred, Rachel. 2013. “Who Are Londoners on Bikes and What Do They Want? Negotiating Identity and
Issue Definition in a ‘Pop-Up’ Cycle Campaign.” Journal of Transport Geography 30: 194–201. 
Aldred, Rachel , and Katrina Jungnickel . 2014. “Why Culture Matters for Transport Policy: The Case of
Cycling in the UK.” Journal of Transport Geography 34: 78–87. 
Alvesson, Mats , and Kaj Sköldberg . 2000. Reflexive Methodology: New Vistas for Qualitative Research.
London: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Amin, Ash , and Nigel Thrift . 2002. Cities: Reimagining the Urban. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Anable, Jillian , and Birgitta Gatersleben . 2005. “All Work and No Play? The Role of Instrumental and
Affective Factors in Work and Leisure Journeys by Different Travel Modes.” Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice 39 (2–3 SPEC. ISS.): 163–181. 
Aultman-Hall, Lisa , Fred L. Hall , and Brian B. Baetz . 1997. “Analysis of Bicycle Commuter Routes Using
Geographic Information Systems: Implications for Bicycle Planning.” Transportation Research Record 1578:
102–110. 
Bauman, Zygmunt. 2000. Liquid Modernity. Cambridge: Polity. 
Bech-Jørgensen, Birte. 1994. Når Hver Dag Bliver Hverdag. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag.
Beck, Ulrich. 1992. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Beck, Ulrich. 2016. The Metamorphosis of the World. Cambridge: Polity. 
Berger, Peter L. , and Thomas Luckmann . 1966. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the
Sociology of Knowledge. London: Penguin Books. 
Bergstad, Cecilia Jakobsson , Amelie Gamble , Olle Hagman , Merritt Polk , Tommy Gärling , and Lars E.
Olsson . 2011. “Affective-Symbolic and Instrumental-Independence Psychological Motives Mediating Effects
of Socio-Demographic Variables on Daily Car Use.” Journal of Transport Geography 19 (1): 33–38. 
Canzler, Weert , Vincent Kaufmann , and Sven Kesselring . 2008a. “Tracing Mobilities: An Introduction.” In
Tracing Mobilities, edited by Weert Canzler , Vincent Kaufmann , and Sven Kesselring , 1–10. Aldershot and
Burlington: Ashgate. 
Canzler, Weert , Vincent Kaufmann , and Sven Kesselring . 2008b. Tracing Mobilities: Towards a
Cosmopolitan Perspective, edited by Weert Canzler , Vincent Kaufmann , and Sven Kesselring . Aldershot:
Ashgate. 
Collin-Lange, Virgile. 2013. “Socialities in Motion: Automobility and Car Cruising in Iceland.” Mobilities 8 (4):
406–423. 
Conley, Jim , and Arlene Tigar Mclaren . 2012. Car Troubles: Critical Studies of Automobility and Auto-
Mobility. Vol. 2012. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 
Copenhagen Municipality . 2014. København Cyklernes By (Copenhagen – City of Cyclists). Copenhagen. 
Doughty, Karolina , and Lesley Murray . 2014. “Discourses of Mobility: Institutions, Everyday Lives and
Embodiment.” Mobilities 101 (November): 1–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17450101.2014.941257. 
Featherstone, M. 2004. “Automobilities: An Introduction.” Theory, Culture & Society 21 (4–5): 1–24. 
Fincham, Ben . 2006. “Bicycle Messengers and the Road to Freedom.” Sociological Review 54 (1): 208–222. 
Fischer, Frank , and John Forester . 1993. The Argumentative Turn in Policy Analysis and Planning, edited
by Frank Fischer and John Forester . Durham: Duke University Press Books. 
Fischer, Frank , and Herbert Gottweis . 2012. “The Argumentative Turn Revistited.” In The Argumentative
Turn Revisited, edited by Frank Fischer and Herbert Gottweis , 1–27. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene. 2009. Mobility in Daily Life: Between Freedom and Unfreedom. Vol. 2012.
Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene. 2014a. “Searching for Ethics and Responsibilities of Everyday Life
Mobilities.” Sociologica 1/2014: 1–23. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene. 2014b. “Tracing the Super Rich and Their Mobilities in a Scandinavian
Welfare State.” In Elite Mobilities, edited by Thomas Birtchnell and Javier Caletío , 209–225. London:
Routledge. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene. 2015a. “Cyclists as Part of the City’s Organism – Structural Stories on
Cycling in Copenhagen.” City & Society 27 (1): 30–50. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene. 2015b. “Whose Commons Are Mobilities Spaces? – The Case of
Copenhagen’s Cyclists.” ACME 14(2): 598–621. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene , Katrine Hartmann-Petersen , and Lise Drewes Nielsen . 2010. “Mixing
Methods in the Search for Mobile Complexity.” In Mobile Methodologies, edited by Ben Fincham , Mark
McGuinness , and Lesley Murray , 25–43. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Freudendal-Pedersen, Malene , and Sven Kesselring . 2016. “Mobilities, Futures and the City. Repositioning
Discourses – Changing Perspectives – Rethinking Policies.” Mobilities 11 (4): 573–584. 
Freund, Peter , and George Martin . 2004. “Walking and Motoring: Fitness and the Social Organisation of
Movement.” Sociology of Health and Illness 26 (3): 273–286. 
Freund, Peter , and George Martin . 2009. “The Social and Material Culture of Hyperautomobility:
‘Hyperauto’.” Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 29 (6): 476–482. doi:10.1177/0270467609349053. 
Friedman, John. 2002. The Prospects of Cities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Furness, Zack. 2007. “Critical Mass, Urban Space and Vélomobility.” Mobilities 2 (2): 299–319, Routledge. 
Furness, Zack. 2010. One Less Car: Bicycling and the Politics of Automobility (Sporting). Philadelphia:
Temple University Press. 
Giddens, Anthony. 1984. The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration. Berkeley:
University of California Press. 
Giddens, Anthony. 1991. Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. Stanford:
Stanford University Press. 
Graham, Steve , and Simon Marvin . 2001. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological
Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge. 
Green, Judith , Rebecca Steinbach , and Jessica Datta . 2012. “The Travelling Citizen: Emergent Discourses
of Moral Mobility in a Study of Cycling in London.” Sociology 46 (2): 272–289. 
Hajer, Maarten. 1999. “Zero-Friction Society.” www.rudi.net/books/11454. 
Hajer, Maarten , and Ton Dassen . 2014. Smart About Cities: Visualising the Challenge for 21st Century
Urbanism. Rotterdam: nai010 Publishers.
Halkier, Bente. 2010. “Focus Groups as Social Enactments: Integrating Interaction and Content in the
Analysis of Focus Group Data.” Qualitative Research 10 (1): 71–89. 
Hannam, Kevin , Gareth Butler , and Cody Morris Paris . 2014. “Developments and Key Issues in Tourism
Mobilities.” Annals of Tourism Research 44: 171–185. 
Harvey, David. 2000. Spaces of Hope. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
Healey, Patsy. 1997. Collaborative Planning. Vancouver: UBC Press. 
Horton, Dave. 2006. “Environmentalism and the Bicycle.” Environmental Politics 15 (1): 41–58, Krieger
Publishing. 
Horton, Dave. 2007. “Fear of Cycling.” In Cycling and Society, edited by David Horton , Paul Rosen , and
Peter Cox , 133–152. Hampshire: Ashgate. 
Ingold, Tim. 2011. “Footprints Through the Weather-World: Walking, Breathing, Knowing.” In Making
Knowledge: Explorations of the Indissoluble Relation Between Mind, Body and Environment, 115–132.
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Jensen, Anne. 2013. “The Power of Urban Mobility: Shaping Experiences, Emotions, and Selves on a Bike.”
In New Mobilities Regimes in Art and Social Sciences, edited by Susanne Witzgall , Gerlinde Vogl , and
Sven Kesselring , 273–286. Farnham: Ashgate. 
Jensen, Ole B. , Mimi Sheller , and Simon Wind . 2014. “Together and Apart: Affective Ambiences and
Negotiation in Families’ Everyday Life and Mobility.” Mobilities 10 (3): 363–382, Routledge. 
Jones, Phil . 2005. “Performing the City: A Body and a Bicycle Take on Birmingham, UK.” Social & Cultural
Geography 6 (6). 
Jones, Phil. 2012. “Sensory Indiscipline and Affect: A Study of Commuter Cycling.” Social & Cultural
Geography 13 (6): 645–658. doi:10.1080/14649365.2012.713505. 
Kaplan, Alice , and Kristin Ross . 1987. Everyday Life, Yale French Studies. New Haven: Yale University
Press. 
Kaufmann, Vincent. 2002. Re-thinking Mobility: Contemporary Sociology (Transport and Society). Oxford:
Ash-gate Pub Ltd. 
Kent, Jennifer L. 2015. “Still Feeling the Car – The Role of Comfort in Sustaining Private Car Use.” Mobilities
10 (5): 726–747, Routledge. 
Kesselring, Sven. 2008. “The Mobile Risk Society.” In Tracing Mobilities, edited by Weert Canzler , Vincent
Kaufmann , and Sven Kesselring , 77–102. Aldershot and Burlington: Ashgate. 
Kidder, J. L. 2005. “Style and Action: A Decoding of Bike Messenger Symbols.” Journal of Contemporary
Ethnography 34 (3): 344–367. 
Kvale, Steinar. 1996. InterViews: An Introduction to Qualitative Research Interviewing. London: SAGE
Publications, Inc. 
Larsen, Jonas. 2014. “(Auto)Ethnography and Cycling.” International Journal of Social Research
Methodology 17 (1): 59–71. 
Lefebvre, Henri. 1976. The Survival of Capitalism. London: Allison and Busby. 
Mann, Eleanor , and Charles Abraham . 2006. “The Role of Affect in UK Commuters’ Travel Mode Choices:
An Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis.” British Journal of Psychology (London, England: 1953) 97 (Pt
2): 155–176. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16613647. 
Palmer, Chatherne. 2004. “Shit Happens: Selling of Risk in Extreme Sport.” The Australian Journal of
Antheropology 13 (3): 13. 
Parkin, John , Tim Ryley , and Tim Jones . 2007. “Barriers to Cycling: An Exploration of Quantitative
Analyses.” In Cycling & Society, edited by Dave Horton , Paul Rosen , and Peter Cox , 67–82. Aldershot:
Ashgate. 
Passell, Aaron. 2013. “Jeffrey L. Kidder 2011: Urban Flow: Bike Messengers and the City.” International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 37 (2): 815–816. 
Pelzer, Peter. 2010. “Bicycling as a Way of Life: A Comparative Case Study of Bicycle Culture in Portland,
OR and Amsterdam.” In 7th Cycling and Society Symposium, 1–13. Oxford.
www.tsu.ox.ac.uk/events/100906/css-pelzer-paper.pdf. 
Peters, Peter , Sanneke Kloppenburg , and Sally Wyatt . 2010. “Co-ordinating Passages: Understanding the
Resources Needed for Everyday Mobility.” Mobilities 5 (3): 349–368. 
Pucher, John , Ralph Buehler , David R. Bassett , and Andrew L. Dannenberg . 2010. “Walking and Cycling
to Health: A Comparative Analysis of City, State, and International Data.” American Journal of Public Health
100 (10): 1986–1992. 
Road Directory . 2016. “Key Numbers for Traffic in Denmark.”
www.vejdirektoratet.dk/DA/viden_og_data/statistik/trafikkenital/hvordan_udvikler_trafikken_sig/Sider/default.
aspx. 
Rosa, Hartmut. 2013. Social Acceleration: A New Theory of Modernity (New Directions in Critical Theory).
New York and Chicester, West Sussex: Columbia University Press.
Sager, Tore. 2006. “Freedom as Mobility: Implications of the Distinction Between Actual and Potential
Travelling.” Mobilities 1 (3): 465–488. 
Sandercock, Leonie. 2003. “Out of the Closet: The Importance of Stories and Storytelling in Planning
Practice.” Planning Theory Practice 4 (1): 11–28, Routledge, part of the Taylor & Francis Group. 
Sheller, Mimi. 2004. “Automotive Emotions: Feeling the Car.” Theory, Culture & Society 21 (4–5): 221–242. 
Sheller, Mimi , and John Urry . 2000. “The City and the Car.” International Journal of Urban and Regional
Research 24 (December 2000): 737–757. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/119042568/abstract. 
Sheller, Mimi , and John Urry . 2006. “The New Mobilities Paradigm.” Environment and Planning A 38 (2):
207–226, Pion Ltd. 
Simonsen, Kirsten. 2007. “Practice, Spatiality and Embodied Emotions: An Outline of a Geography of
Practice.” Human Affairs 17 (2): 168–181. 
Snizek, Bernhard , Thomas Alexander Sick Nielsen , and Hans Skov-Petersen . 2013. “Mapping Bicyclists’
Experiences in Copenhagen.” Journal of Transport Geography 30: 227–233. 
Spinney, Justin. 2006. “A Place of Sense: A Kinaesthetic Ethnography of Cyclists on Mont Ventoux.”
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (5): 709–732. 
Spinney, Justin. 2009. “Cycling the City: Movement, Meaning and Method.” Geography Compass 3 (2):
817–835. 
Spinney, Justin. 2010. “Performing Resistance? Re-Reading Practices of Urban Cycling on London’s South
Bank.” Environment and Planning A 42 (12): 2914–2937. 
Steg, Linda . 2005. “Car Use: Lust and Must. Instrumental, Symbolic and Affective Motives for Car Use.”
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 39 (2–3 SPEC. ISS.): 147–162. 
Stoffers, Manuel. 2012. “Cycling as Heritage: Representing the History of Cycling in the Netherlands.” The
Journal of Transport History 33 (1): 92–114. 
Urry, John. 2000. Sociology Beyond Societies: Mobilities for the Twenty-First Century (International Library
of Sociology). London: Routledge. 
Urry, John. 2006. “Inhabiting the Car.” The Sociological Review 54: 17–31. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
954X.2006.00635x. 
Urry, John. 2007. Mobilities. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Van Goeverden, Kees , and Tom Godefrooij . 2011. The Dutch Reference Study: Cases of Interventions in
Bicycle Infrastructure Reviewed in the Framework of Bikeability. Delft: Department of Transport & Planning,
Faculty of Civil Engineering and Geoscience, Delft University of Technology. 
Vivanco, Luis A. 2013. Reconsidering the Bicycle: An Anthropological Perspective on a New (Old) Thing.
New York and London: Routledge. 
 
Racialized citizenship and the modern American city, ethnographically
considered 
Abdullah, Zain , Black Mecca: The African Muslims of Harlem (Oxford University Press, 2010). 
Anderson, Jervis , This Was Harlem: A Cultural Portrait, 1900–1950 (Farrar Straus & Giroux, 1983). 
Carbado, Devon. “Racial Naturalization.” American Quarterly 57 (3): 633–658, 2005. 
Daniel Barnes, Riché J. , Raising the Race: Black Career Women Redefine Marriage, Motherhood, and
Community (Rutgers University Press, 2016). 
Geertz, Clifford , The Interpretation of Cultures (Basic Books, 1973). 
Gilroy, Paul , Between Camps: Nations, Cultures and the Allure of Race (Taylor and Francis, 2013). 
Gregory, Steven , Black Corona: Race and the Politics of Place in an Urban Community (Princeton
University Press, 1998). 
Gwaltney, John Langston , Drylongso: A Self-Portrait of Black America (The New Press, 1993 ed.). 
Hall, Stuart , Chas Critcher , Tony Jefferson , John N. Clarke , and Brian Roberts , Policing the Crisis:
Mugging, the State, and Law and Order (London: Macmillan, 1978). 
Jackson, John L. Jr. , Harlemworld: Doing Race and Class in Contemporary Black America (University of
Chicago Press, 2001). 
Jackson, John L. Jr. , Real Black: Adventures in Racial Sincerity (University of Chicago Press, 2005). 
Jackson, John L. Jr. , Thin Description: Ethnography and the African Hebrews of Jerusalem (Harvard
University Press, 2013). 
James, Sherman , “John Henryism and the Health of African Americans,” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry
18: 163–182, 1994. 
Kelley, Robin D. G. , Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class (Free Press, 1994).
Lewis, Oscar , Five Families; Mexican Case Studies in the Culture of Poverty (Basic Books, 1975). 
Low, Setha M. , Behind the Gates: Life, Security and the Pursuit of Happiness in Fortress America
(Routledge, 2004). 
Low, Setha M. On the Plaza: The Politics of Public Space and Culture (University of Texas Press, 2000). 
Marcus, George E. , “Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography,”
Annual Review of Anthropology, 24:1, 95–117, 1995. 
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton , American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the
Underclass (Harvard University Press, 1998). 
Mullings, Leith , “Resistance and Resilience: The Sojourner Syndrome and the Social Context of
Reproduction in Central Harlem,” Transforming Anthropology 13:2, 79–91, 2005. 
Murray, Charles , Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950–1980 (Basic Books, 1984). 
Ortner, Sherry , Making Gender: The Politics and Erotics of Culture (Beacon Press, 1996). 
Rony, Fatimah Tobing , The Third Eye: Race, Cinema, and Ethnographic Spectacle (Duke University Press,
1996). 
Smith, Neil , The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City (Routledge, 1996). 
Trouillot, Michel-Rolph. Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World (Palgrave, 2003). 
Wilson, William Julius. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy
(University of Chicago Press, 1987). 
Zuberi, Tukufu and Eduardo Bonilla-Silva , eds., White Logic, White Methods: Racism and Methodology
(Rowman and Littlefield, 2008). 
 
A right to the city? 
Angelcos, Nicolás and Miguel Pérez . 2017. “De la ‘desaparición’ a la reemergencia: Continuidades y
rupturas del movimiento de pobladores en Chile.” Latin American Research Review 52 (1): 94–109. 
Auyero, Javier and Débora A. Swistun . 2009. Flammable: Environmental Suffering in an Argentine
Shantytown. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Berman, Marshall. 1982. All that Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity. New York: Simon &
Schuster. 
Blomley, Nicholas. 2003. “Law, Property, and the Geography of Violence: The Frontier, the Survey, and the
Grid,” Annals of Association of American Geographers, 93(1): 121–141. 
Brenner, Neil. 2013. “Introduction: Urban Theory without an Outside,” in Neil Brenner , ed.
Implosions/Explosions: Towards a Theory of Planetary Urbanism, 14–34. Berlin: Jovis. 
Bruey, Alison. 2012. “Limitless Land and the Redefinition of Rights: Popular Mobilization and the Limits of
Neoliberalism in Pinochet’s Chile, 1973–1985,” Journal of Latin American Studies, 44: 523–552. 
Chatterjee, Partha. 2004. The Politics of the Governed: Reflections on Popular Politics in Most of the World.
New York: Columbia University Press. 
Cheetham, Rosemond. 1971. “El sector privado de la construcció n: patrón de dominació n,” EURE, 1(3):
125–148. 
Cleaves, Peter. 1974. Bureaucratic Politics and Administration in Chile. Berkeley: University of California
Press. 
Colectivo de Memoria Histórica . 2005. Tortura en poblaciones del Gran Santiago. Santiago: Corporación
José Domingo Cañas. 
Coronil, Fernando. 1997. The Magical State: Nature, Money, and Modernity in Venezuela. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 
Coronil, Fernando. 2011. “The Future in Question: History and Utopia in Latin America (1989–2010),” in
Craig Calhoun and Georgi Derluguian, eds. Business as Usual: The Roots of the Global Financial Meltdown,
231–264. New York: New York University Press. 
De Soto, Hernando. 1989. The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. New York: Harper &
Row. 
Coronil, Fernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books. 
Fischer, Brodwyn. 2008. A Poverty of Rights: Citizenship and Inequality in Twentieth-century Rio De Janeiro.
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Garcés, Mario. 2002. Tomando su sitio: el movimiento de pobladores de Santiago, 1957–1970. Santiago:
LOM Ediciones. 
Garcés, Mario. 2003. “La revolución de los pobladores, treinta años después.” www.ongeco.cl/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/La_revolucion_de_los_pobladores.pdf, accessed April 20, 2016.
Gilbert, Alan. 2002. “Power, Ideology, and the Washington Consensus: The Development and Spread of
Chilean Housing Policy,” Housing Studies, 17(2): 305–324. 
Goldstein, Daniel. 2004. The Spectacular City: Violence and Performance in Urban Bolivia. Durham: Duke
University Press. 
Han, Clara. 2012. Life in Debt: Times of Care and Violence in Neoliberal Chile. Los Angeles and Berkeley:
University of California Press. 
Hann, Chris M. 1998. “Introduction: The Embeddedness of Property,” in C.M. Hann , ed. Property Relations:
Renewing the Anthropological Tradition, 1–47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Harvey, David. 2012. Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution. London: Verso. 
Hidalgo Dattwyler, Rodrigo. 2005. La vivienda social en Chile y la construcción del espacio urbano en el
Santiago del siglo XX. Santiago: Pontífica Universidad Católica. 
Holston, James. 2008. Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions of Democracy and Modernity in Brazil. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 
Lefebvre, Henri. 1967. “The Right to the City,” in Eleonore Kofman and Elizabeth Lebas , eds. Writings on
Cities, 147–159. London: Blackwell. 
Lefebvre, Henri. 2003 (1970). The Urban Revolution. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Lobo, Susan . 1982. A House of My Own: Social Organization in the Squatter Settlements of Lima, Peru.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Locke, John . 1988(1689). “Of Property,” in Two Treatises of Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 
Marcuse, Peter. 2012. “Whose Right(s) to What City?,” in Neil Brenner , Peter Marcuse , and Margit Mayer ,
eds. Cities for People, Not for Profit, 24–41. London: Routledge. 
McCann, Bryan. 2014. Hard Times in the Marvelous City: From Dictatorship to Democracy in the Favelas of
Rio de Janeiro. Durham: Duke University Press. 
MIDEPLAN . 2002. CASEN 2001. Santiago: MIDEPLAN. 
Mitchell, Timothy. 2005. “The Work of Economics: How a Discipline Makes Its World,” Archives européeness
de sociologie 2: 297–322. 
Morales, Eduardo , and Sergio Rojas . 1987. “Relocalización socio-espacial de la pobreza: política estatal y
presión popular, 1979–1985,” in Jorge Chateau, ed. Espacio y poder: los pobladores, 77–120. Santiago:
Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales. 
Murphy, Edward. 2004a. “Developing Sustainable Peripheries: The Limits of Citizenship in Guatemala City.”
Latin American Perspectives 31 (6): 48–68. 
Murphy, Edward. 2004b. Historias poblacionales: hacia una memoria incluyente. Santiago: CEDECO. 
Murphy, Edward. 2015. For a Proper Home: Housing Rights in the Margins of Urban Chile, 1960–2010.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. 
Paley, Julia. 2001. Marketing Democracy: Power and Social Movements in Post-Dictatorship Chile.
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Pérez, Miguel. 2017. “Reframing Housing Struggles: Right to the City and Urban Citizenship in Santiago,
Chile,” City 21 (5): 530–549. 
Perlman, Janice. 1976. The Myth of Marginality: Urban Poverty and Politics in Rio de Janeiro. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 
Perlman, Janice. 2010. Favela: Four Decades of Living on the Edge in Rio de Janeiro. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 
Pindell, Ngai. 2006. “Finding a Right to the City: Exploring Community and Property in Brazil and the United
States,” Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 39(2): 435–479. 
Prakash, Gyan. 2008. “Introduction,” in Gyan Prakash and K.M. Kruse , eds. The Spaces of the Modern City:
Imaginaries, Politics, and Everyday Life, 1–20. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Roberts, Bryan R. 2015. “The Consolidation of the Latin American City and the Changing Basis for Social
Order,” in Christien Klaufus and Arij Ouweneel , eds. Housing and Belonging in Latin America, 23–42. New
York and Oxford: Berghahn. 
Rodgers, Dennis. 2014. “Compadres, Vecinos, and Bróderes in the Barrio: Kinship, Politics, and Local
Politics in Urban Nicaragua,” in Brodwyn Fischer , Bryan McCann , and Javier Auyero , eds. Cities From
Scratch: Poverty and Informality in Urban Latin America, 127–149. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Rose, Carol. 1994. “‘Takings’ and the Practices of Property: Property as Wealth, Property as Propriety,” in
Property and Persuasion: Essays on the History, Theory, and Rhetoric of Ownership, 49–70. Boulder:
Westview Press. 
Salazar, Gabriel. 1990. Violencia política popular en las “Grandes Alamedas”: Santiago 1947–1987: una
perspectiva histórico-popular. Santiago: Ediciones SUR. 
Salcedo, Rodrigo. 2010. “The Last Slum: Moving From Illegal Settlements to Subsidized Housing in Chile,”
Urban Affairs Review, 46(1): 90–118.
Samara, Tony Roshan. 2013. “Citizenship and the Urban Polity: Right to the City and the Meanings of
Home,” in Edward Murphy and Najib Hourani , eds. The Housing Question: Tensions, Continuities, and
Contingencies in the Modern City, 219–235. London: Ashgate. 
Sartori, Andrew. 2014. Liberalism in Empire: An Alternative History. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press. 
Skrabut, Kristin. 2013. “Recognizing (Dis)order: Topographies of Power and Property in Lima’s Periphery.” In
Edward Murphy and Najib Hourani , eds. The Housing Question: Tensions, Continuities, and Contingencies
in the Modern City, 183–198. London: Ashgate/Routledge. 
Sugranyes, Ana. 2015. “El derecho humano a una vivienda adecuada en Chile.” In Alfredo Rodríguez ,
Paula Rodríguez , and Ana Sugranyes , eds. Con subsidio, sin derecho: la situación del derecho a una
vivienda adecuada en Chile, 17–43. Santiago: Ediciones SUR. 
Taussig, Michael. 1993. “Maleficium: State Fetishism.” In Emily Apter and William Pietz , eds. Fetishism as
Cultural Discourse, 217–247. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Verdery, Katherine . 2003. The Vanishing Hectare: Property and Value in Postsocialist Transylvania. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press. 
Verdery, Katherine , and Caroline Humphrey . 2004. “Introduction: Raising Questions about Property,” in
Property in Question: Value Transformation in the Global Economy, 1–25. Oxford: Berg. 
Vergara, Angela. 2016. “Revisiting Pampa Irigoin: Social Movements, Repression, and Political Culture in
1960s Chile,” Radical History Review, 124: 43–54. 
Wilder, Gary. 2016. “Here/Hear Now Aimé Césaire,” South Atlantic Quarterly, 115(3): 385–604. 
Zeiderman, Austin. 2015. “Living Dangerously: Biopolitics and Urban Citizenship in Bogotá, Colombia,”
American Ethnologist, 40(1): 71–87. 
 
Neighborhood grassroots organizations and rights to the city in Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil 
Albert, Victor. 2016. The Limits to Citizen Power: Participatory Democracy and the Entanglements of the
State. London: Pluto Press. 
Besteman, Catherine. 2013. “Three Reflections on Public Anthropology,” Anthropology Today 29(6): 3–6. 
Burawoy, Michael. 1998. “The Extended Case Method,” Sociological Theory 16(1): 4–33. 
Burawoy, Michael. 2005. “For Public Sociology,” American Sociological Review 70(1): 4–28. 
Caldeira, Teresa and James Holston . 2015. “Participatory Urban Planning in Brazil,” Urban Studies 52(11):
2001–2017. 
Gledhill, John. 2015. The New War on the Poor: The Production of Insecurity in Latin America. London: Zed
Books. 
Gledhill, John and Hita, Maria Gabriela. 2012. “Beyond an Anthropology of ‘the Urban Poor’,” in:
Venkatesan, Soumhya and Yarrow, Thomas (eds.), Differentiating Development: Beyond an Anthropology of
Critique, pp. 109–125. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. 
Gledhill, John and Hita, Maria Gabriela. 2014. “Las redes de organización popular aún pueden cambiar la
ciudad? El caso de Salvador, Bahia, Brasil,” in: Di Virgilio, Mercedes and Perelman, Mariano (eds.),
Ciudades Latinoamericanas: Desigualdad, Segregación y Tolerancia, pp. 85–112. Buenos Aires: CLACSO. 
Gluckman, Max. 1940. “Analysis of a Social Situation in Modern Zululand,” Bantu Studies 14(1): 1–30. 
Green, Maia. 2012. “Framing and Escaping: Contrasting Aspects of Knowledge Work in International
Development and Anthropology,” in: Venkatesan, Soumhya and Yarrow, Thomas , Differentiating
Development: Beyond an Anthropology of Critique, pp. 42–57. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. 
Hale, Charles R. 2006. “Activist Research Versus Cultural Critique: Indigenous Land Rights and the
Contradictions of Politically Engaged Anthropology,” Cultural Anthropology 21(1): 96–120. 
Hannerz, Ulf. 1980. Exploring the City: Enquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology. New York: Columbia
University Press. 
Hita, Maria Gabriela. 2012. “From Resistance Avenue to the Plaza of Decisions: New Urban Actors in
Salvador, Bahia,” in: Gledhill, John and Schell, Patience (eds.), New Approaches to Resistance in Brazil and
Mexico, pp. 269–289. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press. 
Hita, Maria Gabriela. 2017. “Uma comunidade periférica da cidade de Salvador: entre a requalificação
urbana e a pacificação policial,” in: Gledhill, John , Hita, Maria Gabriela and Perelman, Mariano (eds.),
Disputas em torno do espaço urbano: processos de produção/construção e apropriação da cidade, pp.
187–2013. Salvador, Bahia: EDUFBA. 
Ingold, Tim. 2014. “That’s Enough About Ethnography,” Hau: Journal of Ethnographic Theory. 4(1):
383–395.
Long, Norman. 2004. “Actors, Interfaces and Development Intervention: Meanings, Purposes and Powers,”
in: Tiina Kontinen (ed.), Development Intervention: Actor and Activity Perspectives, pp. 14–36. Helsinki:
University of Helsinki. 
Magnani, Jose Guilherme Cantor. 2005. “From Close Up and Within: Notes for an Urban Ethnography,”
Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais, São Paulo , 1: 1. 
Maricato, Erminia. 2011. “Uncontrolled Metropolises,” Estudos Avançados 25(71): 7–22. 
Mosse, David. 2005. Cultivating Development: An Ethnography of Aid Policy and Practice. London: Pluto
Press. 
Peña, Alejandro Milcíades , and Davies, Thomas Richard. 2014. “Globalisation From Above? Corporate
Social Responsibility, the Workers’ Party and the Origins of the World Social Forum,” New Political Economy
19(2): 258–281. 
Rolnik, Raquel and Jeroen Klink . 2011. “Crescimento economico e desenvolvimento urbano: Por que
nossas cidades continuam tão precárias?” Novos Estudos-CEBRAP 89: 89–109. 
Sassen, Saskia . 2011. Cities in a World Economy. Fourth Edition. Thousand Oaks and London: Sage
Publications. 
Serpa, Angelo. 2017. “Direito à moradia e função social da propriedade: avanços e recuos,” in: Gledhill,
John , Hita, Maria Gabriela and Perelman, Mariano (eds.) Disputas em torno do espaço urbano: processos
de produção/construção e apropriação da cidade. Salvador, Bahia: EDUFBA. 
Smith, Neil. 2002. New Globalism, New Urbanism: Gentrification as Global Urban Strategy. Antipode 34(3):
427–450. 
SOLAC 2012. Estado de las ciudades de América Latina y el Caribe, 2012: Rumbo a una nueva transición
urbana. Nairóbi, Kenya: ONU-HABITAT, http://unhabitat.org/books/estado-de-las-ciudades-de-america-
latinay-el-caribe-state-of-the-latin-america-and-the-caribbean-cities-report-espanol/, accessed November 10,
2015. 
Van Velsen, Jaap. 1967. “The extended case method and situational analysis,” in: Epstein, A.L. (ed.) The
Craft of Social Anthropology, pp. 29–51. London: Tavistock. 
Yarrow, Thomas and Venkatesan, Soumhya. 2012. “Anthropology and Development: Critical Framings,” in:
Venkatesan, Soumhya and Yarrow, Thomas (eds.) Differentiating Development, pp. 1–20. Oxford and New
York: Berghahn Books. 
 
Marxist urbanism meets the specter of communism 
Appadurai, Arjun. 2000. ‘Spectral housing and urban cleansing: Notes on millennial Mumbai’, Public Culture,
12: 627–651. 
Baviskar, Amita. 2006. ‘Demolishing Delhi: World class city in the making’, Mute, 2: 88–95. 
Brenner, Neil. 2009. ‘What is critical urban theory?’, City, 13: 198–207. 
Brenner, Neil , and Nik Theodore. 2002. ‘Cities and the geographies of “actually existing neoliberalism”’,
Antipode, 34: 349–379. 
Caldeira, Teresa Pires do Rio . 1999. ‘Fortified enclaves: The new urban segregation’, in James Holston
(ed.), Cities and Citizenship (Duke University Press: Durham, NC). 
Caldeira, Teresa Pires do Rio. 2000. City of Walls: Crime, Segregation, and Citizenship in São Paulo
(University of California Press: Berkeley, CA). 
Davis, Mike. 2006. Planet of Slums (Verso: New York, NY). 
De Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else (Basic Books: New York, NY). 
Do, Quy-Toan , and Lakshmi Iyer . 2008. ‘Land titling and rural transition in Vietnam’, Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 56: 531–579. 
Duiker, William J. 1989. Vietnam Since the Fall of Saigon (Ohio University Center for International Studies:
Athens, OH). 
Engels, Friedrich. 1943 [1845]. The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844 (Allen and Unwin:
London). 
Ghertner, D. Asher. 2015. Rule by Aesthetics: World-Class City Making in Delhi (Oxford University Press:
New York, NY). 
Harms, Erik. 2014. ‘Civility’s footprint: Ethnographic conversations about urban civility and sustainability in
Ho Chi Minh City’, SOJOURN: Journal of Social Issues in Southeast Asia, 29: 223–262. 
Harms, Erik. 2016a. Luxury and Rubble: Civility and Dispossession in the New Saigon (University of
California Press: Berkeley, CA). 
Harms, Erik. 2016b. ‘Urban space and exclusion in Asia’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 45.
Harvey, David. 2005. ‘Accumulation by dispossession’, in The New Imperialism (Oxford University Press:
New York, NY). 
Herzfeld, Michael. 2006. ‘Spatial cleansing: Monumental vacuity and the idea of the West’, Journal of
Material Culture, 11: 127. 
Kuppinger. 2004. ‘Introduction: Exploring urban segregation’, City & Society, 16: 5–9. 
Leshkowich, Ann Marie. 2014. Essential Trade: Vietnamese Women in a Changing Marketplace (University
of Hawai’i Press: Honolulu, HI). 
Low, Setha M. 1996. ‘Spatializing culture: The social production and social construction of public space in
Costa Rica’, American Ethnologist, 23: 861–879. 
Marx, Karl. 1978. ‘For a ruthless criticism of everything existing’, in Robert C. Tucker (ed.), The Marx-Engels
Reader (W.W. Norton: New York, NY). 
Neuwirth, Robert. 2006. Shadow Cities: A Billion Squatters, A New Urban World (Routledge: New York, NY). 
Rademacher, Anne. 2009. ‘When is housing an environmental problem? Reforming informality in
Kathmandu’, Current Anthropology, 20: 513–533. 
Roy, Ananya. 2011. ‘The blockade of the world-class city: Dialectical images of Indian urbanism’, in Ananya
Roy and Aihwa Ong (eds.), Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being Global (Wiley-Blackwell:
Malden, MA). 
Sassen, Saskia. 2005. ‘The global city: Introducing a concept’, The Brown Journal of World Affairs, XI:
27–43. 
Sassen, Saskia. 2014. Expulsions: Brutality and Complexity in the Global Economy (Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA). 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2013. ‘Post/socialist affect: Ruination and reconstruction of the nation in urban
Vietnam’, Cultural Anthropology, 28: 252–277. 
Siu, Helen. 2007. ‘Grounding displacement: Uncivil urban spaces in postreform South China’, American
Ethnologist, 34: 329–350. 
Smith, Neil. 2002. ‘New globalism, new urbanism: Gentrification as global urban strategy’, Antipode, 34:
427–450. 
Thrift, Nigel , and Dean Forbes . 1986. The Price of War: Urbanization in Vietnam: 1954–1985 (Allen &
Unwin: London). 
Truitt, Allison. 2008. ‘On the back of a motorbike: Middle-class mobility in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam’,
American Ethnologist, 35: 3–19. 
Waldrop, Anne. 2004. ‘Gating and class relations: The case of a New Delhi “colony”’, City & Society, 16:
93–116. 
Zhang, Li. 2010. In Search of Paradise: Middle-Class Living in a Chinese Metropolis (Cornell University
Press: Ithaca, NY). 
Zhang, Li , and Aihwa Ong . 2008. ‘Introduction: Privatizing China: Powers of the self, socialism from afar’, in
Privatizing China: Socialism From Afar (Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY). 
 
Beyond neoliberalism 
Allen, John. 2006. Ambient power: Berlin’s Potsdamer Platz and the seductive logic of public spaces. Urban
Studies 43 (2): 441–455. 
Bell, Rick , Lance Jay Brown , Lynne Elizabeth , and Ron Shiffman , eds. 2012. Beyond Zuccotti Park:
Freedom of Assembly and the Occupation of Public Space. Oakland, CA: New Village Press. 
Boyer, M. Christine. 1992. Cities for sale: Merchandising history at South Street Seaport. In Variations on a
Theme Park: The New American City and the End of Public Space. Ed. Michael Sorkin . New York, NY: Hill
and Wang. 
Brash, Julian. 2011. Bloomberg’s New York: Class and Governance in the Luxury City. Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press. Web. 
Chesluk, Benjamin. 2008. Money Jungle: Imagining the New Times Square. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press. 
Cranz, Galen. 1982. The Politics of Park Design: A History of Urban Parks in America. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. 
Crawford, Margaret. 1995. Contesting the public realm: Struggles over public space in Los Angeles. Journal
of Architectural Education (1984 –) 49 (1): 4–9. 
Deleuze, Gilles. 1990. Control and becoming: Gilles Deleuze in conversation with Antonio Negri. Futur
Anterieur 1. 
Deleuze, Gilles. 1992. Postscript on the societies of control. October 59: 3–7. 
Deleuze, Gilles. 1998. Having an idea in cinema. In Deleuze and Guattari: New Mappings in Politics,
Philosophy and Culture. Eds. Eleanor Kaufman and Kevin Jon Heller . Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press. 
Design Trust for Public Land . 2001. Public Space Makers: The Future of the High Line. New York, NY:
Design Trust for Public Land. 
Design Trust for Public Space . 2002. Reclaiming the High Line: A Project of the Design Trust for Public
Space, With Friends of the High Line. New York, NY: Ivy Hill Corporation. Web. 
Diller, Elizabeth and Damian Woetzel . 2013. “Reimagining Public Space: In Conversation with Architect
Elizabeth Diller.” Aspen, CO: Aspen Institute Arts Program. 
Field Operations, Diller Scofidio + Renfro, Friends of the High Line, and The City of New York . 2008.
Designing the High Line: Gansevoort Street to 30th Street. New York, NY: Friends of the High Line. 
Florida, Richard. 2005. Cities and the Creative Class. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Foderaro, Lisa. 2014. More New York City parks become retailers. The New York Times, December 18. 
Franklin, Seb. 2015. Control: Digitality as Cultural Logic. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Greif, Mark . 2010. What was the hipster? New York Magazine, October 24. 
Halle, David and Elisabeth Tiso . 2014. New York’s New Edge: Contemporary Art, the High Line, and Urban
Megaprojects on the Far West Side. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Harvey, David. 1989. The Urban Experience. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Holston, James. 1989. The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasília. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press. 
Hou, Jeffrey , ed. 2010. Insurgent Public Space: Guerrilla Urbanism and the Remaking of Contemporary
Cities. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Jacobs, Jane. 1992. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York, NY: Vintage. 
James Corner Field Operations . 2011. The High Line, Section 2 James Corner Field Operations. 
James Corner Field Operations and Diller, Scofidio + Renfro . 2015. The High Line. New York, NY: Phaidon. 
Jiménez, Alberto Corsín and Adolfo Estalella . 2013. The atmospheric person: Value, experiment, and
‘making neighbors’ in Madrid’s popular assemblies. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 3 (2): 119–139. 
Kohn, Margaret. 2004. Brave New Neighborhoods. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Lange, Alexandra. 2016. Play ground. The New Yorker, May 16. 
Larson, Scott. 2013. Building Like Moses With Jacobs in Mind. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press. 
Lazzarato, Maurizio. 2004. From capital-labour to capital-life. Ephemera: Theory and Politics in Organization
4(3): 187–208. 
Lazzarato, Maurizio , Paolo Virno , and Michae Hardy . 1996. Immaterial labour. In Radical Thought in Italy:
A Potential Politics. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Logan, John R. and Harvey L. Molotch . 1987. Urban Fortunes: The Political Economy of Place. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press. 
Loughran, Kevin. 2014. Parks for profit: The High Line, growth machines, and the uneven development of
urban public spaces. City & Community 13 (1): 49–68. 
Low, Setha M. 2000. On the Plaza: The Politics of Public Space and Culture. Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press. 
Low, Setha M. 2006. The erosion of public space and the public realm: Paranoia, surveillance and
privatization in New York City. City & Society 18 (1): 43–49. 
Low, Setha M. and Neil Smith , eds. 2006. The Politics of Public Space. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Low, Setha , Dana Taplin , and Suzanne Scheld . 2005. Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural
Diversity. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
Madden, David J. 2010. Revisiting the end of public space: Assembling the public in an urban park. City &
Community 9 (2): 187–207. 
Maskovsky, Jeff and Julian Brash . 2014. Governance: Beyond the neoliberal city. In A Companion to Urban
Anthropology. Ed. Don Nonini . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 
Miller, Kristine F. 2007. Designs on the Public: The Private Lives of New York’s Public Spaces. Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press. Web. 
Mitchell, Don. 2003. The Right to the City: Social Justice and the Fight for Public Space. New York, NY:
Guilford Press. 
New York City Economic Development Corporation . 2011. New York City parks and its impact on residential
property values. Economic Snapshot: A Summary of New York City’s Economy, August. 
Osborne, Thomas and Nikolas Rose . 1999. Governing cities: Notes on the spatialisation of virtue.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 17 (6): 737–760. 
Rosenzweig, Roy and Elizabeth Blackmar . 1992. The Park and the People: A History of Central Park.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Smith, Neil. 1996. The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City. New York, NY:
Routledge. 
Smith, Neil and Setha Low . 2006. Introduction: The imperative of public space. In The Politics of Public
Space. Eds. Setha Low and Neil Smith . New York, NY: Routledge. 
Sorkin, Michael , ed. 1992. Variations on a Theme Park: The New American City and the End of Public
Space. New York, NY: Hill and Wang. 
Staeheli, Lynn A. and Don Mitchell . 2008. The People’s Property?: Power, Politics, and the Public.
Illustrated ed. New York, NY: Routledge. 
 
The semiotics of urbanness 
Backhaus, Peter. 2006. Multilingualism in Tokyo: A look into the linguistic landscape. International Journal of
Multilingualism 3(1): 52–66. 
Beauregard, Robert A. 1986. The chaos and complexity of gentrification. In Smith, Neil , and Peter Williams
(eds.). Gentrification of the city. Winchester, MA: Allen and Unwin. 35–55. 
Beauregard, Robert A. 1989. Voices of decline. The postwar fate of US cities. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Beauregard, Robert A. 1995. If only the city could speak: The politics of representation. In Liggett, Helen ,
and David C. Perry (eds.). Spatial practices: Critical exploration in social/spatial theory. London: Sage.
59–80. 
Bechtel, Nick. 2016. Mall brawl: More than a dozen fight at Easton Town Center. NBC4i.com.
http://www.nbc4i.com/news/mall-brawl-more-than-a-dozen-fight-at-easton-town-center/1114426357.
Accessed 6/1/2016. 
Ben Rafael , Eliezer, Elana Shohamy , Muhammad Amara , and Nira Trumper-Hecht . 2006. Linguistic
landscape as symbolic construction of the public space: The case of Israel. International Journal of
Multilingualism 3(1): 7–30. 
Bilaniuk, Laada. 2005. Contested tongues: Language politics and cultural correction in Ukraine. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press. 
Blommaert, Jan. 2013. Ethnography, superdiversity and linguistic landscapes. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
Blommaert, Jan , and Jef Verschueren . 1991. The pragmatics of minority politics in Belgium. Language i
Society 20: 503–531. 
Bohl, Charles C. 2003. The return of the town center. Wharton Real Estate Review Spring: 54–70. 
Cameron, Deborah. 2000. Good to talk? Living and working in a communication culture. London: Sage. 
Cameron, Deborah. 2001. Working with spoken discourse. London: Sage. 
Carman, Tim. 2016. For some growers, farmers’ markets just aren’t what they used to be. Washington Post,
June 21. www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/food/for-some-growers-farmers-markets-just-arent-what-they-
used-to-be/2016/06/21/c5d93644–3271–11e6–8758-d58e76e11b12_story.html. Accessed 6/21/2016. 
Choi, Jennifer. 2002. Protest reaction. www.oocities.org/tarorg/protestreaction.html. Accessed 6/1/2016. 
Crawford, Margaret. 1992. The world in a shopping mall. In Sorkin, Michael (ed.). Variations on a theme
park: The new American city and the end of public space. New York, NY: Hill and Wang. 3–30. 
Davis, Mike. 1992. Fortress Los Angeles: The militarization of urban space. In Sorkin, Michael (ed.).
Variations on a theme park: The new American city and the end of public space. New York, NY: Hill and
Wang. 154–180. 
District of Columbia Office of Planning . 1989. Chinatown Design Review Guidelines.
http://planning.dc.gov/planning/frames.asp?doc=/planning/lib/planning/Chinatown_Design_Gidelines.pdf. 
The Easton Story. 2016. http://eastontowncenter.com/guest-information/the-easton-story. Accessed
5/31/2016. 
Eisinger, Peter. 2000. The politics of bread and circuses: Building the city for the visitor class. Urban Affairs
Review 35(3): 316–333. 
Fairclough, Norman. 2001. Language and power, 2nd ed. Essex: Longman. 
Foucault, Michel. 1972. The archaeology of knowledge and the discourse on language. New York, NY:
Pantheon. 
Fyfe, Nicholas R. , and Jon Bannister . 1998. ‘The eyes upon the street’: Closed-circuit television
surveillance and the city. In Fyfe, Nicholas R. (ed.). Images of the street: Planning, identity and control in
public space. London: Routledge. 254–267. 
Gee, James Paul. 1990. Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in Discourses. London: Falmer Press. 
Gillem, Mark. 2009. Make-believe streets: Hyperreality and the lifestyle center. Traditional Dwellings and
Settlements Review 20(2): 13–26.
Habermas, Jürgen. 1989 [1962]. The structural transformation of the public sphere: An inquiry into a
category of bourgeois society. Burger, Thomas (trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Heller, Monica , Joan Pujolar , and Alexendre Duchêne . 2014. Linguistic commodification in tourism. Journal
of Sociolinguistics 18(4): 539–566. 
Huebner, Thom. 2006. Bangkok’s linguistic landscapes: Environmental print, codemixing, and language
change. The International Journal of Multilingualism 3(1): 31–51. 
Inoue, Miyako. 2006. Vicarious language: Gender and linguistic modernity in Japan. Berkeley: University of
California Press. 
Jackson, Peter. 1998. Domesticating the street: The contested spaces of the high street and the mall. In
Fyfe, Nicholas R. (ed.). Images of the street: Planning, identity and control in public space. London:
Routledge. 176–191. 
Jaworski, Adam , and Crispin Thurlow . 2010. Introducing semiotic landscapes. In Jaworsi, Adam , and
Crispin Thurlow (eds.). Semiotic landscapes: Language, image, space. London: Continuum. 1–40. 
Kallen, Jeffrey. 2008. Tourism and representation in the Irish linguistic landscape. In Shohamy, Elana , and
Durk Gorter (eds.). Linguistic landscapes: Expanding the scenery. New York, NY: Routledge. 270–283. 
Kress, Gunther , and Theo van Leeuwen . 2001. Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of
contemporary communication. London: Arnold. 
Landry, Rodrigue , and Richard Y. Bourhis . 1997. Linguistic landscape and ethnolinguistic vitality: An
empirical study. Journal of Language and Social Psychology 16(1): 23–49. 
Leeman, Jennifer , and Gabriella Modan . 2009. Commodified language in Chinatown: A contextualized
approach to linguistic landscape. Journal of Sociolinguistics 13(3): 332–362. 
Leeman, Jennifer , and Gabriella Modan . 2010a. Trajectories of language: Orders of indexical meaning in
Washington, DC’s Chinatown. In Guggenheim, Michael , and Ola Söderström (eds.). Re-shaping cities: How
global mobility transforms architecture and urban form. London: Routledge. 167–188. 
Leeman, Jennifer , and Gabriella Modan . 2010b. Selling the city: Language, ethnicity, and commodified
space. In Shohamy, Elana , Eliezer Ben Rafael , and Monica Barni (eds.). Linguistic landscape in the city.
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 182–197. 
Lees, Loretta. 1998. Urban renaissance and the street: Spaces of control and contestation. In Fyfe, Nicholas
R. (ed.). Images of the street: Planning, identity and control in public space. London: Routledge. 236–253. 
Lees, Loretta. 2004. Urban geography: Discourse analysis and urban research. Progress in Human
Geography 28(1): 101–107. 
Ley, David. 1997. The new middle class and the remaking of the central city. Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 
Low, Setha. 2017. Spatializing culture: The ethnography of space and place. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Main Street America . The main street approach. www.mainstreet.org/main-street/about-main-street/main-
street-america/the-main-street-approach.html. Accessed 5/1/2017. 
McConnell-Ginet, Sally. 2008. Words in the world: How and why meanings can matter. Language 84(3):
497–527. 
Mele, Christopher. 2000. Selling the Lower East Side: Culture, real estate, and resistance in New York City.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Miller, Alan D. 1992. Wexner project to begin. The Columbus Dispatch, September 3. A1. 
Modan, Gabriella. 2007. Turf wars: Discourse, diversity and the politics of place. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Modan, Gabriella. 2008. Mango fufu kimchi yucca: The depoliticization of ‘diversity’ in Washington, DC
discourse. City and Society 20(2): 188–221. 
Modan, Gabriella , and Katie J. Wells . 2016. Representations of change: Gentrification in the media. In
Hyra, Derek , and Sabiyha Prince (eds.). Capital dilemma: Growth and inequality in Washington, DC. New
York, NY: Routledge. 315–330. 
Muth, Sebastian. 2015. Language removal, commodification and the negotiation of cultural identity in
Nagorno-Karabakh. In Rubdy, Rani , and Selim Ben Said (eds.). Conflict, exclusion and dissent in the
linguistic landscape. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 77–100. 
National Trust for Historic Preservation . The main street approach. www.preservationnation.org/main-
street/about-main-street/main-street-america/Four-Point-Language-10-19.pdf. Accessed 7/1/2016. 
Ochs, Elinor. 1992. Indexing gender. In Alessandro Duranti and Charles Goodwin (eds.). Rethinking context:
Language as an interactive phenomenon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 335–358. 
Papen, Uta. 2015. Signs in cities: The discursive production and commodification of urban spaces.
Sociolinguistic Studies 9(1): 1–267. 
Pavlenko, Aneta. 2012. Transgression as the norm: Russian in the linguistic landscape of Kyiv, Ukraine. In
Gurter, Dork , Heiko Marten , and Luk van Mensel (eds.). Minority languages in the linguistic landscape.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 36–56. 
Ritzer, George , Michael Ryan , and Jeffrey Stepnisky . 2005. Transformations in consumer settings:
Landscapes and beyond. In S. Ratneshwar and David Glen Mick (eds.). Inside consumption: Consumer
motives, goals, and desires. London: Routledge. 292–308. 
Rubdy, Rani. 2015. Conflict and exclusion: The linguistic landscape as an area of contestation. In Rubdy,
Rani , and Selim Ben Said (eds.). Conflict, exclusion and dissent in the linguistic landscape. Basingstoke:
Pal-grave Macmillan. 1–24. 
Schaller, Susanna , and Gabriella Modan . 2005. Contesting public space and citizenship: Implications for
neighborhood Business Improvement Districts. Journal of Planning Education and Research 24: 394–407. 
Schiffrin, Deborah. 1994. Approaches to discourse. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Scollon, Ron , and Suzanne Wong Scollon . 2003. Discourses in place: Language in the material world. New
York, NY: Routledge. 
Shankar, Shalini , and Jillian Cavanaugh . 2012. Language and materiality in global capitalism. Annual
Review of Anthropology 41: 355–369. 
Silverstein, Michael. 1976. Shifters, linguistic categories, and cultural description. In Keith H. Basso and
Henry A. Selby (eds.). Meaning in anthropology. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 11–55. 
Sindle, Shell. 2016. Facebook commentary and video.
www.facebook.com/shell.sindle/videos/10206377746104137/. Accessed 6/1/2016. 
Smith, Neil. 1986. Gentrification, the frontier, and the restructuring of urban space. In Smith, Neil , and Peter
Williams (eds.). Gentrification of the city. Winchester, MA: Allen and Unwin. 15–34. 
Smith, Neil . 1992. New city, new frontier: The Lower East Side as Wild, Wild West. In Sorkin, Michael (ed.).
Variations on a theme park: The new American city and the end of public space. New York, NY: Hill and
Wang. 
Sorkin, Michael. 1992. See you in Disneyland. In Sorkin, Michael (ed.). Variations on a theme park: The new
American city and the end of public space. New York, NY: Hill and Wang. 205–232. 
Talbot, Mary. 1995. A synthetic sisterhood: false friends in a teenage magazine. In Hall, Kira , and Mary
Bucholtz (eds.). Gender articulated: Language and the socially constructed self. New York, NY: Routledge.
143–165. 
Thurlow, Crispin , and Adam Jaworski . 2010. Tourism discourse: Language and global mobility.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Wells, Kathryn J. 2004. Easton town center: Creation of the retail public-esque. Unpublished thesis.
Department of Comparative Studies, The Ohio State University. Columbus. 
www.eastonway.com/. Accessed 8/14/2016. 
www.eastonway.com/easton-mome-maven-open-call. Accessed 8/14/2016. 
www.facebook.com/EastonTownCenter/. Accessed 8/14/2016. 
Zukin, Sharon. 1995. The cultures of cities. Cambridge, UK: Blackwell. 
Zukin, Sharon. 1998. Urban lifestyles: Diversity and standardization in spaces of consumption. Urban
Studies 35(5–6): 825–839. 
 
Governing through garbage 
Alexander, Catherine and Joshua Reno , eds. 2012. Economies of Recycling: The Global Transformation of
Materials, Values and Social Relations. New York, NY: Zed Books. 
Bauman, Zygmunt. 2003. Wasted Lives: Modernity and Its Outcasts. New York, NY: Wiley. 
Braun, Bruce , and Sarah J. Whitmore , eds. 2010. Political Matter: Technoscience, Democracy and Public
Life. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Butler, Judith. 2015. Notes Towards a Performative Theory of Assembly. Harvard, MA: Harvard University
Press. 
Chalfin, Brenda. 2014. “Public Things, Excremental Politics, and the Infrastructure of Bare Life in Ghana’s
City of Tema.” American Ethnologist 41(1): 92–109. 
Chatterjee, Partha. 2004. The Politics of the Governed: Reflections on Popular Politics in Most of the World.
New York, NY: Columbia University Press. 
DiGregorio, Michael. 1994. Urban Harvest: Recycling as a Peasant Industry in Northern Vietnam. Honolulu,
HI: East-West Center. 
Dillon, Lindsey. 2014. “Race, Waste, and Space: Brownfield Redevelopment and Environmental Justice at
the Hunters Point Shipyard.” Antipode 46(5): 1205–1221. 
Douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. New York, NY:
Routledge. 
Fahmi, Wael and Keith Sutton . 2010. “Cairo’s Contested Garbage: Sustainable Solid Waste Management
and the Zabaleen’s Right to the City.” Sustainability 2(6): 1765-1783.
Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: Birth of the Prison. Alan Sheridan , trans. New York, NY:
Vintage Books. 
Fredericks, Rosalind. 2014. “Vital Infrastructures of Trash in Dakar.” Comparative Studies of South Asia,
Africa and the Middle East 34(3): 532–548. 
Gandy, Matthew. 2006. “The Bacteriological City and its Discontents.” Historical Geography 34: 14–25. 
Gidwani, Vinay. 2010. “Remaindered Things and Remaindered Lives: Travelling With Delhi’s Waste.” In
Finding Delhi: Loss and Renewal in the Megacity. Bharati Chaturvedi , ed. New York, NY: Viking Penguin.
Pp. 37–54. 
Gidwani, Vinay and Rajyashree N. Reddy . 2011. “The Afterlives of ‘Waste’: Notes From India for a Minor
History of Capitalist Surplus.” Antipode 43(5): 1625–1658. 
Gille, Zsuzsa. 2007. From the Cult of Waste to the Trash Heap of History: The Politics of Waste in Socialist
and Postsocialist Hungary. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. 
Gonzalez, Vernadette Vicuña. 2013. Securing Paradise: Tourism and Militarism in Hawai’i and the
Philippines. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Harms, Erik. 2012. “Beauty as Control in the New Saigon: Eviction, New Urban Zones, and Atomized
Dissent in a Southeast Asian City.” American Ethnologist 39(4): 735–750. 
Hawkins, Gay. 2005. The Ethics of Waste: How We Relate to Rubbish. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield. 
Kim, Annette . 2015. Sidewalk City: Remapping Public Space in Ho Chi Minh City. Chicago, IL: Chicago
University Press. 
Lea, Tess and Paul Pholeros . 2010. “This Is Not a Pipe: The Treacheries of Indigenous Housing.” Public
Culture 22(1): 187–209. 
Leshkowich, Ann Marie. 2005. “Feminine Disorder: State Campaigns Against Street Traders in Socialist and
Late Socialist Vietnam.” In Le Việt Nam au féminin. Việt Nam: Women’s Realities. Gisèle Bousquet and Nora
Taylor , eds. Paris: Les Indes Savantes. Pp. 187–207. 
Low, Setha. 2015. “Public Space and the Public Sphere: The Legacy of Neil Smith.” Antipode 49(S1):
153–170. 
Millar, Kathleen M. 2014. “The Precarious Present: Wageless Labor and Disrupted Life in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.” Cultural Anthropology 29(1): 32–53. 
Mitchell, Carrie L. 2008. “Altered Landscapes, Altered Livelihoods: The Shifting Experience of Informal
Waste Collecting During Hanoi’s Urban Transition.” Geoforum 39(6): 2019–2029. 
Moore, Sarah A. 2009. “The Excess of Modernity: Garbage Politics in Oaxaca Mexico.” The Professional
Geographer 61(4): 426–437. 
Morrison, Susan S. 2015. The Literature of Waste: Material Ecopoetics and Ethical Matter. New York, NY:
Palgrave. 
Myers, Fred R. , ed. 2002. The Empire of Things: Regimes of Value and Material Culture. Santa Fe, NM:
SAR Press. 
Nguyen, Minh T.N. 2016. “Trading in Broken Things: Gendered Performances and Spatial Practices in a
Northern Vietnamese Rural-Urban Waste Economy.” American Ethnologist 43(1): 116–129. 
Nguyễn Thị Thanh Mỹ . 2015. “Hiến kế xử lý nạn xả rác” [Strategies for handling litter]. Tuổi Trẻ [Youth],
December 1, p. 9. 
Pelkmans, Mathijs. 2013. “Ruins of Hope in a Kyrgyz Post-Industrial Wasteland.” Anthropology Today 29(5):
17–21. 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2006. “Recombinant History: Transnational Practices of Memory and Knowledge
Production in Contemporary Vietnam.” Cultural Anthropology 21(1): 3–30. 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2013a. “War Debris in Postwar Society: Managing Risk and Uncertainty in the Former
DMZ.” In Interactions With a Violent Past: Reading Post-Conflict Landscapes in Cambodia, Laos, and
Vietnam. Vatthana Pholsena and Oliver Tappe , eds. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press. Pp.
135–156. 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2013b. “Post/Socialist Affect: Ruination and Reconstruction of the Nation in Urban
Vietnam.” Cultural Anthropology 28(2): 252–277. 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2015a. “Reclaiming Rights to the Socialist City: Bureaucratic Artefacts and the
Affective Appeal of Petitions.” Special issue on Porous Enclaves. South East Asia Research 23(2): 205–225. 
Schwenkel, Christina. 2015b. “Spectacular Infrastructure and Its Breakdown in Socialist Vietnam.” American
Ethnologist 42(3): 520–534. 
Tủ An . 1981. “Xây dựng nếp sống mới ở tiểu khu Quang Trung [Building a new lifestyle in Quang Trung].
Nghệ Tĩnh News, May 26, p. 4. 
Uỷ Ban Nhân Dân Thành Phố Vinh [Municipal People’s Committee] . 1997. Báo cáo hiện trạng thu gom –
vận chuyển và xử lý chất thải rắn ở thành phố Vinh, Nghệ An [Report on the current condition of collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste in Vinh City]. Vinh City: Commission for External Relations.
African materiality and the house 
Al-Hassan, Abubakr 1980 The Impact of Modernization on the Traditional Structure of Settlements in
Northern Ghana 1400–1980, PhD Dissertation, Geographical Institute, University of Copenhagen. 
Appadurai, Arjun 1996 Modernity at Large. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony 1992 In My Father’s House: Africa in the Philosophy of Culture. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony 1997 “Cosmopolitan Patriots” Critical Inquiry Vol. 23, No. 3: 617–639. 
Appiah, Kwame Anthony 2006 Cosmopolitanism: Ethnics in a World of Strangers. New York, NY: Norton. 
Bourdieu, Pierre 1970 “The Berber House or the World Reversed” Social Science Information Vol. 9:
151–170. 
Bourdieu, Pierre 1984 Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste, trans. Richard Nice .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Buchli, Victor 2002 “Architecture and the Domestic Sphere” In V. Buchli , ed. The Material Culture Reader.
Oxford: Berg, pp. 207–236. 
Buchli, Victor 2010 “Household and ‘Home Cultures’” In D. Hicks and M.C. Beaudry , eds. The Oxford
Handbook of Material Culture Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 502–517. 
Caravanos, Jack , Edith Clark , Richard Fuller , and Callah Lambertson 2011 “Assessing Worker and
Environmental Chemical Exposure Risks at an e-Waste Recycling and Disposal Site in Accra, Ghana.”
Journal of Health and Pollution 1, 1: 16–25. 
Cohen, Abner 1969 Custom and Politics in Urban Africa. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Coquery-Vidrovitch, Catherine 1991 “The Process of Urbanisation in Africa: From the Origins to the
Beginning of Independence” African Studies Review Vol. 34, No. 1: 1–98. 
Dant, Tim 1999 Material Culture in the Social World: Values, Activities, Lifestyles. Maidenhead: Open
University Press. 
Dant, Tim 2005 Material Culture in the Social World: Values, Activities, Lifestyles. Buckingham, UK: Open
University Press. 
De Boeck, Filip 2002 “Tales of the ‘Invisible City’ & the Second World” In O. Enweazor eds. Under Siege:
Four African Cities. Freetown, Johannesburg, Kinshasa & Lagos. Kassel: Hatje Cantz Publishers. 
De Bruijin, Marjam , Rijk van Dijk , and Dick Focken , eds. 2001 Mobile Africa: Changing Patterns of
Movement in African and Beyond. Leiden: Brill. 
Eisenstadt, Shmuel N. 2000 “Multiple Modernities” In S. N. Eisenstadt , ed. Multiple Modernities. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 1–29. 
Ferguson, James 1999 Expectations of Modernity: Myths and Meanings of Urban Life on the Zambian
Copperbelt. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Ferguson, James 2006 Global Shadows: Africa in the Neoliberal World Order. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press. 
Foucault, Michel 1986 “Space, Knowledge, and Power” In P. Rabinow, ed. The Foucault Reader: An
Introduction to Foucault’s Thought. London: Harmondsworth, pp. 239–256. 
Fried, Marc 1966 “Grieving for a Lost Home: Psychological Costs of Relocation” In James Q. Wilson , ed.
Urban Renewal: The Record and Controversy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 359–379. 
Giddens, Anthony 1990 The Consequences of Modernity. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Graeber, David 2008 “On Cosmopolitan and (Vernacular) Democratic Creativity, or There Never Was a
West” In P. Werbner , ed. Anthropology and the New Cosmopolitanism: Rooted, Feminist and Vernacular
Perspectives. ASA Monograph 45. Oxford: Berg, pp. 281–308. 
Grant, Richard 2009 Globalizing City: The Urban and Economic Transformation of Accra, Ghana. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press. 
Hall, Edward T. 1969 The Hidden Dimension. New York, NY: Doubleday Anchor. 
Hall, Stuart in Conversation with Pnina Werbner 2008 “Cosmopolitanism, Globalisation and Diaspora, March
2006” In Pnina Werbner , ed. Anthropology and the New Cosmopolitanism. Oxford: Berg, pp. 345–360. 
Hannerz, Ulf 1996 Transnational Connections: Culture, People, Places. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Hannerz, Ulf 2005 “Two Faces of Cosmopolitanism: Culture and Politics” Statsvetenkaplig Tidskrift Vol. 107,
No. 3: 199–213. 
Hodder, Ian 2012 Entangled: An Archaeology of the Relationships Between Humans and Things.
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Hodgson, Dorothy L. 2001 “Of Modernity/Modernities, Gender, and Ethnography” In D. L. Hodgson , ed.
Gendered Modernities: Ethnographic Perspectives. New York, NY: Palgrave, pp. 1–23. 
Horstmann, Alexander 1999 “Communities of Practice, Communities of Interest: The Making of Consumers
in Southern Thailand” In Richard Fardon , Wim van Binsbergen and Rijk van Dijk , eds. Modernity on a
Shoestring: Dimensions of Globalization, Consumption and Development in Africa and Beyond. Leiden:
EIDOS, pp. 281–302.
King, Anthony D. 1984 The Bungalow. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
Knauft, Bruce 2002 “Introduction: Critically Modern” In Bruce Knauft , ed. critically Modern: Alternatives,
Alterities, Anthropologies. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University, pp. 1–54. 
Krishna Menon, A. G. 2001 “Thinking ‘Indian’ Architecture” In A. Piotrowski and Julia Robinson , eds. The
Discipline of Architecture. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 208–234. 
Lawrence-Zuniga, Denise , and Pellow, Deborah 2008 “The Self-Consciousness of Placemaking.”
Anthropology News 49, 9: 4–5. 
Low, Setha 2009 “Towards an Anthropological Theory of Space and Place” Semiotica Vol. 175–1, No. 4:
21–37. 
Marris, Peter 1966 Family and Social Change in an African City: A Study of Rehousing in Lagos. London:
Rout-ledge and Kegan Paul. 
Mbembe, Achille 2008 [2002] “The New Africans: Between Nativism and Cosmopolitanism” In P. Geschiere ,
B. Meyer and P. Pels , eds. Readings in Modernity in Africa. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, pp.
107–111. 
Miller, Daniel 2010 Stuff. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Moore, Henrietta L. 1986 Space, Text and Gender: An Anthropological Study of the Marakwet of Kenya.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Moughtin, J.C. 1985 Hausa Architecture. London: Ethnographica. 
Mudimbe, Valentine Y. 1988 The Invention of Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and the Order of Knowledge.
Bloomington, IN: University of Indiana Press. 
Nyamnjoh, Francis 2002 “‘A Child Is One Person’s Only in the Womb’: Domestication, Agency and
Subjectivity in the Cameroonian Grassfields” In R. Werbner , ed. Postcolonial Subjectivities in Africa.
London: Zed, pp. 111–138. 
Packer, George 2006 “The Megacity: Decoding the Chaos of Lagos” The New Yorker. November 30. 
Pellow, Deborah 1987 “Solidarity Among Muslim Women in Accra, Ghana” Anthropos Vol. 82: 489–506. 
Pellow, Deborah 1988 “What Housing Does: Changes in an Accra Community” Architecture and Behaviour
Vol. 4, No. 3: 213–228. 
Pellow, Deborah 1992 “Spaces that Teach: Attachment to the African Compound” In I. Altman and S.M. Low
, eds. Place Attachment. Human Behavior and Environment. Vol 12. New York, NY: Plenum Press, pp.
187–210. 
Pellow, Deborah 2003 “New Spaces in Accra: Transnational Houses” City & Society Vol. XV, No. 1: 59–86. 
Pellow, Deborah 2008 Landlords and Lodgers: Socio-Spatial Organization in an Accra Zongo. Paperback
edition. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Pellow, Deborah 2011 “Internal Transmigrants: A Dagomba Diaspora” American Ethnologist Vol. 38, No. 1:
132–147. 
Pellow, Deborah 2015 “Multiple Modernities: Kitchens for an African Elite” Home Cultures Vol. 12, No. 1:
55–81. 
Pink, Sarah 2012 Situating Everyday Life: Practices and Places. Los Angeles, CA: Sage. 
Piot, Charles 1999 Remotely Global: Village Modernity in West Africa. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press. 
Prussin, Labelle 1970 “Sudanese Architecture and the Manding” African Arts Vol. 3, No. 4: 12–19, 64–67. 
PuruShotam, Nirmala 1998 “Between Compliance and Resistance: Women and the Middle-Class Way of
Life in Singapore” In K. Sen and M. Stivens , eds. Gender and Power in Affluent Asia. London: Routledge,
pp. 127–166. 
Quayson, Ato 2014 Oxford Street Accra: City Life and the Itineraries of Transnationalism. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Rappoport, Amos 1969 House, Form and Culture. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Simone, AbdouMalique 2001 “On the Worlding of African Cities” African Studies Review Vol. 44, No. 2:
15–41. 
Simone, AbdouMalique 2004 For the City Yet to Come: Changing African Life in Four Cities. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. 
Tranberg-Hansen, Karen 2000 Salaula: The World of Secondhand Clothing and Zambia. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. 
Tranberg-Hansen, Karen and Vaa, Mariken 2004 “Introduction” In K. Tranberg Hansen and M. Vaa , eds.
Reconsidering Informality: Perspectives From Urban Africa. Uppsala: Nordiska Afrikainstitutet, pp. 7–24. 
Tsing, Anna 2005 Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Weiss, Brad 2009 Street Dreams and Hip Hop Barbershops: Global Fantasy in Urban Tanzania.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. 
Werbner, Pnina , and Tariq Modood 1997 Debating Cultural Hybridity: Multi-cultural Identities and the Politics
of Anti-racism. London: Zed Books.
Works, John A., Jr. 1976. Pilgrims in a Strange Land: Hausa Communities in Chad. New York, NY: Columbia
University Press. 
 
The past and the future of ritualized sociality in open urban spaces 
Çelik, Zeynep . 1986. The Remaking of Istanbul: Portrait of an Ottoman City in the Nineteenth Century.
Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press. 
Debie, Franck. 1993. Une Forme Urbaine du Premier Age Touristique: Les Promenades Littorales.
Mappemonde, 93.1: 32–37. 
Del Negro, Giovanna P. and Harris M. Berger 2001. Character Divination and Kinetic Sculpture in the
Central Italian Passeggiata (Ritual Promenade): Interpretive Frameworks and Expressive Practices From a
Body-centered Perspective. Journal of American Folklore, 114.451: 5–15. 
Domosh, Mona. 1998. Those ‘Gorgeous Incongruities’: Polite Politics and Public Space on the Streets of
Nineteenth Century New York City. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 88.2: 209–226. 
Gavrilova, Rayna. 2003. Historische Anthropologie der Stadt. In: Karl Kaser , Siegfried Gruber , Robert
Pichler (eds.), Historische Anthropologie im Sudostlichen Europa. Eine Einfuhrung. Wien-Koln-Weimar:
Bohlau Verlag: 269–289. 
Gavrilović, Ljiljana. 1984. Korzo – iskazivanje generacijske polarizacije u strukturi grada [Corso – The
Expression of Generational Polarization in the Town Social Structure], Etnološke sveske, 5: 33–37. 
Gyaĕni, Gaĕbor. 2004. Identity and Urban Experience – Fin-de-siecle Budapest. Boulder, CO: Social
Science Monograph; Wayne, NJ: Center for Hungarian Studies and Publications. 
Herzfeld, Michael. 1997. Cultural Intimacy: Social Poetics in the Nation State. London: Routledge. 
Jerman, Katja. 2003. Promenada v Ljubljani. Ljubljana: Viharnik. 
Lawrence, Henry. W. 1988. Origins of the Tree-Lined Boulevard. The Geographical Review, 78.4: 355–374. 
Low, Setha. 2017. Spatializing Culture. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Mišetić, Anka. 1997. Socijalne značajke Rive u ž ivotu grada – primjer Splita [The Social Characteristics of
the Coastal Promenade in the Life of a Town. The Case of Split]. Društvena istraž ivanja, 6.1(27): 71–87. 
Rotenberg, Robert. 1992. Time and Order in Metropolitan Vienna: A Seizure of Schedules. Washington D.C.
and London: Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Scobey, David. 1992. Anatomy of the Promenade: The Politics of Bourgeois Sociability in Nineteenth-
Century New York. Social History, 17.2: 203–227. 
Skok, Petar. 1971. Etimologijski rječnik hrvatskoga ili srpskoga jezika 1 [Etimological Dictionary of Croatian
or Serbian Language 1]. Zagreb: Jugoslovenska akademija nauka i umjetnosti. 
Telste, Kari. 2002. Karl Johan’s Gate around 1900. Gender, Space and Moral Boundaries, Tidsskrift for
samfunnsforskning, 43.3: 361–380. 
Vučinić, Vesna. 1994. Dubrovački Stradun kao korzo i njegova socijalna segmentacija [Stradun as the Corso
and Its Social Segmentation], Zbornik Filozofskog fakulteta, Serija A: Istorijske nauke 18, Spomenica
Radovnu Samardž iću, 423–441. 
Vučinić, Vesna. 1999. Prostorno ponašanje u Dubrovniku: antropološka studija grada sa ortogonalnom
strukturom [Spatial Behaviour in Dubrovnik: An Anthropological Study of a City With Orthogonal Stucture].
Beograd: Filozofski fakultet Univerziteta u Beogradu. 
Vučinić, Vesna and Smiljana Antonijević . 1998. Društvena funkcija i simbolika beogradskog korzoa u vreme
Kraljevine Jugoslavije (1931–1941), [Social Function and Symbolism of the Belgrade Corso during the
Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1931–1941)]. Glasnik Etnografskog instituta Srpske akademije nauka i umetnosti,
47: 85–101. 
Vučinić-Nešković, Vesna and Jelena Miloradović . 2006. Corso as a Total Social Phenomenon: The Case of
Smederevska Palanka, Serbia. Ethnologia Balkanica, 10: 229–250. 
Vujaklija, Milan. 1972. Leksikon stranih reči i izraza [Lexicon of Foreign Words and Idioms]. Beograd:
Prosveta. 
All the BA theses listed below have been submitted and defended at the Department for Ethnology and
Anthropology, University of Belgrade. 
Banović, Branko. 2004. Korzo u Pljevljima. (Also published as: Banović, Branko. 2014. Pljevaljski korzo
(1930–2004): Pljevlja, Zavičajni muzej). 
Ilić, Jovana. 2010. Korzo u Mladenovcu nakon Drugog svetskog rata: etnološki pregled. 
Luburić, Vera. 2009. Korzo u Nikšiću (1930–2007). 
Miloradović, Jelena. 2001. Korzo u Smederevskoj Palanci (1930–2001). 
Radić, Andrijana. 2012. Uticaj promena u strukturi grada na prostorno ponašanje na korzou: primer Vršca.
Rudnjanin, Višnja. 2007. Korzo u Zemunu (1935–1980). 
Savičić, Grozdana. 2006. Korzo u Pančevu u prvoj polovini 20. veka. 
Stojković, Maja. 2010. Korzo u Prištini (1930–2008). 
 
Financialization and shifting urban growth regimes in Hong Kong and China 
Aalbers, M. B. 2015. The Great Moderation, the Great Excess and the global housing crisis. International
Journal of Housing Policy, 15, 43–60. 
Aalbers, M. B. and Christophers, B. 2014. Centering housing in political economy. Housing, Theory and
Society, 31, 373–394. 
Aglietta, M. 1998. Capitalism at the turn of the century: Regulation theory and the challenge of social
change. New Left Review, 232, 41–90. 
Ailon, G. 2015. Rethinking calculation: The popularization of financial trading outside the global centres of
finance. Economy and Society, 44, 592–615. 
Boyer, R. 2000. Is a finance-led growth regime a viable alternative to Fordism? A preliminary analysis.
Economy and Society, 29, 111–145. 
Castells, M. , Goh, L. and Kwok, R. Y.-W. 1990. The Shekkipmei Syndrome: Economic Development and
Public Housing in Hong Kong and Singapore, London, Pion. 
Chiu, S. and Lui, T. L. 2009. Hong Kong: Becoming a Chinese Global City, New York, Routledge. 
Christophers, B. 2015. The limits to financialization. Dialogues in Human Geography, 5, 183–200. 
Dunford, M. 1990. Theories of regulation. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 8, 297–322. 
Economist, The . 2016. Financial stability: Minsky’s moment. The Economist, July 30, 54–55. 
Firth, R. and Yamey, B. S. (eds.). 2013 [1964]. Capital, Saving and Credit in Peasant Societies: Studies
From Asia, Oceania, the Caribbean and Middle America. Reprinted, originally published 1964, New York,
Routledge. 
Florida, R. and Feldman, M. 1988. Housing in US Fordism: The class accord and postwar spatial
organization. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 12, 187–210. 
Forrest, R. 2015. The ongoing financialisation of home ownership – New times, new contexts. International
Journal of Housing Policy, 15, 1–5. 
Forrest, R. and Kennett, P. 1997. Risk, residence, and the post-Fordist city. American Behavioral Scientist,
41, 342–360. 
Froud, J. , Haslam, C. , Johal, S. and Williams, K. 2000. Shareholder value and financialization: Consultancy
promises, management moves. Economy and Society, 29, 80–110. 
Gluckman, M. 1964. Closed Systems and Open Minds: The Limits of Naivety in Social Anthropology,
Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd. 
Golomski, C. 2015. Compassion technology: Life insurance and the remaking of kinship in Swaziland’s age
of HIV. American Ethnologist, 42, 81–96. 
Graeber, D. 2014. Debt-Updated and Expanded: The First 5,000 Years, Brooklyn, Melville House. 
Harris, R. 2004. Creeping Conformity: How Canada Became Suburban, 1900–1960, Toronto, University of
Toronto Press. 
Hart, K. and Ortiz, H. 2014. The anthropology of money and finance: Between ethnography and world
history. Annual Review of Anthropology, 43, 465–482. 
Haugerud, A. 2013. No Billionaire Left Behind: Satirical Activism in America, Stanford, Stanford University
Press. 
Heyman, J. M. and Smart, A. 1999. States and illegal practices: An overview. In: Heyman, J. M. (ed.). States
and Illegal Practices: An Overview, Oxford, Berg. 
Ho, K. 2009. Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street, Durham, Duke University Press. 
Jessop, B. 2000. The crisis of the national spatio-temporal fix and the tendential ecological dominance of
globalizing capitalism. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 24, 323–360. 
Kalb, D. 2013. Financialization and the capitalist moment: Marx versus Weber in the anthropology of global
systems. American Ethnologist, 40, 258–266. 
Lazonick, W. and O’Sullivan, M. 2000. Maximizing shareholder value: A new ideology for corporate
governance. Economy and Society, 29, 13–35. 
Lee, J. 1999. Housing, Home Ownership and Social Change in Hong Kong, Aldershot, Ashgate. 
Lee, K. M. and Cheng, C. Y. 2011. Financialization, economic crises and social protection: The case of Hong
Kong. Journal of Asian Public Policy, 4, 18–41. 
Low, S. 2003. Behind the Gates: The New American Dream – Searching for Security in America, New York,
Routledge.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 2002. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and
Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. London: Routledge. 
Maurer, B. 2006. The anthropology of money. Annual Review of Anthropology, 35, 15–36. 
Mitchell, K. and Olds, K. 2000. Chinese business networks and the globalization of property markets in the
Pacific Rim. In: Yeung, H. W.-C. and Olds, K. (eds.). Globalization of Chinese Business Firms, Houndmills,
Macmillan. 
Morgen, S. , Acker, J. and Weigt, J. 2013. Stretched Thin: Poor families, Welfare Work, and Welfare Reform,
Ithaca, Cornell University Press. 
Muir, S. 2015. The currency of failure: Money and middle-class critique in Post-Crisis Buenos Aires. Cultural
Anthropology, 30, 310–335. 
Palomera, J. 2014. Reciprocity, commodification, and poverty in the era of financialization. Current
Anthropology, 55, S105–S115. 
Polanyi, K. 1944. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time, Boston,
Beacon Press. 
Roitman, J. 2013. Anti-crisis, Durham, Duke University Press. 
Sassen, S. 1991. The Global City, Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Smart, A. 2000. The emergence of local capitalisms in China: Overseas Chinese investment and patterns of
development. In: Li, S.-M. and Tang, W.-S. (eds.). China’s Regions, Polity and Economy: A Study of Spatial
Transformation in the Post-reform Era, Hong Kong, Chinese University Press. 
Smart, A. 2001. Unruly places: Urban governance and the persistence of illegality in Hong Kong’s urban
squatter areas. American Anthropologist, 103, 30–44. 
Smart, A. 2006. The Shek Kip Mei Myth: Squatters, Fires and Colonial Rule in Hong Kong, 1950–63, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong University Press. 
Smart, A. 2013. Housing support for the ‘undeserving’: Moral hazard, fires, and laissez-faire in Hong Kong.
In: Schlecker, M. and Fleischer, F. (eds.). Ethnographies of social support, New York, Palgrave Macmillan. 
Smart, A. and Lee, J. 2003a. Financialization and the role of real estate in Hong Kong’s regime of
accumulation. Economic Geography, 79, 153–171. 
Smart, A. and Lee, J. 2003b. Housing and regulation theory: Domestic demand and global financialization.
In: Forrest, R. and Lee, J. (eds.). Housing and Social Change, London, Routledge. 
Smart, A. and Smart, J. 2013. Formalizing Hong Kong: Explaining governmental efforts to eradicate and
control urban informality. Social Transformations in Chinese Societies, 9, 55–78. 
Smart, A. and Zerilli, F. 2014. Extralegality. In: Nonini, D. M. (ed.). A Companion to Urban Anthropology,
Malden, Wiley-Blackwell. 
Smith, N. 1996. The New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist City, New York, Routledge. 
Standing, G. 2011. The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class, London, Bloomsbury. 
Tickell, A. and Peck, J. A. 1992. Accumulation, regulation and the geographies of post-Fordism: Missing
links in regulationist research. Progress in Human Geography, 16, 190–218. 
Tretter, E. M. 2016. Shadows of a Sunbelt City, Athens, GA, University of Georgia Press. 
Tsai, K. 2002. Back-alley Banking: Private Entrepreneurs in China, Ithaca, Cornell University Press. 
Weber, R. 2010. Selling city futures: The financialization of urban redevelopment policy. Economic
Geography, 86, 251–274. 
Weiss, H. 2014. Homeownership in Israel: The social costs of middle-class debt. Cultural Anthropology, 29,
128–149. 
Weiss, H. 2015. Financialization and its discontents: Israelis negotiating pensions. American Anthropologist,
117, 506–518. 
Wilson, D. and Keil, R. 2008. The real creative class. Social & Cultural Geography, 9, 841–847. 
Wolf, E. R. 1999. Envisioning Power: Ideologies of Dominance and Crisis, Berkeley, University of California
Press. 
Wu, F. 2015. Commodification and housing market cycles in Chinese cities. International Journal of Housing
Policy, 15, 6–26. 
Yung, B. and Lee, F.-P. 2012. ‘Right to housing’ in Hong Kong: Perspectives from the Hong Kong
community. Housing, Theory and Society, 29, 401–419. 
 
Guilty subjects 
Bush, George W. 2003. Remarks on Signing the American Dream Downpayment Act. December 16. URL: <
http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=64935> (Accessed May 3, 2018). 
Calvey, Mark. 2012. Occupy Takes Foreclosure Protest to Wells Fargo CEO’s Home. San Francisco
Business Times (Saturday, February 25, 2012). URL:<
www.bizjournals.com/sanfrancisco/blog/2012/02/wells-fargo-foreclosure-protest-ceo-home.html?page=all>
(Accessed February 26, 2012). 
Cheers, Imani. 2010. Foreclosure Crisis Pushes More Americans Out of Their Homes. PBS Newshour Extra
(October 22). URL:< www.pbs.org/newshour/extra/features/economics/july-dec10/foreclosure_10-22.pdf >
(Accessed January 22, 2011). 
Chittum, Ryan. 2013. A BusinessWeek Cover Crosses a Line: Minorities as Greedy Grotesqueries Fueling a
New Housing Bubble. Columbia Journalism Review (February 28, 2013). URL:<
http://archives.cjr.org/the_audit/businessweeks_cover_crosses_th.php > (Accessed September 10, 2017). 
Clark, Gordon L. and John Evans . 1998. The Private Provision of Urban Infrastructure: Financial
Intermediation Through Long-term Contracts. Urban Studies 35, no. 2: 301–319. 
Cohen, Lizabeth. 2007. A Consumers’ Republic the Politics of Mass Consumption in Postwar America. New
York, NY: Vintage Books. 
Coy, Peter. 2011. The Mortgage of the Future. Businessweek. November 10. URL: <
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-11-10/the-mortgage-of-the-future> (Accessed May 3, 2018). 
Crump, Jeff , Kathe Newman , Eric S. Belsky , Phil Ashton , David H. Kaplan , Daniel J. Hammel , and Elvin
Wyly . 2008. Cities Destroyed (Again) for Cash: Forum on the U.S. Foreclosure Crisis 29, no. 8: 745–784. 
Daly, Corbett . 2011. Home Foreclosures in 2010 top 1 Million for First Time. Reuters (January 13, 2011).
URL:< www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-housing-foreclosures/home-foreclosures-in-2010-top-1-million-for-
first-time-idUSTRE70C0YD20110113 > (Accessed September11, 2017). 
Davis, Mike. 2007 [1986]. Prisoners of the American Dream: Politics and Economy in the History of the US
Working Class. London, NY: Verso. 
Dayen, David. 2016. Obama Failed to Mitigate America’s Foreclosure Crisis. The Atlantic (December 14,
2016). URL:< www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/obamas-failure-to-mitigate-americas-foreclosure-
crisis/510485/> (Accessed September 10, 2017). 
Di Leonardo, Micaela. 2004. Gender, Race and Class. In David Nugent and Joan Vincent , eds. A
Companion to the Anthropology of Politics, pp. 135–151. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Di Leonardo, Micaela. 2006. There’s No Place Like Home: Domestic Domains and Urban Imaginaries in
New Haven, Connecticut. Identities 13, no. 1: 33–52. 
Fields, Desiree. 2015. Contesting the Financialization of Urban Space: Community Organizations and the
Struggle to Preserve Affordable Rental Housing in New York City. Journal of Urban Affairs 37, no. 2:
144–165. 
Fraser, Nancy , and Linda Gordon . 1991. Decoding ‘Dependency’: Inscriptions of Power in a Keyword of the
Welfare State. Evanston, IL: Center for Urban Affairs and Policy Research, Northwestern University. 
Gimein, Mark. 2009. Go Ahead, Walk Away. There Is Nothing Immoral About Ditching Your Mortgage. Slate
Magazine (October 8, 2009). 
Goode, Judith , and Jeff Maskovsky , eds. 2001. New Poverty Studies: The Ethnography of Power, Politics
and Impoverished People in the United States. New York, NY: New York University Press. 
Gotham, Kevin Fox. 2009. Creating Liquidity Out of Spatial Fixity: The Secondary Circuit of Capital and the
Subprime Mortgage Crisis. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33, no. 2: 355–371. 
Graeber, David. 2014. Debt: The First 5,000 Years. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House. 
Greenbaum, Susan 2002. Report from the field: Social capital and deconcentration: Theoretical and policy
paradoxes of the HOPE VI program. North American Dialogue 5: 9–13. 
Hart, Keith , and Horacio Ortiz . 2014. The Anthropology of Money and Finance: Between Ethnography and
World History. Annual Review of Anthropology 43, no. 1: 465–482. doi:10.1146/annurevanthro-102313-
025814. 
Heussner, Ki Mae , Liam Berkowitz , and Ned Potter . 2009. Top-Selling iPhone App: Sex Offender Locator.
ABC News. URL:< http://abcnews.go.com/Technology/AheadoftheCurve/story?id=8187394&page= >
(Accessed July 28, 2009). 
Ho, Karen. 2009. Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Immergluck, Daniel. 2009. Foreclosed: High-risk Lending, Deregulation, and the Undermining of America’s
Mortgage Market. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Jackson, Kenneth T. 1985. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of America. New York: Oxford
University Press. 
Jefferson, Anna. 2013. Governing Uncertainty: Foreclosure, Finance, and the American Dream in Michigan.
Ph. D. Michigan State University. Anthropology 2013. URL:< http://etd.lib.msu.edu/islandora/object/etd:1252
>.
Jefferson, Anna. 2015. ‘Not What It Used to Be’: Schemas of Class and Contradiction in the Great
Recession. Economic Anthropology 2, no. 2: 310–325. 
Katz, Michael B. 1990. The Undeserving Poor: From the War on Poverty to the War on Welfare. New York,
NY: Pantheon Books. 
Katz, Michael B. 2008. Why Don’t American Cities Burn Very Often? Journal of Urban History 34, no. 2:
185–208. 
Kusisto, Laura. 2015. Many Who Lost Homes to Foreclosure in Last Decade Won’t Return. Fewer Than
One-third of Families Who Lost Homes Are Likely to Become Owners Again, Realtor Group Finds. Wall
Street Journal (April 20, 2015). URL:< www.wsj.com/articles/many-who-lost-homes-to-foreclosure-in-last-
decade-wont-return-nar-1429548640 > (Accessed September 17, 2017). 
Langley, P. 2009. Debt, Discipline, and Government: Foreclosure and Forbearance in the Subprime
Mortgage Crisis. Environment and Planning A 41, no. 6: 1404–1419. 
Lemke, T. 2002. Foucault, Governmentality and Critique. Rethinking Marxism 14, pt 3: 49–64. 
Libman, Kimberly , Desiree Fields , and Susan Saegert . 2012. Housing and Health: A Social Ecological
Perspective on the US Foreclosure Crisis. Housing, Theory and Society 29, no. 1, 1–24. 
Low, Setha M. 2003. Behind the Gates the New American Dream. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Martin, Isaac William , and Christopher Niedt . 2015. Foreclosed America. Stanford, CA: Stanford Briefs, an
imprint of Stanford University Press. 
Martin, Randy . 2002. Financialization of Daily Life. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Martin, Randy. 2007. An Empire of Indifference: American War and the Financial Logic of Risk Management.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Maskovsky, Jeff. 2017. Toward the Anthropology of White Nationalist Postracialism: Comments Inspired by
Hall, Goldstein, and Ingram’s ‘the Hands of Donald Trump’. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 7, no. 1:
433–440. 
Maskovsky, Jeff , and Hilary Cunningham . 2009. ‘Fragmented’ Security: Protecting the Homeland in the
21st Century United States. In Rethinking America: The Imperial Homeland in the 21st Century, pp.
185–200. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Press. 
Maurer, Bill. 2006a. The anthropology of money. Annual Review of Anthropology 35, 15–36. 
Maurer, Bill. 2006b. Pious Property: Islamic Mortgages in the United Sates. New York, NY: Russell Sage
Foundation. 
Miyazaki, Hirokazu. 2013. Arbitraging Japan: Dreams of Capitalism at the End of Finance. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press. 
Morgen, Sandra , Joan Acker , and Jill Weigt . 2010. Stretched Thin: Poor Families, Welfare Work, and
Welfare Reform. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Morgen, Sandra , and Jeff Maskovsky 2003. The Anthropology of Welfare ‘Reform’: New Perspectives on
U.S. Poverty in the Post-Welfare Era. Annual Review of Anthropology 32: 315–338. 
Newman, Kathe. 2009. Post-Industrial Widgets: Capital Flows and the Production of the Urban. International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33: 314–331. 
Roitman, Janet. 2005. Fiscal Disobedience: An Anthropology of Economic Regulation in Central Africa.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Ruben, Matthew , and Jeff Maskovsky . 2008. The Homeland Archipelago: Neoliberal Urban Governance
After September 11. Critique of Anthropology 28: 199–2017. 
Rugh, Jacob S. , and Douglas S. Massey . 2010. “Racial Segregation and the American Foreclosure Crisis.”
American Sociological Review 75, no. 5: 629–651. doi:10.1177/0003122410380868. 
Saegert, Susan , Desiree Fields , and Kimberly Libman . 2009. Deflating the Dream: Radical Risk and the
Neoliberalization of Homeownership. Journal of Urban Affairs 31: 297–317. 
Saegert, Susan , Desiree Fields , and Kimberly Libman . 2011. Mortgage Foreclosure and Health Disparities:
Serial Displacement as Asset Extraction in African American Populations. Journal of Urban Health 88, no. 3:
390–402. 
Stout, Noelle. 2015. Petitioning a Giant: Debt, Reciprocity, and Mortgage Modification in the Sacramento
Valley. American Ethnologist 43, no. 1: 1–14. 
Stout, Noelle. 2016. Indebted: Disciplining the Moral Valence of Mortgage Debt Online. Cultural
Anthropology 31, no. 1: 81–105. 
Torrance, Morag I. 2008. Forging Glocal Governance? Urban Infrastructures as Networked Financial
Products. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 32, no. 1: 1–21. 
Weber, Rachel. 2002. Extracting Value From the City: Neoliberalism and Urban Redevelopment. Antipode
34, no. 3: 519–540. 
Weber, Rachel. 2010. Selling City Futures: The Financialization of Urban Redevelopment Policy. Economic
Geography 86, no. 3: 251–274. 
Williams, Brett. 1988. Upscaling Downtown: Stalled Gentrification in Washington, D.C. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Yglesias, Matthew. 2013. Businessweek Warns That Minorities May Be Buying Houses Again. Slate.
Moneybox Blog (February 28, 2013). URL:< www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2013/02/28/racist_business-
week_cover_bloomberg_businessweek_misfires_badly.html > (Accessed September 10, 2017). 
Zaloom, Caitlin. 2010. Out of the Pits: Traders and Technology From Chicago to London. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. 
 
Ethics and profits 
Appadurai, Arjun . 1986. Introduction. In Arjun Appadurai , ed., The Social Life of Things. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–72. 
Argenti, Nicolas , and Daniel M. Knight . 2015. Sun, Wind, and the Rebirth of Extractive Economies:
Renewable Energy Investment and Metanarratives of Crisis in Greece. Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute (n.s.) 21: 781–802. 
Askew, Marc . 1996. The Rise of Moradok and the Decline of the Yarn: Heritage and Cultural Construction in
Urban Thailand. Sojourn 11: 183–210. 
Austin, J.L. 1971 [1956–57]. A Plea for Excuses. In Colin Lyas , ed., Philosophy and Linguistics. London:
Macmillan, pp. 79–101. 
Benson, Peter, and Stuart Kirsch. 2010. Capitalism and the Politics of Resignation. Current Anthropology
51(4): 459–486. 
Blum, Joseph A. 2000. Degradation Without Deskilling: Twenty-Five Years in the San Francisco Shipyards.
In Michael Burawoy , ed., Global Ethnography: Forces, Connections, and Imaginations in a Postmodern
World. Berkeley: University of California Press, pp. 106–136. 
Bourdieu, Pierre . 1984. Distinction:Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Translated by Richard Nice .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Braverman, Harry . 1974. Labor and Monopoly Capital. New York: Monthly Review Press. 
Bubandt, Nils . 1998. The Odour of Things: Smell and the Cultural Elaboration of Disgust in Eastern
Indonesia. Ethnos 63: 48–80. 
Chatri Prakitnonthakan . 2003. Pom Mahakan: Anurak roe Thamlai Prawatisaht? Silapawatthanatham,
February 2003, pp. 124–135. 
Douglas, Mary . 1966. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Elinoff, Eli . 2013. Smouldering Aspirations: Burning Buildings and the Politics of Belonging in Contemporary
Isan. South East Asia Research 20: 381–397. 
Greenwood, Davydd J. 1977. Culture by the Pound: An Anthropological Perspective on Tourism as
Commoditization. In Valene L. Smith , ed., Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 129–138. 
Harms, Erik . 2013. Eviction Time in the New Saigon: Temporalities of Displacement in the Rubble of
Development. Cultural Anthropology 28: 344–368. 
Harrison, Rachel , and Peter Jackson , eds. 2009. The Ambiguous Allure of the West. Hong Kong: Hong
Kong University Press. 
He, Shenjing . 2007. State-Sponsored Gentrification under Market Transition: The Case of Shanghai. Urban
Affairs Review 43: 171–198. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 1987a. As in Your Own House: Hospitality, Ethnography, and the Stereotype of
Mediterranean Society. In David D. Gilmore , ed., Honor and Shame and the Unity of the Mediterranean 
(Special Publication No. 22). Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association, pp. 75–89. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 1987b. Anthropology Through the Looking-Glass: Critical Ethnography in the Margins of
Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 1991. A Place in History: Social and Monumental Time in a Cretan Town. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2006. Spatial Cleansing: Monumental Vacuity and the Idea of the West. Journal of
Material Culture 11: 127–149. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2009. Evicted From Eternity: The Restructuring of Modern Rome. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2010. Engagement, Gentrification, and the Neoliberal Hijacking of History. Current
Anthropology 51, supplement 2: S259–S267. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2015. Heritage and the Right to the City: When Securing the Past Creates Insecurity in
the Present. Heritage and Society 8: 3–23. 
Herzfeld, Michael . 2016. Siege of the Spirits: Community and Polity in Bangkok. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Heywood, Paolo . 2015. Freedom in the Code: The Anthropology of (Double) Morality. Anthropological
Theory 15: 200–217. 
Hochschild, Arlie Russell . 1983. The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling. Berkeley:
University of California Press. 
Holmes, Douglas R. 2013. Economy of Words: Communicative Imperatives in Central Banks. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 
Holston, James . 1989. The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 
Holston, James . 2009. Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions of Democracy and Modernity in Brazil. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 
Hom, Stephanie Malia . 2015. The Beautiful Country: Tourism and the Impossible State of Destination Italy.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Jacobs, Jane . 1993 [1961]. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Random House. 
Janssen, Peter . 2011. Showing Love to Shophouses: UNESCO Awards [sic] Effort to Preserve Bangkok’s
Historic Straits-Style Structures. The Nation [Bangkok], 22 September, available at
www.nationmultimedia.com/2011/09/22/life/Showing-love-to-shophouses-30165851.html, last accessed 27
April 2015. 
Johnson, Andrew Alan . 2014. Ghosts of the New City: Spirits, Urbanity, and the Ruins of Progress in Chiang
Mai. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Klima, Alan . 2002. The Funeral Casino: Meditation, Massacre, and Exchange With the Dead in Thailand.
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Klima, Alan . 2009. Ghosts and Numbers. Video. Watertown: Documentary Educational Resources. 
Low, Setha M. , and Sally E. Merry . 2010. Engaged Anthropology: Diversity and Dilemmas: An Introduction
to Supplement 2. Current Anthropology 51, Supplement 2: S203–S226. 
Mack, Jennifer . 2017. The Construction of Equality: Syriac Immigration and the Swedish City. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press. 
Mack, Jennifer . Forthcoming. ‘We Just Don’t Do that in Sweden!’ Planners, Regulation, and Syriac Single-
Family Homes. In Mack and Herzfeld. 
Mack, Jennifer . –, and Michael Herzfeld , eds. Forthcoming. Life Among Planners: Practices, 
Professionalism, and Expertise in the Making of the City  . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.  
Mauss, Marcel . 1954. The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies. Translated by Ian
Cunnison . London: Cohen & West. 
Mills, Mary Beth . 1999. Thai Women in the Global Labor Force. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
Molé, Noëlle J. 2010. Precarious Subjects: Anticipating Neoliberalism in Northern Italy’s Workplace.
American Anthropologist 112: 38–53. 
Muehlebach, Andrea . 2012. The Moral Neoliberal: Welfare and Citizenship in Italy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 
Nader, Laura . 1972. Up the Anthropologist – Perspectives Gained From Studying Up. In Dell Hymes , ed.,
Reinventing Anthropology. New York: Pantheon, pp. 284–311. 
Non, Arkaraprasertkul . 2016. Gentrification From Within: Urban Social Change as Anthropological Process.
Asian Anthropology 15: 1–20. 
Peleggi, Maurizio . 2002a. Lords of Things: The Fashioning of the Siamese Monarchy’s Modern Image.
Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press. 
Peleggi, Maurizio . 2002b. The Politics of Ruins and the Business of Nostalgia. Bangkok: White Lotus. 
Smith, Neil . 1979. Toward a Theory of Gentrification A Back to the City Movement by Capital, not People.
Journal of the American Planning Association 45: 538–548. 
Sopranzetti, Claudio . 2012. Burning Red Desires: Isan Migrants and the Politics of Desire in Contemporary
Thailand. South East Asia Research 20: 361–379. 
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1990. Magic, Science, Religion, and the Scope of Rationality. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 
Tan, Isaac . 2012. Notes on ‘The Material Culture of Bukit Brown Cemetery’. The Kent Ridge Common, 20
May, available at http://kentridgecommon.com/notes-on-the-material-culture-of-bukit-brown-cemetery/,
accessed 6 September 2016. 
Thompson, Michael . 1979. Rubbish Theory: The Creation and Destruction of Value. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 
Yalouri, Eleana . 2001. The Acropolis: Global Fame, Local Claim. Oxford: Berg. 
Zawacki, Benjamin . 2017. Shifting Ground: Thailand between the U.S. and a Rising China. London: Zed
Books. 
Zhang, Li . 2002. Spatiality and Urban Citizenship in Late Socialist China. Public Culture 14: 311–334. 
Zukin, Sharon . 1987. Gentrification: Culture and Capital in the Urban Core. Annual Review of Sociology 13:
129–147.
Gender, art, and the reshaping of the urban in Amman, Jordan 
Ababsa, Myriam . Citizenship and Urban Issues in Jordan. Cities, Urban Practices and Nation Building in
Jordan. Villes, pratiques urbaines et construction nationale en Jordanie: 39–64, 2011. 
Abaza, Mona . Changing Consumer Cultures of Modern Egypt: Cairo’s Urban Reshaping. Leoden/Boston:
Brill Academic Publishers, 2006. 
Abowd, Thomas . Colonial Jerusalem: The Spatial Construction of Identity and Difference in a City of Myth,
1948–2012. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2014. 
Abu-Hamdi, Eliana . The Jordan Gate Towers of Amman: Surrendering Public Space to Build a Neoliberal
Ruin. International Journal of Islamic Architecture 5(1): 73–101, 2016. 
Abu-Lughod, Lila . Orientalism and Middle East Feminist Studies. Feminist Studies 27(1): 101–113, 2001. 
Achilli, Luigi . Disengagement From Politics: Nationalism, Political Identity, and the Everyday in a Palestinian
Refugee Camp in Jordan. Critique of Anthropology 34(2): 234–257, 2014. 
Adely, Fida . Gendered Paradoxes: Educating Jordanian Women in Nation, Faith, and Progress. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
Ali, Hikmat ; Fuad Malkawi and Yamen Al-Betawi . Quality of Life in Cities: Setting up Criteria for Amman
Jordan. Social Indicators Research 93(2): 407–432, 2009. 
Al-Oudat, Mohammed Ali and Ayman Alshboul . Jordan First: Tribalism, Nationalism and Legitimacy of
Power in Jordan. Intellectual Discourse 18(1): 65–96, 2010. 
Al Rabady, Rama and Shatha Abu-Khafajah . ‘Send in the Clown’: Re-inventing Jordan’s Downtowns in
Space and Time, Case of Amman. Urban Design International 20(1): 1–11, 2015. 
Antoun, Richard . Civil Society, Tribal Process and Change in Jordan: An Anthropological View. IJMES
32(4): 441–463, 2000. 
Bayat, Asef . Life as Politics: How Ordinary People Change the Middle East. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, (2010) 2013. 
Baylouny, Marie Ann . Militarizing Welfare: Neo-Liberalism and Jordanian Policy. The Middle East Journal
62(2): 277–303, 2008. www.jstor.org/stable/25482510. 
Bjawi-Levine, Laure . ‘My Heart Is Palestinian, My Passport Is Jordanian’ Ambivalence, Identity and
Children’s Rights Among Palestinian Refugee Camp Children. In Emerging Perspectives on Children in
Migratory Circumstances. Edited by Rachel R. Reynolds Pp. 25–35. Philadelphia, PA: Drexel University
Press, 2013. 
Bocco, Riccardo . UNRWA and the Palestinian Refugees: A History Within History. Refugee Survey
Quarterly 28(2–3): 229–252, 2009. 
Bondi, Liz . Constructing Gender, Constructing the Urban: A Review of Anglo-American Feminist Urban
Geography. Gender, Place & Culture 10(3): 229–245, 2010. 
Corbett, Elena . Hashemite Antiquity and Modernity: Iconography in Neoliberal Jordan. Studies in Ethnicity
and Nationalism 11(2): 163–193, 2011. 
Daher, Rami. F. Gentrification and the Politics of Power, Capital and Culture in an Emerging Jordanian
Heritage Industry. Traditional Dwellings and Settlements Review 10(2): 33–45, 1999. 
Daher, Rami , F. Amman : Disguised Genealogy and Recent Urban Restructuring and Neoliberal Threats. In
The Evolving Arab City: Tradition, Modernity and Urban Development. Pp. 37–68. London and New York,
NY: Routledge, 2008. 
Daher, Rami F. Urban Heritage and the Contention Between Tradition, Avant-garde, and Kitsch: Amman’s
Rising ‘Kitsch Syndromes’ and Its Creeping Vernacularized Urban Landscapes. Ethnologies 35(2): 55–75,
2013. 
Deeb, Lara . An Enchanted Modern: Gender and Public Piety in Shi’i Lebanon. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2006. 
DeJong, Jocelyn . Household Health and Crises: Coping With Economic Upheaval in Jordan, 1988–1991.
Journal of International Development 7(3): 443–465, 1995. 
DeJong, Jocelyn , and Tareq Tell . “Economic Crisis and the Labour Market: A Case Study of Palestinian
Workers in Low-Income East Amman.” Palestine, Palestiniens: Territoire National, Espaces
Communautaires, Les Cahiers du CERMOC 17: 195–217, 1997. 
Doan, Rebecca Miles . Class Differentiation and the Informal Sector in Amman, Jordan. International Journal
of Middle East Studies 24(1): 27–38, 1992. 
Farah, Randa . ‘To Veil or Not to Veil Is Not the Question’: Palestinian Refugee Women’s Voices on Other
Matters. Development 45(1): 93–98, 2002. 
Ghannam, Farha . Remaking the Modern: Space, Relocation and the Politics of Identity in a Global Cairo.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002. 
Hale, Sondra . The New Middle East Insurrections and Other Subversions of the Modernist Frame. Journal
of Middle East Women’s Studies 10(3): 40–61, 2014. 
Hart, Jason . Children and Nationalism in a Palestinian Refugee Camp in Jordan. Childhood 9(1): 35–47,
2002.
Hart, Jason and Anna Kvittingen . Rights Without Borders? Learning From the Institutional Response to Iraqi
Refugee Children in Jordan. Children’s Geographies 14(2): 217–231, 2016. 
Hawkins, Simon . Cosmopolitan Hagglers or Haggling Locals. City and Society 22(1): 1–24, 2010. 
Hourani, Najib B. Urbanism and Neoliberal Order: The Development and Redevelopment of Amman. Journal
of Urban Affairs 36(s2): 634–649, 2014. 
Joseph, Suad . Gender and Citizenship in the Arab World. Al-Raida (Spring/Summer), 129–130: 8–18, 2010. 
Kanna, Ahmed . Dubai: The City as Corporation. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2011. 
Katz, Emma . Art and the Economy in Amman. Journal of Georgetown University-Qatar Middle Eastern
Studies Student Association 7: 2014. http://dx.doi.org/10.5339/messa.2014.7. 
Lacroix, Marie and Talal Al-Qdah . Iraqi Refugees in Jordan: Lessons for Practice With Refugees
Internationally. European Journal of Social Work 15(2): 223–239, 2012. 
Layne, Linda . Home and Homeland: The Dialogics of Tribal and National Identities in Jordan. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1994. 
Mahmood, Saba . Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2005. 
Malt, Carol . Women, Museums , and the Public Sphere . Journal of Middle East Women’s Studies 2(2):
115–136, 2006. 
Mason, Victoria . The Im/mobilities of Iraqi Refugees in Jordan: Pan-Arabism, ‘Hospitality’ and the Figure of
the ‘Refugee’. Mobilities 6(3): 353–373, 2011. 
Massey, Doreen . Space, Place and Gender. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1994. 
Menoret, Pascal . Joyriding in Riyadh: Oil, Urbanism, and Road Revolt. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2014 
Merabet, Sofian . Queering Beirut. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 2014. 
Moghadam, Valentine . Engendering Citizenship, Feminizing Civil Society: The Case of the Middle East and
North Africa. Women and Politics 25(1–2): 63–87, 2003. 
Monroe, Kristin . The Insecure City: Space, Power, and Mobility in Beirut. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 2015. 
Na’amneh, Mahmoud M. and Abdel Hakeem Al Husban . Identity in Old Clothes: The Socio-cultural
Dynamics of Second-hand Clothing in Irbid, Jordan.” Social Identities 18(5): 609–621, 2012. 
Na’amneh, Mahmoud , Shunnaq Mohammed , and Tastasi Aysegui . The Modern Sociocultural Significance
of the Jordanian Bedouin Tent. Nomadic Peoples 12(1): 149–163, 2008. www.jstor.org/stable/43123817. 
Parker, Christopher . Tunnel-bypasses and Minarets of Capitalism: Amman as Neoliberal Assemblage.
Political Geography 28(2): 110–120, 2009. 
Perez, Michael V. Human Rights and the Rightless: The Case of Gaza Refugees in Jordan. The International
Journal of Human Rights 15(7): 1031–1054, 2011. 
Potter, Robert , Khadija Darmame , Nasim Barham , and Stephen Nortcliff . ‘Ever-Growing Amman’, Jordan:
Urban Expansion, Social Polarisation and Contemporary Urban Planning Issues. Habitat International 33(1):
81–92, 2009. 
Sawalha, Aseel . Identity, Self and the Other Among Palestinian Refugees in East Amman. In Amman, Ville
et Socie’te’ – The City and Its Society. Edited by Jean Hannoyer and Seteney Shami . Pp. 345–357. Beirut:
CERMOC, 1996. 
Sawalha, Aseel . Reconstructing Beirut: Memory of Space in a Postwar Arab City. Austin, TX: Texas
University Press, 2010. 
Schwedler, Jillian . Amman Cosmopolitan: Spaces and Practices of Aspiration and Consumption.
Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East 30(3): 547–562, 2010. 
Shami, Seteney . Prehistories of Globalization: Circassian Identity in Motion. Public Culture 12(1): 177–204,
2000. 
Shami, Seteney . Historical Processes of Identity Formation: Displacement, Settlement, and Self-
Representations of the Circassians in Jordan. Iran and the Caucasus 13(1): 141–159, 2009. 
Shami, Seteney , and Lucine Taminian . Children of Amman: Childhood and Child Care in Squatter Areas of
Amman, Jordan. Children in the Muslim Middle East: 68–76, 1995. 
Shryock, Andrew . Nationalism and the Geneological Imagination: Oral History and Textual Authority in
Tribal Jordan. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1997. 
Shteiwi, Musa . Class Structure and Inequality in the city of Amman. Amman: Ville et Société. Pp. 412–414,
(Beirut: Centre d’Études et des Recherches sur le Moyen-Orient Contemporain, 1996). 
Singerman, Diane , and Paul Amar (eds.). Cosmopolitan Cairo: Politics, Culture and Urban Space in the
New Globalized Middle East. Cairo: American University Press, 2006. 
Skalli, Loubna . Communicating Gender in the Public Sphere: Women and Information Technologies in the
MENA. Journal of Middle East Women’s Studies 2(2): 35–59, 2006. 
Tawil, Maram Falah , Christa Reicher , Mais Jafari , and Katrin Baeumer . Assessment of Public Space
Efficiency in Relation to Spatial Development in Amman: Exploring Indicators to Sustainable Modes of
Future City Lire. Journal of Sustainable Development 9(3): 104–117, 2016. 
Tobin, Sarah and Madeline Otis . Campell NGO Governance and Syrian Refugee ‘Subjects’ in Jordan.
MERIP 278(Spring), 2016. 
Valentine, Gill . Theorizing and Researching Intersectionality: A Challenge for Feminist Geography. The
Professional Geographer 59(1): 10–21, 2007. 
Wiktorowicz, Quintan . The Political Limits of Nongovernmental Organizations in Jordan. World Development
30(1): 77–93, 2002. 
 
Dancing, design methods and the politics of space in Kampala 
Appadurai, Arjun . 2013. The Future as Cultural Fact: Essays on the Global Condition. London: Verso. 
Balán, Iván C. , Victoria Barreda , Rubén Marone , María Mercedes Ávila , and Alex Carballo-Diéguez .
2014. Venues, Patrons, and Alcohol Use Dynamics: The Creation of a High Risk Sexual Environment. AIDS
and Behavior, 18 (11), 2097–2109. 
Barton, Bernadette C. 2006. Stripped: Inside the Lives of Exotic Dancers. New York: NYU Press. 
BBC News . 2015. Google Launches Wi-Fi Network in Uganda. December 4, sec. Africa.
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35000544 [Accessed 2 April, 2016]. 
Bennett, Jane . 2010. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University Press
Books. 
Brooks, S. 2012. Unequal Desires: Race and Erotic Capital in the Stripping Industry. New York: SUNY
Press. 
Businge, Julius . 2012. Uganda: Kizza Besigye and Lord Mayor Lukwago Denied Exit. The Independent, 25
October. 
Bwambale, Taddeo , and Bwireq, Job . 2011. Uganda: Vendors Thrown Off Kampala Streets. The New
Vision, 5 September. 
Caluya, Gilbert . 2008. ‘The Rice Steamer’: Race, Desire and Affect in Sydney’s Gay Scene. Australian
Geographer, 39 (3), 283–292. 
Castaldi, Francesca . 2006. Choreographies of African Identities: Negritude, Dance, and the National Ballet
of Senegal. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
Centenary Park Eviction Turns Violent [online]. 2013. Available from:
http://www.newvision.co.ug/news/635681-centenary-park-eviction-turns-violent.html [Accessed 2 Apr 2013]. 
Charry, Eric , ed. 2012. Hip Hop Africa: New African Music in a Globalizing World. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press. 
Chatterjea, Ananya . 2003. Subversive Dancing: The Interventions in Jawole Willa Jo Zollar’s ‘Batty Moves’.
Theatre Journal, 55 (3), 451–465. 
Cheney, Kristen . 2007. Pillars of the Nation: Child Citizens and Ugandan National Development. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. 
Chin, Elizabeth . 2014. Dunham Technique: The Politics of Dancing Through Ethnography. In: E. Chin , ed.
Katherine Dunham: Recovering an Anthropological Legacy, Choreographing Ethnographic Futures. Santa
Fe: School of American Research Press, 79–100. 
CIA . 2015. The World Factbook [online]. [Accessed 6 Jan 2016]. 
Coe, Cati . 2005. Dilemmas of Culture in African Schools: Youth, Nationalism, and the Transformation of
Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Condry, Ian . 2006. Hip-Hop Japan: Rap and the Paths of Cultural Globalization. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Cox, Aimee , 2009. The Blacklight Project and Public Scholarship: Young Black Women Perform Against
and Through the Boundaries of Anthropology. Transforming Anthropology, 17 (1), 51–64. 
Cressey, Paul G. 1932. The Taxi Dance Hall. Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith. 
Davis, Dana-Ain . 2006. Battered Black Women and Welfare Reform: Between a Rock and a Hard Place.
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
DeFrantz, Thomas F. 2005. Composite Bodies of Dance: The Repertory of the Alvin Ailey American Dance
Theater. Theatre Journal, 57 (4), 659–678. 
Delamont, Sara . and Stephens, Neil . 2008. Up on the Roof: The Embodied Habitus of Diasporic Capoeira.
Cultural Sociology, 2 (1), 57–74. 
Durand, Alain-Philippe . 2002. Black, Blanc, Beur: Rap Music and Hip-Hop Culture in the Francophone
World. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. 
Durham, Deborah . 2008. Figuring the Future: Globalization and the Temporalities of Children and Youth.
Santa Fe: School for Advanced Research Press.
Fabian, Johannes , and Bunzl, Matti . 2014. Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object. New
York: Columbia University Press. 
Food Court Musical. 2008 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dkYZ6rbPU2M. 
Frank, Katherine . 2007. Thinking Critically About Strip Club Research. Sexualities, 10 (4), 501–517. 
Frozen Grand Central. 2008 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jwMj3PJDxuo. 
García, Cindy . 2013. Salsa Crossings: Dancing Latinidad in Los Angeles. Durham: Duke University Press
Books. 
Gaunt, Kyra D. 2006. The Games Black Girls Play: Learning the Ropes From Double-Dutch to Hip-Hop. New
York: NYU Press. 
Google Launches Wi-Fi Network in Kampala, Uganda - BBC News [online]. 2016. Available from:
http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35000544 [Accessed 12 June 2016]. 
Green, Jesse . 1993. Paris Has Burned. New York Times, 18 April. 
Guizardi, Menara Lube , and Ypeji, Annelou . 2014. ‘Being Carried Out’: Women’s Bodies and Masculinity
Inside and Outside the Capoeira Ring. In: G. Frerks , A. Ypeji , and R.S. König , eds. Gender and Conflict:
Embodiments, Discourses and Symbolic Practices. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing, 175–192. 
Harvey, David . 2007. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Hazzard-Gordon, Katrina . 1990. Jookin’: The Rise of Social Dance Formations in African-American Culture.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Head, Scott , and Gravina, Heloisa . 2012. Blackness in Movement: identifying with Capoeira Angola in and
out of Brazil. African and Black Diaspora: An International Journal, 5 (2), 194–210. 
Johnson, Merri Lisa . 1998. Pole Work: Autoethnography of a Strip Club. In: B.M. Dank and R. Refinetti ,
eds. Sex Work and Sex Workers. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 149–157. 
Kapasula, Jessie Kabwila . 2010. The African Public Space of Dangarembga’s Neria: A Site for
Autochthonous Feminist Agency. Africa Development, 35 (1–2), 95–115. 
Kapchan, Deborah . 2006. Talking Trash: Performing Home and Anti-Home in Austin’s Salsa Culture.
American Ethnologist, 33 (3), 361–377. 
Martin, Randy . 1985. Dance as a Social Movement. Social Text, no. 12, 54–70. 
Martin, Randy . 2012. A Precarious Dance, a Derivative Sociality. TDR/The Drama Review, 56 (4), 62–77. 
Mitchell, Tony . 2001. Global Noise: Rap and Hip Hop Outside the USA. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
University Press. 
Ness, Sally . 1992. Body, Movement and Culture: Kinesthetic and Visual Symbolism in a Phillippine
Community. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Ntarangwi, Mwenda . 2009. East African Hip Hop: Youth Culture and Globalization. Urbana: University of
Illinois Press. 
Paris Is Burning. 1991. Lions Gate Films. 
Pennycook, Alastair . 2007. Language, Localization, and the Real: Hip-Hop and the Global Spread of
Authenticity. Journal of Language, Identity & Education, 6 (2), 101–115. 
Perkins, William Eric . 1996. Droppin’ Science: Critical Essays on Rap Music and Hip Hop Culture.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Peterson, Grant Tyler . 2011. Clubbing Masculinities: Gender Shifts in Gay Men’s Dance Floor
Choreographies. Journal of Homosexuality, 58 (5), 608–625. 
Pough, Gwendolyn D. 2015. Check It While I Wreck It: Black Womanhood, Hip-Hop Culture, and the Public
Sphere. Evanston: Northeastern University Press. 
Ramsey, Kate . 1997. Vodou, Nationalism, and Performance: The Staging of Folklore in Mid-Twentieth-
Century Haiti. In: J.C. Desmond , ed. Meaning in Motion. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 345–378. 
Rize. 2005. Lions Gate Films. 
Roberts, Rosemarie . 2005. Radical Movements: Katherine Dunham and Ronald K. Brown Teaching Toward
Critical Consciousness. PhD. City University of New York Graduate Center, New York, NY. 
Rose, Trisha . 1994. Black Noise: Rap Music and Black Culture in Contemporary America. Middletown, CT:
Wesleyan University Press 
Savigliano, Marta . 1995. Tango and the Political Economy of Passion. Boulder, CO: Westview. 
Sharff, Jagna . 1998. King Kong on 4th Street: Families and the Violence of Poverty on the Lower East Side.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 
Stephens, Sharon . 1995. Children and the Politics of Culture. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Style Wars. 1984. Public Art Films. 
Susser, Ida . 1982. Norman Street: Poverty and Politics in an Urban Neighborhood. New York: Oxford
University Press. 
Törnqvist, Maria . 2012. Troubling Romance Tourism: Sex, Gender and Class Inside the Argentinean Tango
Clubs. Feminist Review, (102), 21–40.
Urquía, Norman . 2005. The Re-Branding of Salsa in London’s Dance Clubs: How an Ethnicised Form of
Cultural Capital Was Institutionalised. Leisure Studies, 24 (4), 385–397. 
Viladrich, Anahi . 2013. More Than Two to Tango: Argentine Tango Immigrants in New York City. Phoenix:
University of Arizona Press. 
Wallis, George W . 1970. Chronopolitics: The Impact of Time Perspectives on the Dynamics of Change.
Social Forces, 49 (1), 102–108. 
 
Lisbon is black 
Almeida de, Miguel Vale . 2004. An Earth-Colored Sea: ‘Race’, Culture and the Politics of Identity in the
Post-Colonial Portuguese-Speaking World. New York, NY: Berghahn Books. 
Almeida de, Miguel Vale 2007. From Miscegenation to Creole Identity: Portuguese Colonialism, Brazil, Cape
Verde. In Creolization: History, Theory, Ethnography, ed. Charles Stewart . Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast
Press: 108–132. 
Anderson, Wanni W. and Robert G. Lee . 2005 Asian American Displacements. In Displacements and
Diasporas: Asians in the Americas, eds. Wanni W. Anderson and Robert G. Lee . New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press: 3–22. 
Batalha, Luís . 2004. The Cape Verdean Diáspora in Portugal: Colonial Subjects in a Postcolonial World.
New York, NY: Lexington Books. 
Batalha, Luís . 2008. Cape Verdeans in Portugal. Transnational Archipelago: Perspectives on Cape Verdean
Migration and Diaspora, eds. Luís Batalha and Jørgen Carling . Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Amsterdam
University Press: 61–71. 
Brettell, Caroline . 2012. Civic Engagements: The Citizenship Practices of Indian and Vietnamese 
Immigrants  (with Deborah Reed-Danahay). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.  
Brettell, Caroline . 2016. Perspectives on Migration Theory. In Anthropology International Handbook of
Migration and Population Distribution, ed. Michael White . New York: Springer Publishing. 
Carreira, Antonio . 1972. Cabo Verde: formação e extinção de uma sociedade escravocrata (1460–1878).
Lisbon: Centro de estudos da Guiné Portuguesa. 
Chabal, Patrick . 2002. A History of Postcolonial Lusophone Africa. London: Hurst and Company. 
Cidra, Rui . 2008. Cape Verdean Migration, Music Recordings and Performance. In Transnational
Archipelago: Perspectives on Cape Verdean Migration and Diaspora, eds. Luís Batalha and Jørgen Carling .
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Amsterdam University Press: 189–204. 
Connell, John and Chris Gibson . 2003. Sound Tracks: Popular Music, Identity, and Place. London:
Routledge. 
Dear, Michael J. 2001. The Postmodern Urban Condition. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 
De Certeau, Michel . 1985. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Degler, Carl . 1971. Neither Black nor White: Slavery and Race Relations in Brazil and the United States.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Duarte, Dulce Almada . 2003. Bilinguismo ou Diglossia?As relações de força entre o crioulo e o português
na sociedade cabo-verdiana. Praia, Cape Verde: Spleen Edições. 
Eaton, Martin . 1993 Foreign Residents and Illegal Aliens: Os Negros em Portugal. Ethnic and Racial
Studies 16(3): 536–562. 
Forman, Murray . 2012. ‘Represent:’ Race, Space and Place in Rap Music. In That’s the Joint: The Hip-Hop
Studies Reader, eds. Murray Forman and Marc Anthony Neal . New York, NY: Routledge: 247–269. 
Freyre, Gilberto . 1953. Aventura e Rotina: sugestões de uma viagem à procura das constants portuguesas
de carater e acão. Rio de Janeiro: José Olympio. 
Gilroy, Paul . 1993. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double-Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 
Góis, Pedro . 2006. Emigração cabo-verdiana para (e na) Europa e sua inserção em mercados de trabalho
locais: Lisboa, Milão, Roterdão. Lisbon: ACIDI, IP. 
Harvey, David . 1973. Social Justice and the City. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Hawkins, Harriet . 2011. Dialogues and Doings: Sketching the Relationships Between Geography and Art.
Geography Compass 5(7): 464–478. 
Henriques, Isabel Castro . 2009. A Herança Africana em Portugal – séculos XV–XX. Lisbon: Correios de
Portugal. 
Henriques de, Isabel Castro and Pedro Pereira Leite . 2013. Lisboa, Cidade Africana: Percursos e Lugares
de Memória da Presença Africana, Século XV–XIX. Lisbon: Marca D’Água Editora. 
Horta, Anna Paula Beja . 2001. Transnational Networks and the Local Politics of Migrant Grassroots
Organizing in Postcolonial Portugal. ESRC Research Programme, University of Oxford, WPTC-02-03. 
Karttunen, Frances R. 2005. The Other Islanders: The People Who Pulled Nantucket’s Oars. New Bedford,
MA: Spinner Publications. 
Khirfan, Luna and Bessma Momani . 2012. (Re)branding Amman: A ‘Lived’ City Values, Image and Identity.
Place, Branding and Public Diplomacy 9(1): 49–65. 
Kozák, Jan and Valdimir Cermák . 2010. The Illustrated History of Natural Disasters. New York, NY:
Springer. 
Krims, Adam . 2007. Music and Urban Geography. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Lefebvre, Henri . 1991. Critique of Everyday Life. Vol. 1. London: Verso. 
Loude, Jean-Yves . 2005. Lisboa na cidade negra. Lisbon: Dom Quixote. 
Low, Setha . 1996. Spatializing Culture: The Social Production and Social Construction of Public Space.
American Ethnologist 23(4): 861–879. 
Low, Setha . 1999. Theorizing the City: The New Urban Anthropology Reader. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press. 
Mark, Peter . 2002. ‘Portuguese’ Style and Luso-AfricanIdentity: Precolonial Senegambia, Sixteenth-
Nineteenth Centuries. Bloomington, IN: University of Indiana Press. 
Massey, Doreen . 1984. Spatial Divisions of Labour. New York: Palgrave. 
Massey, Doreen . 1994. Space, Place and Gender. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
Massey, Doreen . 2005. For Space. London: Sage. 
McDonough, Tom , ed. 2010. The Situationists and the City: A Reader. New York, NY: Verso. 
Mesquita, André Luiz . 2011. Insurgências políticas: arte ativista e ação coletiva (1900–2000). São Paulo:
Anneblume Editora. 
Miles, Malcolm . 2007. The Culture Industries: Symbolic Economies and Critical Practices. Social Analysis
51(1): 13–27. 
Monteiro, César Augusto . 2003. Manuel d’Novas música, vida, caboverdianidade. São Vicente, Cape
Verde: self-published. 
Pardue, Derek . 2015a. Kriolu Interruptions: Local Lisbon Rappers Provoke a Rethinking of ‘Luso’ and
‘Creole’. Luso-Brazilian Review 52(2): 153–173. 
Pardue, Derek . 2015b. Cape Verde, Let’s Go: Creole Rappers and Citizenship in Portugal. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press. 
Pennycook, Alastair . 2010. Language as a Local Practice. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Pereira, Nuno Teutônio . 1994. Pátios e Vilas de Lisboa, 1870–1930: A Promoção Privada de Alojamento
Operário [Patios and Villas in Lisbon, 1870–1930: Private Development of Housing]. Análise Social 29(127):
509–524. 
Pike, Andy , ed. 2011. Brands and Branding Geographies and Urban Tourism and Urban Change: Cites in a
Global Economy. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Sassen, Saskia . 2002. The Repositioning of Citizenship: Emergent Subjects and Spaces for Politics.
Berkeley Journal of Sociology 46: 4–25. 
Schacter, Rafael . 2015. The Invisible Performance/the Invisible Masterpiece: Visibility, Concealment and
Commitment in Graffiti and Street Art. In Anthropology, Theatre and Development: The Transformative
Potential of Performance. London: Palgrave MacMillan: 203–223. 
Schiller, Nina Glick and Ayse Simisek-Caglar . 2011. Locating Migration: Rescaling Cities and Migrants.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Shabaka, Lumumba Hamilcar . 2013. Transformation of ‘Old Slavery’ Into Atlantic Slavery: Cape Verde
Islands, C. 1500–1879. Dissertation in the History, Michigan State University. 
Sieber, Timothy . 1999. Intervenção nas frentes de água das cidades americanas. In A cidade da Expo’98,
Uma reconversão na frente ribeirinha de Lisboa, eds. V. M. Ferreira and F. Indovina . Lisboa: Bizâncio:
63–77. 
Sieber, Timothy 2005. Popular Music and Cultural Identity in the Cape Verdean Post-Colonial Diaspora.
Etnográfica IX(1): 123–148. 
Simões, João Miguel . 2004. O Convento das Trinas do Mocambo: estudo históricoartístico. Lisboa: Instituto
Hidrográfico. 
Soja, Edward . 1989. Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Social Theory. New
York, NY: Verso. 
Soja, Edward . 1996. Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real and Imagined Spaces. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell. 
Stevens, Jeroen . 2015. Theatre City: On Design in the Interplay of Social and Material Space (Teatro
Oficina, Bixiga, São Paulo). Culture and Local Governance 5(1–2): 45–59. 
Straw, Will . 1991. Systems of Articulation, Logics of Change: Scenes and Communities in Popular Music.
Cultural Studies 5(3): 368–388.
Taylor, Charles . 1992. The Politics of Recognition. In Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of Recognition,
ed. A. Gutmann . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press: 25–73. 
Tinhorão, José . 1988. Os negros em Portugal: Uma presença silenciosa. Alfragide, Portugal: Caminho. 
Tinhorão, José . 2007. O Rasga: Uma dança negro-portuguesa. São Paulo: Editora 34. 
 
Brazilian popular music and the city 
Alencar, Edigar . 1981. Nosso Sinhô do samba. Rio de Janeiro: Funarte. 
Berlinck, Manoel Tosta . 1976. “Sossega leão: algumas considerações sobre o samba como forma de
cultura popular”. Contexto 1: 101–114. 
Frith, Simon . 1996. “Songs as Texts”. In: Performing Rites: On the Value of Popular Music. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, pp. 158–182. 
Frith, Simon .. 2007. “Why Do Songs Have Words?”. In: Taking Popular Music Seriously. Aldershot:
Ashgate, pp. 209–238. 
Hertzman, Marc A. Making Samba: A New History of Race and Music in Brazil. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2013. 
McCann, Bryan . 2004. Hello, Hello Brazil: Popular Music in the Making of Modern Brazil. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. 
Middleton, Richard . 1990. Studying Popular Music. Milton Keynes: Open University Press. 
Middleton, Richard . 2000. “Popular Music Analysis and Musicology: Bridging the Gap”. In: R. Middleton
(Ed.), Reading Pop: Approaches to Textual Analysis in Popular Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
104–121. 
Oliven, Ruben George . 1979. “Culture Rules OK: Class and Culture in Brazilian Cities”. International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research 3(1). 
Oliven, Ruben George .;. 1984. “A malandragem na música popular brasileira”. Latin American Music
Review 5(1): 66–96. 
Oliven, Ruben George .. 1988. “The Woman Makes (and Breaks) the Man: The Masculine Imagery in
Brazilian Popular Music”. Latin American Music Review 9(1): 90–108. 
Oliven, Ruben George .. 1999. “Money in Brazilian Popular Music”. Studies in Latin American Popular
Culture 18: 115–137. 
Sandroni, Carlos . 2001. Feitiço decente. Transformações do samba no Rio de Janeiro (1917–1933). Rio de
Janeiro: Jorge Zahar Editor/Editora da UFRJ. 
Severiano, Jairo . 1988. “Nosso Sinhô do samba e outras bossas”. Text in the cover of the record Nosso
Sinhô do Samba. Rio de Janeiro: Funarte. 
Sodré, Muniz . 1979. Samba, o dono do corpo. Rio de Janeiro: Codecri. 
Tagg, Philip . 2000. “Analysing Popular Music: Theory, Method, and Practice”. In: R. Middleton (Ed.),
Reading Pop: Approaches to Textual Analysis in Popular Music. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
71–103. 
Tatit, Luiz . 2002. “Analysing Popular Song”. In: D. Hesmondhalgh and K. Negus (Eds.), Popular Music
Studies. London: Arnold, pp. 33–50. 
Vianna, Hermano . 1999. The Mistery of Samba: Popular Music and National Identity in Brazil. Chapel Hill,
NC: University of North Carolina Press. 
 
