JCOM THE NEED FOR FEMINIST APPROACHES TO SCIENCE COMMUNICATION
Technoscience in the era of #MeToo and the science march
Stephanie Steinhardt
Feminist technoscience theory offers perspectives for science
communication that both question common narratives and suggests new
narratives. These perspectives emphasize issues of ethics and care often
missing from science communication. They focus on questions of what is
marginalized or left out of stories about science — and encourage us to
make those absences visible.Abstract
Science communication: theory and models; Social inclusion; Women in
scienceKeywords
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303 DOI
Submitted: 30th August 2019
Accepted: 10th September 2019
Published: 30th September 2019
Science communication is inside a hard but important moment. When scientiﬁc
controversies make the news, they are more often spawned by industry elites and
celebrities who refute scientiﬁc work than by scientists. When the current U.S.
president came into power, his administration scrubbed all mentions of climate
from the White House website. Earth Day is now a March for Science. As scholars
develop our research programs, we are faced with questions of how to orient our
work to speak to other scientists, to the general public, and to this administration.
We are learning that facts are not just facts but are pieces of complex sociopolitical
ﬂows. We are learning ﬁrsthand that the possibility for evidence-based policy is not
based on evidence but on culture, politics and capitalism. We are all struggling
with the current moment, particularly with how to communicate about and within
this new gaze upon science that makes scientists feel silenced or even marginalized.
Simultaneously we are grappling with a new alertness via the #metoo movement to
the ways in which science itself can occlude and marginalize women and other
minoritized people while protecting abusers. This uncomfortable reality in which
scientists are hurting each other is also reinforcing the heightened skepticism in
science that public anti-intellectuals are currently cultivating. This is a moment in
which political action and scientiﬁc action are closely entwined. In this charged
political context, we as scientists and science communicators urgently need to
demonstrate ethical behavior as a priority moving forward.
Comment Journal of Science Communication 18(04)(2019)C03 1
For decades, the ﬁeld of feminist technoscience has striven to practice ethical
approaches to scientiﬁc inquiry and technological development, built upon the
assertion that knowledge is power and that science is politics. What can we learn
by envisioning science communication through the lens of feminist technoscience
that may help us to move forward ethically and carefully? Feminist technoscience
looks critically at the practices, policies, and politics of science. It seeks to
understand knowledge production, particularly: whose knowledge is considered
valued knowledge? This work attends to power relations and resources, identifying
who are empowered to produce knowledge through current infrastructures of
scientiﬁc work and who are science’s discontented and disenfranchised. Feminist
technoscience pays particular attention to practices and praxis to understand the
politics of the personal, to see how people treat each other, how they care for each
other and their environment, and how they care for their science.
Canonically, Susan Leigh Star, echoing Anselm Strauss, asked of science and
technology studies: cui bono? Who beneﬁts? [Star, 1995] I might extend this
question by asking: how do they beneﬁt? And, who is inconvenienced or harmed
for this beneﬁt? A critical feminist scholar might look at a piece of research and ask:
what is this a story of? Who is in power and who is subordinate? Where did the
money for this work come from? How does that money drive the research agenda?
Who is absent from this story? And importantly, what does this data represent and
what does this data miss? Feminists reﬂexively ask this of ourselves as much as we
ask it of our subjects: who are we missing? How can we do better? All of these
questions can shape our work as science communication researchers and
practitioners.
As an ethnographer of oceanographic and climate research infrastructures, I spent
the last years with scientists and technologists instrumenting the global ocean with
sensors and robots. I looked at what gets built and maintained, what can be broken
and ﬁxed. I sought to ﬁnd what utopian ideals motivate my subjects and what
impedes them from realizing those dreams. The answer, I was surprised to ﬁnd, is
often of a feminist concern. In my work, I found many scientists of all genders grap-
pling with the differing treatment of men in science. I came upon a lot of atrocities
when I did not go looking for them, which I will not detail here. For a discussion
of sexual violence and gender inequity in ocean science, see [Steinhardt, 2018].
Harm appears in many forms, in disruptive life-changing events and at other times
more subtly and slowly. One researcher discussed a newsletter on the exciting
launch of a new oceanographic initiative which featured a cover with only one
photo of two older white male scientists. Frustrated, she labored to get that photo
changed for future publications to include an image depicting a diversity of
genders, ages and races involved in the project, working with the communications
staff and publishers. This was exhausting, nontrivial work. She detailed complex,
awkward, emotive scenes of a love for ocean science: how she signed up
knowingly for a passionate life of science and for this gendered power structure
that is distinctly alienating, tiresome, unsatisfying, and heartbreaking. She
lamented that this culture had taken the beauty and the bliss out of her work. This
researcher described the frustrations of women who are not being depicted in the
same ways that men are for the same work. We joked together as we rattled these
sorts of common lines, “She’s a woman!” “A mother!” “Has a family!” “The ﬁrst
woman to!” “Persevered despite latent misogyny!” “She walked a harder road
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303 JCOM 18(04)(2019)C03 2
than her colleagues!” “She was pregnant at the time!” These gendered stereotypes
are common in narratives about women in ocean science.
When stories of women scientists are told, their greatness is often qualiﬁed by their
gender or their association with a man — often their husband or their
advisor — rather than letting the power of their scholarship or their brilliance stand
on its own. But science does not need a male referent to validate and authorize it.
Stories of nonbinary scientists often do not get told at all [see Pérez-Bustos, 2014,
for an exception, and the commentary by Perez-Bustos in this collection]. When
men are written about in science, they are rarely qualiﬁed or recognized as fathers
or husbands. A hard road for men, as another participant explained, is not deﬁned
by the gender binary but instead socioeconomic status, sickness, or disability. This
participant and others described how they would like to stop seeing womanhood
treated as a genetic deformity which needed to be overcome; they believed that
womanhood doesn’t require reference at all when evaluating whether the road to
discovery was a hard one. These assertions are the crux of the politics of the
personal, how we interact in everydayness.
We can learn from these scientists’ experiences, by, for example, developing better
networks for acknowledgments and crediting through science communication the
collective action that makes science work, rather than reinstating the prototypical
lone white male genius trope. Donna Haraway [2007], Mel Chen [2012] and Maria
Puig de la Bellacasa [2015] push us even further, by asserting ecological thinking,
including the presence of animals, insects and nature in our narratives of science
work (not just as scientiﬁc subject). This work acknowledges the privileges of being
a giver or a recipient of care and care’s multi-directionality: how we care for
non-humans and how non-humans care for us. We need to recognize when we as
science communicators keep reifying the genius narrative that inaccurately
represents the crucial contributions of many people and things, when not only
feminist technoscience but much scholarship from broader science and technology
studies and histories of science have shown us that time and again large networks
and ecologies surround each and every discoverer and their great contribution to
science. Feminist technoscience luminaries like Judy Wajcman [1991] have long
argued that science and technology are not gender neutral. My work has shown
that many women are pushed out of the workforce by the combined forces of
men’s dominance in the ﬁeld and the sexual violence that disproportionately
affects women and marginalized people. We can do better, and science
communication can be part of how we do that.
Postcolonial and decolonial feminist scholars like Evelyn Fox Keller [1983], Sharon
Traweek [1988], Tania Pérez-Bustos [2014] and Sandra Harding [1991] demonstrate
to us that science is interesting to all genders, and that scientiﬁc labor is not
exclusively masculine. However, the dominant interests of science became strongly
linked to male interest, and associations of masculinity and femininity limit what
we come to know. Together with queer theory by Karen Barad [2007], Sarah Ahmed
[2006] or Lauren Berlant [2011] we see that diverse scientiﬁc teams and subjects,
diverse reviewers and readers, advisory boards, and mentorship roles, will
at once open new regimes of knowledge and identify oppressive practices to begin
to unravel them. We are often blind to the troubles of others who are not like us.
It is important to put multiple kinds of actors in our stories, to cite multiple kinds
of people from multiple places, to have diverse citation lists and syllabi, to work
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303 JCOM 18(04)(2019)C03 3
cross-culturally not just to ﬁll a diversity quota set by the U.S. National Science
Foundation or other funding agencies but because we have much to learn from
others, we want multiple kinds of people to see themselves in science, to participate
with us and to use science to solve problems inherent in their communities. The way
around the blindspot is to necessitate diversity, openly and continuously asking
for feedback from multiple kinds of people who will make our research stronger,
our conversations richer, and our solutions less elite, particularly in health sectors.
Adele Clarke [1998], Ruha Benjamin [2013] and Annemarie Mol [2003], for
example, look at the ways in which categories of people in medical ﬁelds get
deﬁned and what happens when someone lands in an Other or Miscellaneous
category, about the bias of science toward answering questions concerning male
reproduction and sexuality and sidelining the health and sexual freedom of women
and nonbinary genders. Who do we overlook as having unimportant concerns?
When did peanuts get banned from schools and, to follow Star [1991], what would
be the tipping point for all restaurants to cater toward being allergic to onions?
We also have learned time and again that the deﬁcit model of communication does
not stand. This means that when we dispense information to a public, it does not
mean it will increase knowledge or introduce behavior change to that public.
Information is not enough. Feminist technoscience visionaries like Lucy Suchman
[2007] have shown us that local culture is critical to understanding how something
gets taken up, that simply disseminating a plan, policy or vision for the future does
not mean it will be followed. Feminist technoscience can help scholars and science
communicators understand the precarious visibility politics of who gets described
and seen in science, and how they get described (what parts or who gets to be
whole) and how they are seen, and the particular kinds of academic and
journalistic labor that can produce the more equitable scientiﬁc worlds we desire,
to be careful and not careless for ourselves and our environment.
Feminist technoscience shows us that there are endless possibilities for change, that
change sometimes comes from within radical spheres, from the queer and
unexpected scientiﬁc moments and people, just as much as it comes from within
the powerful forces of hegemony and patriarchy that we see so visibly today. We
can change. Our determinist narratives, which tell us certain norms and standards
and technologies are “here to stay,” are misleading. So how can we push toward
positive change? The powerful lens of feminist technoscience in science
communication starts us on this road by challenging assumptions and asking
questions that produce constructive answers for more carefully constructed
futures. The lens of feminist technoscience makes for a more resilient science
communication (and science) that can stand up to the political climate of
anti-intellectualism and scientiﬁc skepticism today.
References Ahmed, S. (2006). Queer phenomenology: orientations, objects, others. Durham,
NC, U.S.A.: Duke University Press.
Barad, K. (2007). Meeting the universe halfway: quantum physics and the
entanglement of matter and meaning. Durham, NC, U.S.A.: Duke University
Press.
Benjamin, R. (2013). People’s science: bodies and rights on the stem cell frontier.
Stanford, CA, U.S.A.: Stanford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303 JCOM 18(04)(2019)C03 4
Berlant, L. (2011). Cruel optimism. Durham, NC, U.S.A.: Duke University Press.
Chen, M. (2012). Animacies: biopolitics, racial mattering and queer affect. Durham,
NC, U.S.A.: Duke University Press.
Clarke, A. E. (1998). Disciplining reproduction: modernity, american life sciences
and the problems of sex. Berkeley, CA, U.S.A.: University of California Press.
Haraway, D. J. (2007). When species meet. Minneapolis, MN, U.S.A.: University of
Minnesota Press.
Harding, S. G. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge? Thinking from women’s
lives. Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.: Cornell University Press.
Keller, E. F. (1983). A feeling for the organism: the life and work of Barbara
McClintock. San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.: W. H. Freeman.
Mol, A. (2003). The body multiple: ontology in medical practice. Durham, NC,
U.S.A.: Duke University Press.
Pérez-Bustos, T. (2014). ‘Of caring practices in the public communication of science:
seeing through trans women scientists’ experiences’. Signs: Journal of Women in
Culture and Society 39 (4), pp. 857–866. https://doi.org/10.1086/675540 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). ‘Making time for soil: technoscientiﬁc futurity and
the pace of care’. Social Studies of Science 45 (5), pp. 691–716.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851 .
Star, S. L. (1991). ‘Power, technologies and the phenomenology of conventions: on
being allergic to onions’. In: A sociology of monsters: essays on power,
technology and domination. Ed. by J. Law. London, U.K.: Routledge, pp. 26–56.
— ed. (1995). Ecologies of knowledge: work and politics in science and technology.
Albany, NY, U.S.A.: State University of New York Press.
Steinhardt, S. B. (2018). ‘The instrumented ocean: how sensors, satellites and
seaﬂoor-walking robots changed what it means to study the sea’. Ph.D.
dissertation. Ithaca, NY, U.S.A.: Cornell University.
https://doi.org/10.7298/X4XP735P .
Suchman, L. (2007). Human-machine reconﬁgurations: plans and situated actions.
2nd ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Traweek, S. (1988). Beamtimes and Lifetimes. The World of High Energy Physicists.
Cambridge, U.S.A.: Harvard University Press.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.
Author Stephanie Beth Steinhardt is an assistant professor in the Department of Media and
Information and core faculty in the Center for Gender in a Global Context at
Michigan State University. E-mail: ssteinh@msu.edu.
Steinhardt, S. (2019). ‘Technoscience in the era of #MeToo and the science march’. How to cite
JCOM 18 (04), C03. https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303.
cThe Author(s). This article is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution — NonCommercial — NoDerivativeWorks 4.0 License.
ISSN 1824-2049. Published by SISSA Medialab. jcom.sissa.it
https://doi.org/10.22323/2.18040303 JCOM 18(04)(2019)C03 5
