Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Geoforum
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/geoforum
Telling times: More-than-human temporalities in beekeeping☆
Catherine Phillips
School of Geography, University of Melbourne, 221 Bouverie St, Carlton, VIC 3053, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
TimeTemporality
Honey bee
BeekeepingAustraliaABSTRACT
In this paper, I build on insights from temporal studies and more-than-human geographies to argue that there is
need to delve more deeply into how, by whom, and to what ends the times in which we live become told.
Empirically, the practice of beekeeping provides orientation for exploring intertwining temporalities and
timescales as more-than-human accomplishments. Drawing on ethnographic research undertaken in Australia,three accounts are developed: the catastrophic futures related to calls to ‘save the bees’; intimate, embodiedtemposandnegotiatedtimingsofvisitinga hive;andseasonalcyclesandrhythmsbeyondbutintegraltothelife
of a colony. Employing the concept of ‘telling times’ enables a gathering of these three accounts and highlights
not only the eco-social significance of the current times, but the ways in which time becomes experienced,shared, and resonates through more-than-human practices of time- and world-making.
1. Introduction
We live in telling times. What is done, thought, accomplished in the
nowmattersinsignificantways,onlysomeofwhichmaybeunderstood
or understandable. Advisories of these vital ecosocial times may be
found in (among other things) the proposal of the Anthropocene as a
new age (Crutzen and Stoermer, 2000), the impending disaster sym-
bolised by the Doomsday Clock (Mecklin, 2018), or the indication of
massive biodiversity loss through warnings of a ‘Sixth Extinction’
(Leakey and Lewin, 1996). These are attempts to register shifts in how
worlds become, and end. Each provides provocation to rethink and
remake worldly relations, among humanity and nonhuman others in
ways that might allow for mutual survival or even thriving; however,
each also suggests that time is running out for such action. Whether or
notsuchsymbolsandnamingsmoveus,theypointtothesignificanceof
whatAdam (2000) calls a ‘temporal gaze’ – a means of examining
worlds through time and temporality.
How might one respond to the demand for ‘stories (and theories)
that are just big enough to gather up the complexities and keep theedges open and greedy for surprising new and old connections’
(Haraway, 2016: 160)? To begin with, I argue we need to consider
temporalityinouraccountsofthe‘complexityofspecificculture-nature
intersections in their in/visible and im/material expressions’ (Adam
et al., 1997: 81). Narratives of particular sites and encounters not only
convey temporality but also generate temporal affects (Crang, 1994).
‘Telling times’, then, points to the significance current ecosocialrelations but also the importance of examining lived narratives oftemporality.Weneed,inotherwords,toexplorehowandbywhomthe
times in which we live become told.
Whatmight it mean tounderstand time tellingas more-than-human
accomplishment? What might such tellings of time reveal about the
significance of the times in which we live, whomever ‘we’ are? Which
tellingsoftimecometomatter?Toattendthesequestions,Iexplorethe
intertwining of multiple temporalities and timescales through attention
to one more-than-human practice: beekeeping. In doing so, this paper
takes up recent calls to better attend gaps in exploring temporalities of
more-than-human world-making (Bastian, 2012; Jones, 2011), and to
demonstrate how situated accounts of intimate human-nonhuman re-
lations stretch beyond the spacetimes of their immediacy (see Fitz-
Henry, 2017; Phillips, 2017). Through detailing beekeeping, a pat-
terning of lived temporalities emerges – refrains told, remade, re-
iterated through negotiated practice. Further, how time comes to be
understoodandexperiencedisshowntoradiate.Thetimestoldthrough
this paper travel not only with bees and keepers, but resound in wider
worlds swayed through tales of catastrophe and loss, practice and co-
ordinated tempos,encountersand seasonality.Inhighlighting multiple,
entwined more-than-human temporalities, the case of beekeeping also
helps reveal how select tellings of time both emerge from and remake
worlds. In addition to demonstrating the complications of more-than-
human temporal experiences, then, this paper gestures to how different
senses of time and temporality become conveyed, coordinated, and
contested. Such temporal accounts inform practices and the pivotal era
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.08.018
Received 13 October 2018; Received in revised form 30 July 2019; Accepted 29 August 2019☆Submission declaration: This article has not been published previously, is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, and its publication is approved by
the author. The research occurred under ethical approvals from the University of Wollongong, Western Sydney University, and University of Melbourne.
E-mail address: cphillips2@unimelb.edu.au.Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
Available online 10 September 2019
0016-7185/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
in which we live in ways often unrecognised.
After outlining the paper’s conceptual framing for considering
multispecies accounts of temporality and a short section on the context
and methods of the research, this paper proceeds through three ac-
counts of temporality that inform contemporary beekeeping. The first
of these sections interprets recent projected catastrophic futures of bee
loss, and the project of ‘saving the bees’. While seemingly distinct from
more experiential accounts that orient the next sections, there is no
doubt that the anticipated loss of bees echoes through beekeeping
worlds. The next segment outlines beekeeping through the tempos,
sequencing, and timings of intimate encounters of visiting with bees in
hives. While keeping the hive in view, the penultimate section focuses
on relations beyond the hive found in the cycles, durations, and dis-
ruptions of seasonality. These three explorations of temporal dynamics
are not intended to convey a linear or scalar account of beekeeping –
moving from intimate relations to a global debate, for example. As
narrative fragments oriented around temporal experiences, each telling
punctures, runs alongside, and/or interweaves among others, through
practice and, as such, should be read through each other. Finally, the
conclusion reflects upon what insights might be gained through more-
than-human time telling.
2. Thinking toward multispecies time tellings
Recent social studies of beekeeping offer important insights into the
complexities of the practice (Adams, 2018; Moore and Kosut, 2013;
Phillips, 2014) and the politics of knowledge involved in related eco-
logical damage and extinctions (Lezaun, 2011; Lehébel-Péron et al.,
2016; Maderson and Wynne-Jones, 2016; Watson and Stallins, 2016).
There are also indications of how important temporalities can be in
beekeeping. In their account of urban beekeeping in New York, Moore
and Kosut (2013, 92) observe that beekeeping involves a ‘responsible
performance of [human] mind/body and bee’ such that apiarists must
attune to the ‘affective buzz’ of bees. This is suggestive of the key role
that coordinating human and bee temporalities plays in the practice.
Further, these authors argue that beekeeping might be understood as a
method of ‘striving to coexist in common worlds’ (2013, 89), an ob-
servation that implies a concern for bee lives and futures shared with
humans. Temporality also plays a role in which expertise becomes re-
cognised through its enrolment in standard lab protocols for testing
toxicity for bees (Kleinman and Suryanarayanan, 2013); in which flora
is accessible and, therefore, how and when economic precarity is ex-
perienced by industry (Durant, 2019); and in how bees become mobi-
lised within cultural discourses, for example as industrious ‘busy’
creatures to be emulated (Preston, 2006). However, thus far, attention
to temporalities of human-bee relations and their importance to bee-
keeping practice tends to be implicit. This article begins to redress this.
In this paper, temporality is taken as embodied and enacted,
emergent through and with practice. Time, in this view, becomes
through lived, situated experiences that take shape in particular ex-
pressions of time. Edensor and Holloway (2008) point to such relations
in their exploration of a coach tour through polyrhythmia, eurythmia,
and arrhythmia– typesofrhythmsthat‘orderanddisorder experiential
terrains and mesh with subjective apprehensions wherein time can
appear to drag, speed up, or feel at odds with habitually placed
rhythms’ (484). In this way, time becomes something done and ex-
perienced differently, undermining assumptions about the possibilities
ofauniversalorsingulartemporalorder.Timemaybeexperiencedasa
finite, measured resource such that one ‘has time’ or not, but this is far
from the only way time becomes lived, felt, and/or told.
Ingold’s (2000) explanation of times through a consideration of
music is helpful. Time emerges, he argues, through activity; the musi-cians play sequences of notes at particular tempos, which must co-
ordinate or resonate among themselves but also with others (the con-
ductor and audience, the instruments, ideas of what the piece should
be, etc.). Time here is not only lived, but lived through practice and ascollectives. Ingold’s emphasis on repetition as productive of spacetimesechoesLefebvre’s articulation of rhythmanalysis, in which spacetimes
are understood to take shape through the relations of ‘slow or fast,syncopated or continuous, interfering or distinct’ rhythms (2004: 69).
Tsing (2015) takes the music analogy further writing of revelation
found in learning to listen for polyphony. In this learning, Tsing ‘wasforced to pick out separate, simultaneous melodies andto listen for the
moments of harmony and dissonance they created’ and, she argues that‘[t]his kind of noticing is just what is needed to appreciate the multiple
temporal rhythms and trajectories of the assemblage’ (24, original
emphasis). Such accounts indicate the multiplicity and complexity
needed in developing accounts of more-than-human temporality, but
how and who/what tells time in the polyphony remains somewhat
obscured.
The idea that time is experienced and made through diverse and
imbricated relations and, further, that such relations are more-than-
human, is beginning to gain attention (see Bastian, 2012; Brice, 2014;
Gan, 2017; Neimanis and Walker, 2014). Power (2009), for instance,
considers how the temporalities of possums influence dynamics of
human efforts of home-making. In a different vein, Jones’ (2011) study
of tidal rhythms, explains an interest in ‘natural’ rhythms with twoimportant caveats: first, that such times require analysis to grasp the
world’spolyrhymicity;andsecond,thatnaturalrhythmspointtonature
not as opposite but as condition of culture. How such natural tempor-
alities coexist with other times has proven of interest for recent more-
than-human studies as investigations into seasonality. Krause’s (2013)
exploration of the seasonal liveliness of a river demonstrates that ‘theserhythms emerge from the interplay of various fluctuating phenomena,
including the calendar and weather, but also electricity prices and
human activities’. Times, and worlds, are not necessarily comprised of
orwithsocial ornaturaltemporalities,butrathercomplexintertwinings
and foldings. Moreover, time itself might be understood not only aslived but as dynamic in its polyrhythmic tellings. Rethinking time thisway provides opportunity to consider how seemingly discordant tem-
poralities and time scales co-exist. As I illustrate, urgent pleas to ‘save
thebees’inthefaceoffearsofextinctionandlostfoodsecuritycan(and
do) co-exist with intimate tempos and seasonal coordinations of bee-
keeping.
Recent work also challenges assumptions about nature’s pace al-
ways being ‘slow’ (Bastian, 2012; Jones, 2011; Neimanis, 2018). One
approach has been to suggest that in fact, nature’s quickening pace
makeshumanstooslowwhenitcomestoenvironmentalcrises.Whileit
is not unreasonable to argue that humans are responding too slowly to
the many ecosocial crises we face today, this approach retains a pro-
blematic dualism between nature and culture as well as an underlying
sense of a singular natural temporality. A different approach, and one
taken herin, involves critically attending to the complex interplay of
temporalities through empirical enquiry. We might note, for instance,
theslowandfastaswellastheimmediacyandhauntingsevidentinthe
violences of extinctions, hazardous waste, or oceanic pollution (Adam,
1998; Neimanis, 2018; Phillips, 2017; Van Dooren, 2014). Or the cy-
cles, durations, and tempos involved in maintaining plants (Jones and
Cloke, 2002), producing wine (Brice, 2014), or caring for soil (Puig de
la Bellacasa, 2015). In addition to detailing complex relations, more-
than-human accounts reveal other possibilities through their telling,
signalling what figures might serve as inspiration for alternative senses
of time (Bastian, 2012) or questioning conceptual and methodological
habits through attention to non-linear, relational experiences of time
(Bawaka et al., 2017). As these examples suggest, accounts of multi-
species co-constitutions of time offer a means to disrupt notions of
unitary natural time and straightforward accounts of ecosocial chal-
lenges.
Diversifying and ‘thickening’ accounts of times and temporalities
provides opportunity to gain new insight into ‘small kingdoms of
worldliness’ (Lorimer, 2009: 273;see also Phillips and Atchison, 2018).
As this paper will show, examining more-than-human temporalitiesC. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
316
provides means to more deeply explore the experiences and negotia-
tions involved in practices, and provides another means of considering
the ethico-political implications involved. How beekeepers and bees
live, learn, and tell time in multiple ways suggests the polyphony
mentioned by Ingold (2000) and Tsing (2015). Held alongside this
notion of polyphony, the concept of resonance (and dissonance) mightreflect the imbricated processes of living temporalities, sharing such
experiences through tellings of time, and making such tellings matter
more widely. In the following sections, I offer partial, situated accounts
of living and telling more-than-human temporalities that I hope find
resonance through and beyond their particularity. In this way, the
paper not only reports but participates in telling times.
3. Exploring Australian beekeeping
Australia provides a fascinating location for exploring beekeeping
practices for several reasons, three of which are particularly relevant
here. First, Australian beekeeping is experiencing a declining com-
mercial sector with simultaneous growth in (especially urban) hobbyist
numbers (ABARES, 2016). Second, there is an absence of documented
mass bee losses and of Varroa destructor, a parasitic mite held at least
partially responsible for world-wide bee declines and considered “themost serious threat to apiculture globally” (UNEP, 2010). And third,
distinctive spatiotemporal patterns shape Australian practice including
irregular blossoming of key species, a relatively long season, and on-
going challenges of dealing with changing land management and cli-
mate change (Sommerville, 2010; ABARES, 2016). These three aspects
– ambivalentnumbers, continuing absences, and erratic spatiotemporal
patterning – point to the unique and compelling worlds of Australian
beekeeping.
1Each of these aspects suggest the need to explore bee-
keeping beyond its economic and productive aspects, and provides in-dicationthatattentiontotimemayofferusefulinsightsintobeekeeping
as it is currently known, felt, and reproduced.
This research took an ethnographic approach to learn about bee-
keeping.Toallowforvariedspaces,times,andactivities,fieldworkwas
undertaken throughout the year and involved three methods. Firstly,
interviews with 42 beekeepers (24 hobbyist and 18 commercial) andfive government officers were completed during 2011–2014 and
2015–2018. The first period, as part of a larger study, concentrated on
commercial beekeepers – defined by governmental documents as full-
time apiarists with 400 hives or more (see ABARES, 2016). Distinctions
made in statistics and in interviews prompted a second project to
consider the practices of hobbyist beekeepers, especially those practi-
cing within urban contexts.
2Discussions with both commercial and
hobbist beekeepers covered a range of themes: details about their hivesand resourcing; learning processes; materials and techniques; joys and
challenges; and, opinions about related governance and the future of
beekeeping. Secondly, the interviews were complementedby ‘go-along’
(Kusenbach, 2018) activities, such as examining hives and extracting
honey, ranging in duration from about an hour to several days. This
method proved particularly useful in building understanding of lived
experience. It also allowed other-than-human roles to come to the fore,sparking new conversations (see Hitchings and Jones, 2004). And
thirdly, in both periods of research, participant observation involvedattending various meetings, events, field-days, and training. This
combination of interviews, go-alongs, and participant observation
provides rich data on the experiences, valuations, practices,places, and
temporalities of Australian beekeeping.
4. A time of crisis, or urgent mandates to ‘save the bees’
‘No bees=No food’ (see Fig. 1) declares the mudflap on the bee-
keeper’s truck I hop into to learn about how honeybees
3are moved in
commercial production in Australia (see Phillips, 2014). At the end of
myvisit,whichcoveredover24htogetherinoraroundthattruck,Iam
gifted my own set. I do not own a vehicle so their intended function is
lost but they are an excellent reminder of our discussions and that ex-
perience– partof anarchive ofaffective objects.Themudflap wasused
by the Crop Pollination Association of Australia to raise awareness of
the importance of bees in assuring human food security. Its exhortation
is clear: save the bees! In this telling of impending catastrophe, bees
condition human survival – particularly as pollinators. Humans may
shape bees’ possibilities of living – particularly through colonial dis-
persals, industrial agriculture, habitat destruction, and anthropogenic
environmental change. But, we are told, bees would not leave this
world alone. Our fate follows theirs: ‘no bees, no food’.
Thepleaof themudflapbuilds uponacrisis narrativethathascome
to dominate discussions of bees, even though bee losses experiencedaround the world remain undocumented in Australia. Chris (longterm
hobbyist, club organiser) points to the importance of this narrative:
Why did people get interested in bees in the last 10years? The mainreasonisbecauseofthethreatofbeesoverseas,andthat’spickedup
in the press. So, people have become interested in bees here [in
Australia] to save bees.
As Chris indicates, the anxiety over bee losses, and the accompanying
drive to save the bees, travels, becomes felt even in places yet to livesuch losses. The narrative compels action. Cameron (short-term bee-
keeper, working toward commercial) reiterated this point, explaining:
The whole CCD [colony collapse disorder] phenomenon, you know
what I mean, that media is transpiring here. So, I do get people
wantingtosavethebees.Somepeoplewanttokeep hives,butalsoI
getcallsaboutswarms,where peoplesay,‘givenbeesarein decline,
Idon’twanttocallapestcontrollerI’llcallabeekeeper[toremovea
Fig. 1.Promotional object. Photo by author.
1An exploration of the ecosocial history of Australian beekeeping is beyond
the scope of this paper. However, it is notable that honeybees became estab-
lished as part of pursuits of settler agriculture (Hopkins, 1886) and later de-velopmentsofindustrialagriculture.Thishistoryiscarriedthroughgenerations
of practice.
2Pseudonyms have been assigned to quoted beekeepers. Each is also labelled
either commercial (full-time, 400 hives or more) or hobbyist (part-time, 50
hives or less), reflecting governmental distinctions and common descriptors.
Though this provides a sense of participants it can also obscure nuances within
a complex community of practice. As examples, hobbyists may sell products oract as full-time swarm collector in season; many beekeepers undertake other
activities–runningclubs,mentoring,brokering,etc.;andseveralpositionsexist
between ‘hobbyist’ and ‘commercial’.3In deference to the stories being told, throughout this paper I use the col-
loquial honeybee rather than the scientific term ‘honey bees’.C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
317
swarm]’.
Swarming – the process of forming a new colony – is further ex-
plored in section five, but here offers a connection to a sense of crisis,
and the mandate to save bees. The threat of this looming future, her-
alded by the mudflap, resonates.
Icontendthatpayingattention totheframingoftimeinvolved with
this crisis narrative helps reveal the ways in which bee existence and
interaction arebecoming understood,andthe inclusionsandexclusions
involved. In other words, to understand contemporary beekeeping and
the challenges facing people and bees it is vital to explore how times
become known and told.
In2006beekeepersintheUnitedStatesbegannoticingthatcolonies
ofbeesweredisappearing,andthecausewasunclear.Itwasatroubling
mystery. Bees’ products – honey, wax, venom – provide significant
benefits for humans, but the most valued service they provide is pol-
lination; of the 100 crop species estimated to provide 90% of the food
worldwide, 71 are estimated to be least partially bee-pollinated and
honeybees remain the most commonly managed pollinator (UNEP,
2010: 1).4Without honeybees, human food security would be at risk.
This says nothing of ecological consequences, erosion of longstandingand diverse roles in human culture, or the emotional toll such losses
might incur (Hung et al., 2018; Mathews, 2010; Preston, 2006). Losing
bees would be tragic – in ecological, economic, cultural, and moral
terms. In the aftermath of the alert, it was revealed that US beekeepers
were not alone in their losses.
5Concern mounted.
In her consideration of the implications of ‘colony collapse dis-
order’, as the US losses came to be known, Mathews (2010) coined the
term ‘planetary collapse disorder’, pointing to and reiterating theominous tale being told. In addition to the particularities of these bee
deaths, these losses were understood to signal a broader warning.
Honeybees, it turned out, were not the only bees, the only pollinators,
or the only insects disappearing (Hallman et al., 2017; IPBES, 2016).
Though evidence on many insects is limited, it is expected that bees,
butterflies,andotherinvertebratepollinatorswillmakeupthemajority
of future biodiversity loss (FAO, 2018; IPBES, 2016). Public commen-
taries on the catastrophe of ‘insectageddon’ (see Monbiot, 2017) echo
this idea that such losses point to fundamental ecological and agri-
cultural breakdown.
6With this repeated framing, bee/pollinator/insect
loss becomes a crisis.
The sense of urgency and need for action are made clear by the
many campaigns, news stories, governance measures, films, and pro-
motional objects (like the mudflap). The message transmitting is: we
mustsavethebees,tosaveourselves,now.Butthis‘now’isconditioned
byassumptionsaboutthepastandconcernsforthefuture.Inthepast,it
is assumed, bee lives were not so precarious or at least pollination (and
therefore human lives) were less at risk. The hope for the future, then,
becomes a return to a time when this present disruptionis resolved and
the norm re-established. There is a sense of a future rushing toward the
present, inhabitingit,reshapingit,demandingaction beforeitbecomes‘too late’. During this time of anticipating loss, what is decided anddone makes all the difference. Anderson (2010) has highlighted an-
ticipatory action as precautionary, pre-empting, and/or preparatory,suggestingactivitiesareundertakentocreateanintervalintimetodeal
with futures-yet-to-come. Even as bees and people are living amid
losses – projected and real – the message is reiterated. The seeming
inevitable future of a world of ‘no bees, no food’ might be avoided or
even rolled back, we are told, if we act in time. Within this defined
crisis, there is a linear understanding of time such that ‘time is divisible
into a static past, a given present, and a predictable future’ (Grosz,
1999: 9).
Anticipating the ecosocial disaster of pollinator loss not only shows
the future as something that can be enacted in the present, it supports
particularpursuitsandmaterialisationsofenvisionedworlds.Ingeneral
terms, arguments for particular solutions may favour sustainability
measures, like planning bee-friendly flora or transitions to multi-
fuctional agriculture (IPBES, 2016), or may endorse techno-scientific
innovation such as manufacturing drones capable of pollination
(Chechetka et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017). Commenting on the situa-
tion in Australia, Cameron argued for different strategies. First, he in-
dicated, echoing governmental and industry messages, that it is a
parasitic mite that threatens bees and beekeeping futures:
It’s really interesting, everyone thinks that bees in Australia are
declining, but it’s not. But it’s good for me, ‘cause people think that
and they’re naturally going to want to save the bees. Which is good,
but.…Youknow,beesarefantastic.It’sgood,wantingtosavebees.
But saving our bees is going to be, going back to Varroamite, pre-
venting that from coming here. That’s gonna be saving the bees.
In this way, the particular threat to bees (and corresponding solu-
tions) may be differently defined, but the sense of urgency to ‘save thebees’ remains. As a discourse, this implies the future is catastrophic,
unless humanity can lead the world out of this mess.
It is worth pausing to consider the gains and loses made through
viewing the future only through a lens of catastrophe, and throughaddressing crisis only through asking how to halt its progression. Tsing
(2015: 19) argues that ‘neither tales of progress nor of ruin tell us how
to think about collaborative survival.’ Heeding this warning, we might
work to admit tellings of times of crisis into collective stories, but that
need not mean being confined to such tales. What might other reck-
onings and renderings of time reveal? This question might be posed
aboutbeesandbeekeeping,butalsoinrelationtomanyidentifiedcrises
fromclimate changetofood security.In thenextsections, Itake upthis
question by moving toward more intimate accounts of beekeeping, first
by considering the tempos and rhythms involved in visiting bees in a
hive, and then by moving beyond the hive to examine bee-human ne-
gotiations of seasonal cycles.
5. At the hive: visiting bees, coordinating rhythms
Observing. I am told over and over again that it is the key to bee-
keeping. Knowing when to intervene, or not. A lot of beekeeping is
about timing it seems – discerning and becoming part of a shared
rhythm. The best time, I have been taught, is a clear, warm, not-too-
windy day. Then I still have to discern if the time is right. Watching,
listening, smelling. Are the bees up for a visit? Are they calm and
happy? Hungry, queen-less, diseased? Bees signal with their flight
patterns and buzzing; quick, erratic, high, loud warnings. Sluggishness
would be troubling, silence devastating. Is the hive entrance busy with
beescarryingheavyloads?Isthereasoursmell,orthatwondrousscent
of warm wax, propolis, and honey? With a sense of bees’ movements
and mood, things can proceed. I light a smoker in case the bees get
grumpy and I need to delay attack, then pull a veil over my head.
Watching, listening, smelling, I move closer. I try not to disrupt the
workings of the colony too much. Opening the hive takes focus – on
what is happening, on the state of the colony, on pollen and honey4Of the estimated 20,000 bee species, approximately 0.1% are actively
managed as pollinators (vanEngelsdorp and Meixner, 2010).
5Though falling short of increasing pollination demands, hive numbers
worldwide are estimated to have increased overall since 1961 (Aizen and
Harder, 2009). However, total hive estimates ignore death rates, and in some
locales problems are serious. Unmanaged colonies have largely disappeared inplaces inhabited by the parasitic mite Varroa destructor, while managed hives
experience significantly higher winter die-off (Kraus and Page, 1995; Jaffé
et al., 2010). And bees continue to be stressed and killed through aspects ofindustrial agrifood, including chemical use (EFSA, 2014; Godfray et al., 2014).
No single cause has been determined for increased honeybee death rates
worldwide; rather, it seems to be interactions of pests and diseases, limited
geneticdiversity,andstressorsofagrifoodproduction(chemicalexposure,poornutrition, mismanagement) (Potts et al., 2010).
6For recent debates on the subject in conservation science see Thomas et al.
(2019)andForister et al. (2019).C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
318
stores, on interacting with bees. Masses of fuzzy bodies wiggling and
waggling,beingbornandgivingcare,returningwithpollenandnectar,
going about their lives. I become rapt, almost immersed in another
world. For a moment. And more. Watching, listening, smelling (see
Fig. 2). But there are practical issues when keeping bees, and that
means getting on with it. Drawing on previous experience, using di-
verse resources but especially previous interactions with beekeepers
and bees, I continue to learn the ‘art of noticing’ (Tsing, 2015). The
colony tells me whether it is time not just to visit, but to intervene.
The physical and emotional work of beekeeping means becoming
attuned to hives over time, altering one’s rhythms to coordinate with
those of bees, and feeling how one is altered through repeated en-
counters. The opening paragraph of this section is based on my own
experiences with beekeeping. Among other things, it points to the need
forattentivenesstohiverhythms,thepossibilitiesofimmersionandlost
time, and a shared interest in honey and/or pollen that requires ne-
gotiation. This section elaborates each of these aspects of beekeeping
encounters.
5.1. Feeling hive tempos, getting in tune
Several beekeepers I interviewed spoke about slowing down –
slowing their bodies, focusing on bees, and enjoying the distance from
monitored and measured times. Though their contexts and scale-of-
operations differ, commercial and hobbyist beekeepers mentioned this
slowing and its associations to peace, calm, mindfulness, and connec-
tion to natural cycles as motivations for continuing to keep bees. For
example, Jack (long-term commercial beekeeper and bee broker) ex-
plainedthathisfavouritepartofhisjobis‘WhenI’vegottimetojustgo
outand observe.Anice,sunnyday whentheblossoms’fullout,andthe
aroma’s in the air, and the bees are coming… That’s a good day.’ This
desire for a slower tempo and for time to observe is not just about
beekeeperenjoyment,butaboutdoingbeekeepingwell.Speakingaboutwhat makes a ‘good beekeeper’, Daphne (long-term hobbyist), for in-
stance, indicated that lessons about slowing down and patience were
key:
…thebiggestthingisbeingpatient.It'snotsomethingyoucandoin
a hurry. I find it a bit frustrating, because I am, I am a terribly
impatient person… But to have to slow myself down for the bees is
good really. It's taken me a while to think that I can go slower.
Beekeeping, for Daphne, means mediating tendencies to hurry.
Throughtending tobees and learningtheir rhythmsshe is learning that
she ‘can go slower’, to do beekeeping well but also in ways that benefit
other aspects of her life.
In addition to demands to slow down, for some practitioners, time
itselfrecedesinbeekeeping.ThisisreflectedinmyownaccountwhenI
note becoming rapt and moments drawing out. Other fascinated bee-
keepers, both commercial and hobbyist, indicate that they can become
lost in their attention to bees. For them, time stops, passes without
notice, or becomes consumed. In conversation, two long-term com-
mercial beekeepers reflected:
Alex: I love it, but not to the extent that [Simon] does. I really do
enjoythe bees. Ilike workingout inthe bush,in the open.ButI alsoenjoying working when we’re pulling the hives apart, and actually
working with the bees themselves. But, [turning to Simon] you’re
just obsessed.
Simon: Yeah [pleased, rueful smile], it’s a bit time consuming.
Commenting upon the intrigue of bees and her own awe of bees,
Valerie (long-term hobbyist and broker) revealed:
I think we don't respect bees enough for what they do. The in-
credible taking of pollen, and the nectar and creating honey. I just
think that's unbelievable. So, there's a bit of awe I guess. … It’s just
fascinating.Icouldjust,youcouldjustopenahive,justhaveitopen
Fig. 2.Visits with bees, outside and inside hives. Photos by author.C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
319
all the time and be looking at stuff. [We (names deleted)] get quite
carried away actually sometimes when we're doing that.
Though her fascination creates a desire to keep a hive ‘open all the
time and be looking at stuff’, she can get ‘carried away’ so her en-
thusiasm must be moderated. Continuous observations can be difficult,
evendangerous,forbees.TherespectValerieadvocatesmeans notonly
slowing movements but also not overstaying one’s welcome. It is a
compellingworldthatcanprovokepausesaswellasdemandingaction.
Valerie continued by explaining that, ‘when they’ve had enough, the
bees say “Come on! Move on! Close up the hive.”’ The bees, then, re-
mind her of the time. They tell her ‘time’s up’, at least until the next
time.
Part of this fascination of beekeepers comes with watching bees
resting, playing, and (mostly) working. In my note and the photos
above, the initial glimpse into a hive reveals thousands of vibrating,
bumping, flitting bees involved in colony life. During their lifetime,
worker bees take on a series of tasks based on age – moving from
cleaning when they are a few hours old, through nursing, cooking,
constructing, and guarding, until they begin foraging in their early 20s
(daysnotyears).Butbeestellitistimetochangejobsbymorethanage;
timing these moves is about the condition of the hive and its residents.
Though the progressive task schedule suggests a regularised timeline,
the specifics of any bee’s progression and any colony’s workforce
composition relates to hormone levels, which shift with weather, nu-
trition, colony age profile, genetics, and season (Huang and Robinson,
1996).Alltheactivitydiscoveredbeneathahiveroofalsoinvolvesbees
sharing news about food, tasks, their queen, and general hive living.
Bees bump, stroke, joggle, dance, dart, among other things. The di-
rections, tempos, and durations of their moves convey much of the
goings on (Seeley, 2009). Opening a hive also alters the conditions of
the colony, so a beekeeper must be careful about their timing, making
efforts to work with the colony’s tempos and timings.
Other beekeepers echoed the need for patience for and respect of
hiverhythms.Belinda(longtermhobbyist),forexample,explainedhow
she thinks of beekeeping:
It's almost a meditative practice. You can kind of be in tune with
them and you can open the hive mindfully and not get stung at all
and observe things that you wouldn't have observed otherwise. …
the other way that bees teach you mindfulness is when they do get
aggressive … There's a bee inside your suit, you've got your hands
full, you've got your hive open, gloves and stuff everywhere. You
know it's going to take you 10min to pack it all up before you can
walk away to open your suit and let that bee out. And the bee's
getting more and more agitated and stressed. And you can hear it,
you can feel it crawling around in your ear, and near your eye. …
Nothing else teaches you mindfulness like a bee in your suit!
As Belinda suggests, beekeeping is not always smooth. Beekeeping
can be ‘a meditative practice’ helping a beekeeper connect with and
learn about the colony, but one must also protect oneself and the beeswhen encounters become dangerous. Though distinct from moments of
fascination, here too, 10min can feel like an eternity. As Valerie and
Belinda indicate, it is not just slowing down that matters. Becoming ‘in
tune’ may mean slowing or expedience. Coordinating multiple tem-
poralities and remaining open to what is needed in any one moment is
part of beekeeping well.
5.2. Storing for the future, or time to harvest?
Another important way in which negotiating bee times manifests is
in considering when, or if, to take honey from the colony. Honey is, forbees, key to survival. Stored pollen provides bees with protein but
honey is their primaryenergy source. Foragers,in the last stageof their
life, find and collect pollen and nectar for the colony (Huang and
Robinson, 1996). Once a bee’s stomach is full, she delivers its contents
to the hive and returns to foraging. Through repeated regurgitation
among worker bees inside the hive, the nectar is transformed and
evaporateduntilitisstoredinacell.Furthermoisturereductionmaybe
achieved as the bees fan their wings. Honey is then sealed (or capped)
by ‘construction’ worker bees, who make and shape wax into comb. All
of this honey-making and -storing suggests planning for the future of
thecolony.Thehoneyremainsstoreduntilbeesneedtoeatit,oruntila
beekeeper takes it for their own use.
The crafting of honey by bees for their own sustenance is an un-
dertaking that humans benefit from (or exploit) as harvesters. Kevin
(long-term commercial) recollected his choice to leave a full box of
honey for bees working an area that later became surrounded by flood:
Butthat’sabeekeepingtechnique.There’salotofpeoplethatwould
just take the honey off, usually because they’re running low on
money.Theysay,‘Right,Ineedthemoney.Ineeditnow.I’mtaking
it off.’ And then something happens, and there’s no honey left so all
the bees might die. Whereas, as much as I am trying to look at the
business, I try to keep the bees first.
His bees survived the unexpected, he clarified, because a future risk
was anticipated and short-term gain was refused in favour of long-term
success. His distinction disrupts unitary assumptions about commercial
practice (that it is only about quick production), and points to the im-
portance of temporal considerations: if and when honey is removed;
long- and short-term concern.
Theideathathealthybeesshouldcomefirstresounded throughthis
research and, as Kevin suggests, much of this has to do with temporal
coordination. Questions relating to honey taking revolved around how
long bees needed to endure without new food sources – when floramight flower, when to supplement feed, when to move hives. This
question of ‘when’ had significant influence on the life and death of
bees, and on the success of beekeepers. For some concerned with short-
term gain, learning bee tempos might enable pushing bees hard to
produce large quantities quickly but for most the desire to share time
with bees ran deeper. As Chris reiterated, ‘You’ve got to make sure that
you learn beekeeping and do what’s right for the bees, and the honey
will follow.’ This prioritisation of proper beekeeping, in combination
with repeated assertion that for each teaspoon of honey twelve forager
bees have laboured their lifetimes, points to a sense of responsibility. It
also demonstrates recognition of differences in the duration and
rhythms of bee and human lifetimes.
The sensory and affective impact of beekeeping can be over-
whelming – fascination, fear, love, anxiety, desire are all part of the
transformative encounters that can happen through visiting with bees.
Moore and Kosut (2013) explain that good beekeeping involves feeling
bees’ ‘affectivebuzz’,a sensebuiltthrough gesturesand reverberations,made but not necessarily heard or understood by all those involved.
This echoes Lefebvre’s notion that through experience capacities to
register everyday rhythms may enter ‘into the lived; though that does
notmeanitentersintotheknown’(2004:77).Further,thepotentialfor
moments of enchantment to prompt ethico-political engagement has
been explored in more-than-human studies (Bennett, 2010). Building
on these insights, this section illustrates that to understand beekeeping
requires attention to involved temporalities. The sequencing, timing,
and pacing of checking hives matters because it has implications for
bees and their time reckoning as well as for what the relations among
bees and humans produces. Too long, too fast, too disruptive and bees
begin to think it is time to defend the hive rather than getting on withC. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
320
their lives. And bees certainly tell beekeepers when dissonance regis-
ters. To achieve honey-making, pollination, or even just healthy hives
in beekeeping there is a need for human and bee tellings of time to
coordinate, to sync, even if this is always incomplete. Over time, with
repeated encounters and the development of routines, the capacities of
practitioners to attune, to tell times together, can be enhanced. How-
ever, the worlds of any particular hive, and its products, do not end
with the combined labour of specific colonies and beekeepers. Rather,
broader rhythms and histories live within such intimate encounters.
The next section explores seasonality as part of the polyrhythmic tales
of beekeeping, an aspect that moves us beyond the hive.
6. Beyond the hive: learning seasonal cycles and dynamism
Attuning to the rhythms of seasonal changes, growth patterns, and
circadian cycles within beekeeping was considered by beekeepers to
make felt both the persistence and the dynamism of broader environ-
ments. Connecting with ecological temporalities was part of the appeal
ofbeekeeping.Belinda,reflectingonthecyclesinvolvedinherpractice,
explained:
Ifyou'reintunewithyourbees,youconnectwiththisseasonalcycle
ofthings.It'sverysubtle.Youwouldn'tnecessarilynoticeotherwise.
So, you're really aware of your environment. There's just a lovely
seasonal cycle of beekeeping, like swarming in the spring and
building boxes and harvesting the honey in the autumn and then
wintering down. It kind of marks the season when it's those times of
the year. I think that's one of the greatest gifts of beekeeping.
Belinda’s appreciation for the ‘seasonal cycle of things’ and the in-
creased noticing of environmental shifts was reiterated by many of the
beekeepers with whom I spent time. Two of the significant ways this
manifested orient around seasonality as related to tree rhythms, parti-
cularly the availability of pollen and nectar, and to the growth and
contraction of colonies in terms of swarming.
6.1. Getting into the flows of trees
Ensuring bees have access to nectar flows is vital for healthy hives
and beekeeping success. Daphne, for instance, articulated a need to
‘know flora’ that was confirmed by others. She explained:
Youdohavetocheckthatthereisfloraaroundforthem.Thesedays,
itdoesn'tmatterwhereyouare,whetheryou'reinthecityorcoming
out into the suburbs, a lot of gardens are disappearing. Like I said,
when I first brought the hives here, I made sure that there was
something around. It's the next-door neighbour's garden probably
that kept them going rather than mine.
Although her own garden could not support her hives alone, in
combination with other resources in the neighbourhood Daphne’s
beekeeping has thrived. Chris reiterated the need to learn surrounding
places and seasonal variations, stating:
I think what it does is, it makes you more aware of the living world.
Particularly, it’s highly dependent on the weather. So, you’ve got to
be looking out at the weather… I think definitely for me, it makes
me more aware of nature. Trees, you’ve got to look at trees.
For both Daphne and Chris, among others, beekeeping entangles
with the rhythms and times of plants.
Flowering frequencies, durations, and intensities vary with species,
and with each species’ reactions to climatic factors. In Australia,
Eucalypts serve as the main flora for commercial honey production and
though they can offer abundant flows, they are also erratic; blossoming
relatesmoretorainfalleventsthantoseasonalcycles,andinvolvestime
scales ranging from one to five years (Sommerville, 2010). This is dis-
tinct from other places, like North America and Tasmania. Lincoln
(long-term commercial) explained the significance: ‘beekeeping overthere [Tasmania] is different to over here [mainland Australia]. Totallydifferent. There, you can put the clock just about to the time and date
when the honey flow starts and finishes. And usually you get a heavy
honey flow and a quick flow’. Available nectar also varies with tree age
and abiotic factors, and some Australian beekeepers have observed
long-term declines in nectar production (Britchnell and Gibson, 2008).
Moreover, ensuring access to nectar flow is not enough; instead, over-
lapping flows at the right times are necessary to support a colony’s
lifecycle. Commercial beekeepers move their hives to different sites to
ensure nectar and pollen access (see Phillips, 2014), while hobbyists’
hivesmostlyremainstatic.Thisdifferencemeansthatthefocusdiffers–
one across a series of sites and landscapes, another on one place – but
for both, an understanding of plant seasonality is necessary. The sea-
sonality of beekeeping, therefore, is experienced differently based on
colony needs, flora, place, and practice.
The ‘angiosperm-insect alliance’ developed long before human-bee
relations (Clark, 2013). Concerns about disruption within the rhythms
of this relation – such as those raised by the adaptation of different
species to climate change – further complicate matters. Belinda af-
firmed:
Climate change affects bees massively. I mean, if you talk to bee-
keepers about climate change, because they all will tell you, years
ago we always used to get the best honey… I mean, it affects the
bees in that it affects their nutrition. Things don't flower at the right
time, when they're supposed to. It rains when things are blossoming
and they [bees] can't get out to forage. If the system’s kind of out of
whack,beesaren'tgettingthenutritionthattheyneedintheirhives.
Beekeepers and bees rely upon flora – remnant, weedy, cultivated,
conserved – all a result of complex pasts of floral capacities and dis-
tributionsaswellashumanlandmanagementandplantingpreferences.
Decreasing availability and accessibility of floral resources leads to
precarityforbeekeepers(Durant,2019),andforbees.Currenteffortstoengagepublicsinplantingbee-friendlyfloraanddisputesoveraccessto
state forest for apiaries (compare EPA, 2007; DEPI, 2013) suggest this
kind of reliance, though ongoing planting and land histories remainlargely unspoken. And emergent floral landscapes – cultivated and
otherwise–arejustoneaspectofthecomplexseasonalcycles(andtheir
disruption) lived through beekeeping.
6.2. Time to move, and ‘swarm-watch’
Another way in which seasonality comes to matter in beekeeping
temporalities involves swarming – when some bees from one colony
separate to form a new colony (see Fig. 3, bottom right). Swarming is
taken most commonly as a sign of spring, as Belinda notes above, but it
can occur anytime when weather is warm, food sources plentiful, and a
healthy colony becomes too cramped. This abundance and excess
prompts about half of an established colony to depart with their queen
to form a cluster nearby, leaving remaining bees behind. Though those
leavinghaveagreeditistimetomove,theyhavenotyetdecidedwhere
to live. Emerging from the cluster, scouts, among the eldest in the hive,
explore the area for potential new homes. When a scout returns to the
swarm, she dances – through her movements she shares information
about the direction, distance, and quality of her preferred site. Fol-
lowersofthedancewillthenvisitthesitetoevaluateitthemselves,and
if they are convinced, they return to the swarm and dance for that site.
Once the number of sites has been whittled down and enough bees
agree, the swarm will fly en masse to their new place and begin settling
in.
7As swarming demonstrates, rhythms of communication and co-
ordination of timing are key to colony survival.
7This process was repeatedly elaborated by beekeepers based on their own
observations, readings, or mentoring by other beekeepers. For a scientific ex-
ploration of swarming and bee cognition see Seeley (2009).C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
321
Attendingtothetimingofswarmingispartofbeekeeping.Speaking
of seeing a swarm emerge, beekeepers used words like ‘amazing’,
‘fantastic’, and ‘cool’, always suggesting a sense of excitement. It was
considered a privilege to catch swarming in process – to witness a
humming, shifting cloud of bees fly off and later resolve as a vibrating,
semi-settled cluster. Commercial producers mentioned ongoing tweaks
to their swarm management techniques, but for hobbyists a stronger
debate about whether (and how) swarms should be managed was on-
going. Chris divulged:
Some people say they're natural beekeepers because they don’tmanage the bees as much as what I would manage them. For ex-
ample, controlling swarming. So, they don’t worry about swarming
because it’s natural to let bees swarm. Whereas I would say because
you live in a city, you’ve got a responsibility perhaps to stop the
swarms going into buildings.
As hobbyist beekeeping grows in popularity especially in urban
locations, and as worry over loss of insects and biosecurity concernsgrow, management of swarms is increasingly endorsed; collection and
managementofswarmsisrecommended,forinstance,bygovernmental
agents to limit public risk especially in urban areas (see DPI, 2000).
‘Swarm-watch’ was what Quinton (long-time hobbyist) called
swarming season – a time each year when he said he was ‘run off his
feet’ trying to keep up with his own hives as well as all of the requests
for removal. Beekeepers like Quinton, reflecting on spring tasks, re-
commended being ready to collect unexpected swarms, suggesting a
season of anticipation involving preparation for not-always-predictable
colony timings. To manage swarming in one’s own hives means at-
tempting to interrupt colony division and spread. To delay swarming,beekeepers cited increasing the frequency of their hive checks and re-movingqueencells(see Fig.3,topright).But,theyexplained,removing
queen cells is no guarantee against swarming, and it can be risky;construction of cells for queens signals either imminent swarming or a
failingqueenandreadingthingswrongcanbedisastrousforthecolony.
To disrupt the swarming cycle, rather than just delay it, beekeepers
recommended either providing more space in the hive to allow growth
or splitting the hive – i.e., creating an artificial swarm. Even with such
measures, however, swarming can happen.
In addition to watching one’s own hives, beekeepers like Quinton
oftenengagedinswarmcollection.Storiesofswarmcollectionincluded
talesofeasilyremoving swarmswithastrongraponatree branchwith
bees droppingsmoothly into a waiting box butalso of prolongedaffairs
involving removals from inside walls, heritage tree hollows, chimneys,
compost bins, and even a fire hydrant. The docility of swarming bees
and the marvel of collecting beekeepers does not always translate into
how bee swarms are publicly received, particularly if swarms crossover
into ‘human’ places like shops, streets, pools, or yards. Beekeepers re-
layed stories of responses involving thrill and support but also fear and
avoidance until swarms were removed or killed (see Fig. 3, left, for
example of posted warning in public park of colony swarming sched-uled for collectio). Human schedules and expectations of timely ac-
commodation can conflict with leaving bees to their own devices, or
waiting for solutions other than extermination.
While swarm-watch season can be busy, unpredictable, even tense,
most beekeepers indicated they enjoy collecting swarms. In fact,
swarmsoftenofferedinspiration;swarmsprovidedtheinitialcolonyfor
most of the beekeepers with whom I spoke and provided a means of
increasingthenumbersofthehivestheyhadorcouldsharewithothers.
Fig. 3.Watching for and finding swarming, photos by author.C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
322
Inthisway,swarm-watchservesthepracticeofbeekeepingbyensuring
friendly relations with neighbours and by providing the basis for
sharing the practice. There was also a sense of doing something good
for the bees collected as swarms. Henry (short-term hobbyist) ex-
plained:
I've been starting to collect swarms and I think there's a tremendoussatisfaction where you can rescue some bees that were either going
to be poisoned or sprayed or in some way killed through ignorance
orjustthroughconvenience.Buttosavesomebees,relocatethemto
someone who is going to look after them, so that they prosper and
then multiply at some stage in the future. Now that, to me is, if
you're getting involved with bees to help save the bees, what better
way of doing it? – saving swarms from certain death.
Henry’s comment suggests a disjunct between the time-spaces of
swarmsandthoseofhumanssuchthatbeeswouldlosetheirfuturesdueto a public’s lack of understanding or inconvenience. In this way, he,
among others, understood swarm collection as work to ensure bees can
thrive, with someone who cares for them. This is quite an intimate,
imminent sense of ‘saving the bees’ compared with that explored in
section four. Swarming has previously been characterised as a ‘time of
anxiety’ due to a suggestion that beekeepers worry about the loss of
productivity should swarming occur (Green and Ginn, 2014). This de-
sire for uninterrupted production – whether for honey or pollination –
may be part of the concern; however, as Henry, Chris, and Daphne
articulate, there is much more going on.
In beekeeping, then, the marking of a season is demonstrably less a
calendar reference than recognition of a polyrhythmic confluence.
Olwig’s (2005: 260) observation about farming (in the global North) is
suggestive:
it is not particularly helpful to calculate the spring growing seasonas beginning on 21 March … phenomenon such as the sprouting of
leaves are more realistic indicators of spring because seasonal
transition involves a highly irregular, complex process of inter-
related climatic, geologic, floral, faunal, and social change, and the
ability to read all the signs of this change correctly can spell agri-
cultural success or failure.
Seasonality, then, is a patterning of multiple rhythms. The cycles
and times of the colony are individual and collective; bees commu-nicate with each other through chemical receptors and gestures, ne-
gotiate timing of activities such as swarming, and coordinate with
seasonalvariations.Beesexperienceandtelltime,forthemselvesandin
ways that keepers must learn and accommodate to maintain the shared
practice of beekeeping. There are also interruptions and disruptions in
seasonal patterns, such as those of irregular nectar flows or unexpected
swarms, that require continual attendance. Several of the comments
from beekeepers may seem to reinforce a division of ‘social’ or ‘natural’
temporality; however, as recent works on agricultural seasonality re-
mind, dissonance need not be read as dualism (Brice, 2014; Krause,
2013; Whitehouse, 2017). Holding calendar indicators or production
timelines alongside other ways of telling times provides valuable in-
sights into how seasonality becomes registered (as well as how bee-
keeping gets done).
7. Telling times, finding resonance
It may be through loss, through catastrophe-in-progress, that bees –
and beekeeping – are coming into focus worldwide. Honeybees are
becoming a symbol of ecological and agricultural vulnerability, and
their long, intimate history with humans may make the warning they
proffer of shared, troubled futures take hold in ways other crises would
not. There is a risk that care for, about, with honeybees might obscure
other creatures and worlds worthy of consideration; however, their
figuration as omen might also prompt deeper questions and thoughtful
action. Further, as this paper demonstrates, such anticipations of lossand urgencies to act refract only part of how tellings of time manifestand influence. Thinking further about ways of reckoning, experiencing,
and coordinating time through more-than-human practices demon-
strates a diversityof experience and narrativesthat refuses anysense of
singular, unitary, or universal accounts of time or temporality.
Thispaperhasexploredthephenomenonofbeekeepingasemerging
from and reiterating interplays of temporal rhythms and time framings.
A moment’s pleasure, a lifetime of labour; expected sequences and
surprising variations; negotiations of long- and short-term; tempos of
disruption and timings of flow; repeating cycles, erratic irruptions –
each of these (among others) has featured. Recognising the temporal-
ities of nonhumans, such as bees, is just a small step to gaining insight
into their worlds. This paper illustrates some ways in which honeybees
tellofthetemposandtimingsoftheirlivesanddeaths.Thetimetellings
provided also indicate temporal interactions of bees and keepers – ef-
forts to negotiate, manage, coordinate as part of keepers’ aims to find
resonance. These multiple temporalities of practice are not experienced
in isolation or linearly, there are interruptions, complex harmonies,
staccato notes, as well as driving beats in the polyphony. Beekeeping
times also reach beyond immediate encounters, carrying legacies and
futures. Which times become lived and shared (or not) has practical,
affective, and ethico-political implications. Only some tellings of times
resound, while others stutter, fall silent, haunt. Whether and how
tellingof timesof crisis,of intimateimmersion, ofcyclicalcoordination
(amongothers) become experienced and find resonance matters agreat
deal.
As part of an endeavour to understand contemporary ecosocial
challenges, analyses need to delve more deeply into questions of how
and what wetell ourselves and othersabouttime. In framingthis paper
through ‘telling times’, I have aimed to highlight three things: first, the
variety of ways in which time becomes experienced, understood, and
shared in more-than-human terms; second, the act of sharing through
accountsinwhichweall–includingmyselfasaresearcher–attempttotell of things, including times, that matter and that find resonance; and
third, the significance of the times in which we live, and which we
remakewithothers.Thinkingtimeinamore-than-humanmodereveals
the value of a temporal approach involving varied spans, scales, and
rhythms. It also indicates that collective understandings of forms and
relevanceoftimeemerge,withandwithoutengagementswithhumans.
Developing more-than-human accounts of how times become, how
temporalities are experienced, and multiple tellings of time, I argue, is
fundamental to understanding and responding to the telling times in
which we live.
Acknowledgements
My deepest thanks to all the beekeepers and bees who shared their
times and places with me for this research. My gratitude also to the
special issue editors for the invitation to join the publication, and the
participants in the ‘Rethinking Time and Temporality’ workshop for
thoughtful, provocative discussions about time. Final thanks to Lesley
Head, David Bissell, the anonymous reviewers, and the handling editor
for offering constructive comments about the thinking and writing of
this article.
References
ABARES(AustralianBureauofAgriculturalandResourceEconomicsandSciences),2016.
Australian Honey Bee Industry: 2014–2015 Survey Results. Commonwealth of
Australia, Canberra.
Adam, B., 1998. Timescapes of Modernity: The Environment and Invisible Hazards.
Routledge, London.
Adam, B., 2000. The temporal gaze: the challenge for social theory in the context of GM
food. Br. J. Sociology 51, 125–142.
Adam, B., Geißler, K., Held, M., Kümmerer, K., Schneider, M., 1997. Time for the en-
vironment: The Tutzing time ecology project. Time Soc. 6 (1), 73–84.
Adams, E., 2018. How to become a beekeeper; learning and skill in managing honeybees.
Cultural Geographies 25 (1), 31–47.C. Phillips Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
323
Aizen, M.A., Harder, L.D., 2009. The global stock of domesticated honey bees is growing
slower than agricultural demand for pollination. Curr. Biol. 19 (11), 915–918.
Anderson,B.,2010.Preemption,precaution,preparedness:Anticipatoryactionandfuture
geographies. Prog. Hum. Geogr. 34 (6), 777–798.
Bastian, M., 2012. Fatally confused: telling the time in the midst of ecological crises.
Environ. Philosophy 9 (1), 23–48.
Bawaka Country, including Burarrwanga, L., Ganambarr, R., Ganambarr-Stubbs, M.,
Ganambarr, B., Maymuru, D., Wrights, S., Suchet-Pearson, S., Sweeney, J., 2017. Co-
becoming time/s. In: Thorpe, J., Lavau, S., Sandberg, L.A., (Eds.) Methodolgocial
Challenges in Nature-Culture and Environmental History Reseearch. Routledge, New
York, pp. 81–92.
Bennett, J., 2010. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Duke University Press.
Brice, J., 2014. Attending to grape vines: perceptual practices, planty agencies and
multiple temporalities in Australian viticulture. Social & Cultural Geography 15 (8),
942–965.
Britchnell, M., Gibson, M., 2008. Flowering Ecology of Honey-Producing Flora in South-
East Australia. RIRDC report. ACT: Commonweath of Australia, Barton.
Chechetka, S., Yu, Y., Tange, M., Miyako, E., 2017. Materially engineered artificial pol-
linators. Chem 2 (2), 224–239.
Chen, Y., Wang, H., Helbling, E., Jafferis, N., Zufferry, R., Ong, A., Ma, K., Gravish, N.,
Chirarattananon,P.,Kovac,M.,Wood,R.,2017.Abiologicalinspired,flapping-wing,hybrid aerial-aquatic microrobot. Sci. Robotics 2 (11). https://doi.org/10.1126/
scirobotics.aao5619.
Clark,N., 2013.Mobilelife:biosecurity practicesandinsectglobalization.Sci.Culture22
(1), 16–37.
Crang, M., 1994. Spacing times, telling times and narrating the past. Time & Soc. 3 (1),
29–45.
Crutzen, P., Stoermer, E., 2000. The ‘Anthropocene’. Global Change Newsletter 41,
17–18.
DEPI (Department of Environment and Primary Industries), 2013. Beekeeping on Public
Land.www.dse.vic.gov.au/forests/forest-products-firewood/beekeeping-on-public-
land.
DPI (Department of Primary Industry – New South Wales), 2000. Bee Swarms and their
Control. Agnote DAI/125. NSW Agriculture, Orange, NSW.
Durant, J., 2019. Where have all the flowers gone? Honey bee declines and exclusions
from floral resources. J. Rural Stud. 65, 161–171.
Edensor, T., Holloway, J., 2008. Rhythmanalysing the coach tour: The Ring of Kerry,
Ireland. Trans. Inst. Br. Geographers 33 (4), 483–501.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority), 2014. Towards an Integrated Environmental
RiskAssessmentofMultipleStressorsonBees:ReviewofResearchProjectsinEurope,Knowledge Gaps and Recommendations. EFSA, J12, 3594.
EPA(EnvironmentalProtectionAgency),2007.OperationalPolicy:ManagingBeekeeping
on EPA Managed Lands. Queensland Government, Brisbane.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation), 2018. Why Bees Matter: The Importance of
Bees and Other Pollinators for Food and Agriculture. FAO, Rome. www.fao.org/3/
I9527EN/i9527en.PDF.
Fitz-Henry, E., 2017. Multiple temporalities and the nonhuman other. Environ.
Humanities 9 (1), 1–17.
Forister,M.L.,Pelton,E.M.,Black,S.H.,2019.Declinesininsectabundanceanddiversity.
Conservation Sci. Pract e80.
Gan, E., 2017. Timing rice: an inquiry into more-than-human temporalities of the
Anthropocene. New Formations 92 (92), 87–101.
Godfray, H., et al., 2014. A restatement of the natural science evidence base concerning
neonicotinoid insecticides and insect pollinators. Proc. Royal Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 281.
Green, K., Ginn, F., 2014. The smell of selfless love: Sharing vulnerability with bees in
alternative apiculture. Environ. Humanities 4 (1), 149–170.
Grosz, E., 1999. Becomings: Explorations in Time, Memory, and Futures. Cornell
University Press, New York.
Hallman, C., Sorg, M., Jongejans, E., Siepel, H., Hofland, N., Schwan, H., Stenman, W.,
Muller, A., Sumser, H., Horren, T., Goulson, D., de Kroon, H., 2017. More than 75
percent decline over 27 years in total flying insect biomass in protected areas.
PlosOne. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0185809.
Haraway, D., 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Duke
University Press, Durham.
Hitchings, R., Jones, V., 2004. Living with plants and the exploration of botanical en-
counter within human geographic research practice. Ethics, Place Environ. 7, 3–18.
Hopkins, I., 1886. Illustrated Australasian Bee Manual. I Hopkins, Aukland.
Huang, Z.Y., Robinson, G.E., 1996. Regulation of honey bee division of labor by colony
age demography. Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 39 (3), 147–158.
Hung, Keng-Lou James, Kingston, Jennifer M., Albrecht, Matthias, Holway, David A.,
Kohn, Joshua R., 2018. The worldwide importance of honey bees as pollinators innatural habitats. Proc. R. Soc. B 285 (1870), 20172140. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.2017.2140.
Ingold, T., 2000. The Perception of the Environment. Essays in Livelihood, Dwelling and
Skill. Routledge, London.
IPBES (Inter-governmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services), 2016. The Assessment Report on Pollinators, Pollination and FoodProduction. IPBES, Bonn.
Jaffé,R.,Dietemann,V.,Allsopp,M.H.,Costa,C.,Crewe,R.M.,Dall'olio,R.,DeLaRúa,P.,
ElNiweiri, M.A., Fries, I., Kezic, N., Meusel, M.S., Paxton, R.J., Shaibi, T., Stolle, E.,
Moritz, R.F., 2010. Estimating the density of honeybee colonies across their natural
range to fill the gap in pollinator decline censuses. Conserv. Biol. 24 (2), 583–593.
Jones,O.,Cloke,P.,2002.TreeCultures:ThePlaceofTreesandTreesintheirPlace.Berg,
Oxford.
Jones, O., 2011. Lunar–solar rhythmpatterns: towards the material cultures of tides.
Environ. Planning A 43 (10), 2285–2303.
Kleinman, D., Suryanarayanan, S., 2013. Dying bees and the social production of ignor-
ance. Sci. Technol. Human Values 38 (4), 492–517.
Kraus, B., Page, R.E., 1995. Effect of Varroa jacobsoni (Mesostigmata: Varroidae) on feral
Apis mellifera (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in California. Environ. Entomol. 24,
1473–1480.
Krause, F., 2013. Seasons as rhythms on the Kemi River in Finnish Lapland. Ethnos 78(1,
23–46.
Kusenbach, M., 2018. In: Flick, U. (Ed.), The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data
Collection. Sage, London, pp. 344–361.
Leakey, R., Lewin, R., 1996. The Sixth Extinction: Biodiversity and its Survival.
Weidenfeld & Nicholson, London.
Lefebvre, H., 2004. Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time and Everyday Life, trans. Elden, S. &
Moore, G. Continuum, New York.
Lehébel-Péron, A., Sidawy, P., Dounias, E., Schatz, B., 2016. Attuning local and scientific
knowledge in the context of global change. J. Rural Stud. 44, 132–142.
Lezaun, J., 2011. Bees, beekeepers, and bureaucrats: parasitism and the politics of
transgenic life. Environ. Planning D 29 (4), 738–756.
Lorimer, H., 2009. Caught in the nick of time: archives and fieldwork. The Handbook of
Qualitative Methods in Human Geography 248–273.
Maderson, S., Wynne-Jones, S., 2016. Beekeepers’ knowledges and participation in pol-
linator conservation policy. J. Rural Stud. 45, 88–98.
Mathews, F., 2010. Planetary collapse disorder: the honeybee as portent of the limits of
the ethical. Environ. Ethics 32, 353–367.
Mecklin, J. (Ed.), 2018. 2018 Doomsday Clock Statement, Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists. Science and Security Board, Chicago.
Monbiot, G.,2017. Insectageddon: farmingismore catastrophicthanclimate breakdown.
The Guardian. 20 Oct. www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/oct/20/
insectageddon-farming-catastrophe-climate-breakdown-insect-populations.
Moore,L.,Kosut,M.,2013.Buzz:UrbanBeekeepingandthePoweroftheBee.NYUPress.
Neimanis, A., Walker, R.L., 2014. Weathering: Climate change and the ‘thick time’ of
transcorporeality. Hypatia 29 (3), 558–575.
Neimanis, A., 2018. Queer times and chemical weapons, suspended in the Gotland Deep.
J. Contemp. Archaeology 5, 66–78.
Olwig, K.R., 2005. Liminality, seasonality and landscape. Landscape Res. 30 (2),
259–271.
Phillips, C., 2014. Following beekeeping: more-than-human practice in agrifood. J. Rural
Stud. 36, 149–159.
Phillips,C.,2017.Ghostly encounters:Dealingwithghost gearin theGulfofCarpentaria.
Geoforum 78, 33–42.
Phillips, C., Atchison, J., 2018. Seeing the trees for the (urban) forest. Austr. Geogr.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00049182.2018.1505285. In press.
Potts, S., Biesmeijer, J., Schweiger, O., Kunin, W., 2010. Global pollinator declines:
trends, impacts and drivers. Trends Ecol. Evol. 25 (6), 345–353.
Power, E., 2009. Domestic temporalities: nature times in the house-as-home. Geoforum
40 (6), 1024–1032.
Preston, C., 2006. Bee. Reaktion, London.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M., 2015. Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the
pace of care. Soc. Stud. Sci. 45 (5), 691–716.
Seeley,T.D.,2009.TheWisdomoftheHive:theSocialPhysiologyofHoneyBeeColonies.
Harvard University Press.
Sommerville, D., 2010. Forestry Plantations and Honeybees. Pub10/076. Commonwealth
of Australia, Canberra.
Thomas, C.D., Jones, T.H., Hartley, S.E., 2019. “Insectageddon”: A call for more robust
data and rigorous analyses. Glob. Change Biol. 25, 1891–1892.
Tsing, A., 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Program), 2010. Emerging Issues: Global Honey Bee
Colony Disorder and Other Threats to Insect Pollinators. UNEP, Nairobi.
VanDooren, T., 2014. Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction. Columbia
University Press, New York.
vanEngelsdorp, D., Meixner, M., 2010. A historical review of managed honey bee po-
pulations in Europe and the Uniteed States and the factors that may affect them. J.
Invertebr. Pathol. 103, 580–595.
Watson, K., Stallins, J.A., 2016. Honey bees and colony collapse disorder: A pluralistic
reframing. Geography Compass 10 (5), 222–236.
Whitehouse,A.,2017.Loudlysingcuckoo:More-than-humanseasonalitiesinBritain.The
Sociological Rev. 65 (1suppl), 171–187.C. Phillips
Geoforum 108 (2020) 315–324
324
