Landscape Research
ISSN: 0142-6397 (Print) 1469-9710 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/clar20
Tending to Yosemite
Brett Milligan
To cite this article: Brett Milligan (04 Jul 2025): Tending to Yosemite, Landscape Research, DOI:
10.1080/01426397.2025.2516013
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2025.2516013
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 04 Jul 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 314
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=clar20
Landscape ReseaRch
Tending to Yosemite
Brett Milligan
department of human e cology, University of c alifornia, davis, davis, ca, Usa
ABSTRACT
This article is an investigation into the caring for  landscapes in a time 
of accelerating change and the context of decolonising efforts. Care—as 
label, concept or set of practices—is complex, multifaceted, and plays 
a major role in determining how landscapes look and function across 
social, aesthetic, material, ecological, and political domains. Synthesising 
recent cross-disciplinary scholarship of care, I build a conceptual frame -
work for the care of landscapes and apply that framework through a 
case study of land-fire stewardship and conservation efforts in Yosemite 
National Park, California, where I have conducted extensive fieldwork, 
interviews, and archival research. In discussion, I reflect on what was 
learned from this application, and in conclusion, put forth a set of salient 
questions, challenges and speculations on what the future of landscape 
care might become, in attempting to equitably adapt to changing cli -
mates and entangled social-ecological-political realities.
Introduction
If you visit Yosemite Valley—the most iconic and heavily visited area in Yosemite National 
Park—there is a one-way driving loop you will likely traverse to experience it. As one drives 
the loop, pullouts provide access to hikes into the steep granite formations enclosing the valley 
or offer vistas and vantage points to observe the landscape.
For example, you might stop at Postage Stamp Point, which provides an impressive view of 
the sheer walls of El Capitan towering from the other side of the Merced River ( Figure 1 ). The 
postage stamp name comes from the US stamp issued in 1934, depicting the view from this spot.
In multiple places along the South Side Road, you will see pine forests with noticeably 
blackened bark—a signature tattoo from fires—with large open meadows scattered between 
them ( Figure 2 ).
As you work your way around the loop, it is worth a stop at Woski Pond on the north side 
of the valley. Woski Pond is actually an old oxbow lake within the Merced’s floodplain. Here 
you will have unobstructed views across a broad expanse of the valley. Wetlands and meadows 
give way to copses of black oak in the distance, with Cathedral Rock and spires looming behind 
(figure 3 ).
What you might not know or gather from what you see, is that this nature —perhaps one 
of the most prized, revered, represented, and contested in contemporary US culture—is a 
product of much convoluted labour and care. As a case in point, just a few years ago, you 
© 2025 The a uthor(s). p ublished by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Brett Milligan  bmilligan@ucdavis.edu
This is an Open a ccess article distributed under the terms of the c reative c ommons a ttribution-nonc ommercial-nod erivatives License ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way. The terms on which this article has been 
published allow the posting of the a ccepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.KEYWORDS
Wilderness myth; 
traditional ecological 
knowledge; landscape 
stewardship; land-fire 
stewardship; fire 
management; 
decolonisation; climate 
change adaptation; 
conservation; restoration; 
national parkshttps://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2025.2516013
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 19 July 2024
Accepted 01 June 2025
2 B. MILLIGAN
Figure 1.  photograph of p ostage s tamp p oint, Yosemite Valley, July 2023.
Figure 2.  photograph of meadows and pine forest after a prescribed burn, Yosemite Valley, July 2023.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 3
Figure 3.  photograph of Woski p ond, Yosemite Valley, July 2023.
would not have been able to see the view of El Capitan from Postage Stamp Point, as it would 
have been completely obscured by the unchecked growth of trees. Touring this site with Garrett 
dickman, Yosemite’s Forest Ecologist, informs us that 111 trees were cut and removed by park 
staff to restore historic views, as part of the Park’s Scenic Vista Management Plan. This plan 
provides the programmatic basis ‘for documenting, protecting, and re-establishing Yosemite’s 
important vistas, consistent with the natural processes and human influences that created them’ 
(National Park Service, 2022 ). If you look closely, you can still see the stumps of some of those 
trees in the floodplain and terraces ( Figure 1 ).
Most of the soot-covered bark on the ponderosa pines and other trees is not from wildfire. 
It is from prescribed burns intentionally lit and tended to by park staff to restore and sustain 
these lands. Before these burns can happen, park staff often need to clear out overgrown 
vegetation in the understory, and thin out the trees. Without this preparation, the prescribed 
fires can burn too intensely—which has the potential to harm the trees—and can also burn 
uncontrollably. Yosemite’s meadows have been remade through these kinds of labour.
The views at Woski pond were similarly obscured by conifer trees, and around 80 of them 
were recently removed. The groves of black oaks seen on the far side of the pond have been 
actively restored by the removal of the conifers, and by reintroducing prescribed fire to the land.
But not all this care-taking labour is invisible. On the days I was in the valley, I saw the 
Yosemite Ancestral Stewards (YAS) Indigenous youth program tending to the black oaks. The 
Yosemite Ancestral Stewards is a youth-based landscape management crew with ties to local 
tribes, including the Southern Sierra Miwuk Nation, the Tuolumne Band of Me-Wuk Indians, the 
Bishop Paiute Tribe, Bridgeport Indian Colony, Kutzadika’a Mono Lake Indian Community, North 
Fork Rancheria of Mono Indians of California, and the Picayune Rancheria of Chukchansi Indians. 
Members of the YAS program partake in a range of conservation activities like felling trees, 
chainsawing downed woody debris, and conducting cultural burns to share knowledge, refine 
land-based skills and open up new career pathways (National Park Foundation, 2023 ).
4 B. MILLIGAN
I also encountered grids of meticulously hand-stacked brush piles near the roadside, waiting 
for the park’s fire management staff to have the opportunity to burn them ( figure 4 ). Looking 
into the forest next to them, one can see just how dense it was prior to that work. At other 
locations industrial excavators and other logging machines were seen at rest among stacks of 
recently felled trees; signs of in-process efforts to thin overcrowded forests ( figure 5 ).
What makes all this caring of the land convoluted is that much of it is an effort to undo 
past forms of care; undoing what we might call misguided care or care that harms.
With the colonial conquest of North America came the practice of wildfire suppression, or 
the intentional extinguishing of all wildfires, particularly in the more fire-prone western US. The 
intensions driving fire suppression were and are complex and manifold, encompassing settler 
ideology, resource extraction, exurban modes of settlement and public safety (Forest History 
Society, n.d.; Hankins, 2024 ; Travis, 2007 ). Fire protection and suppression became widely imple -
mented in the early 20th century, often through policy. The Weeks Act (Southard, 2011 ) created 
provisions for the federal government to purchase private land to protect the headwaters of 
rivers and watersheds (and led to the US Forest Service) and pioneered collaborative fire pro -
tection and suppression efforts across federal, state, and private landowners. On National Forest 
Lands, the U.S. Forest Service’s “10 a.m. policy”—an aggressive suppression protocol instituted 
in 1935 to rapidly extinguish all wildfires by 10 am on the morning after they were spotted—
was based on a monetary cost-benefit impact analysis of timber production; of forests primarily 
understood and instrumentalised for the production of commercial crops of trees  (Loveridge, 
1944 ). The act was a response to prior ‘let burn’ policies (primarily in remote or inaccessible 
areas) that were deemed costly and detrimental. Let burn policies continue to be controversial 
today, challenged with balancing public safety and increased understanding that attempting 
to banish fires from fire-dependent landscapes does not work and actually increases risks.
Fire suppression was also motivated by settler interpretations of the colonised Western U.S. 
landscape and driven by ideological and aesthetic concerns. In the late nineteenth century, 
Figure 4.  photograph of brush piles waiting to be burned, Yosemite Valley, July 2023.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 5
Yosemite became a touchstone for a colonial vision of wilderness , despite being inhabited and 
stewarded by the Indigenous people of the western slope of California’s central Sierra Nevada 
Mountains for generations, including the Southern and Central Miwok, Northern and Owens 
Valley Paiute, Chukchansi Yokuts, and Western Mono Tribal communities. White explorers cast 
the landscape as pristine and untouched, and promoted a preservationist approach for its future 
management. Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted ( 1952 ) was a key proponent of this 
approach, as exemplified in his initial 1865 planning report for Yosemite. This understanding of 
wilderness put forth static understandings of landscapes and the eradication of wildfire, ironically 
undermining its own goals. Like many landscapes across the American West, Yosemite is threat -
ened by the very thing that tried to control it: preservation (Schlickman & Milligan, 2023 ).
When Indigenous people were forced out of Yosemite by Euro-American settlers—a long and 
contested process beginning around 1850 and lasting until the 1930s (Spence, 1996 )—thousands 
of years of embodied knowledge and intensive tending of these wilds went with them, including 
their most impactful tool for caring for their homelands: fire. With it, they sculpted the land so 
seamlessly, and cultivated the plants, foods and materials they needed so sustainably (Anderson, 
2005 ; Spence, 1996 ), that settlers couldn’t even see their craft for what it was. Instead, Yosemite 
was cast as pristine scenery, and in turn, millennia of human-fire-landscape co-evolution was 
radically altered, culturally and in the physical landscape itself.
Without Indigenous people tending and shaping them, Yosemite’s landscapes transformed. Its 
vast meadows shrank or disappeared. Its spacious forests and open views became occluded by 
dense expanses of trees ( figure 6 ). With wildfires proactively suppressed—a totally different way 
of tending to the land—habitat quality and diversity significantly decreased. And over the longer 
term, the very nature of what fire is and does in these landscapes has changed too. In precolonial 
times, it is estimated that at least 6,500 hectares in Yosemite National Park burned each year. 
From 1930 to 2000, much less burned an average: less than 1,250 hectares per year (Miller & 
davis, 2009 ).
Figure 5.  photograph of logging skidder and piles of downed trees, Yosemite Valley, July 2023.
6 B. MILLIGAN
Fire suppression does not actually stop fires. Rather, it delays and transforms them, with 
increased fuel loading being a critical factor (Miller & davis, 2009 ). When suppressed in 
Figure 6.  Top: p hotograph of Yosemite Valley taken by henry G. p eabody in 1899 (Us national p ark s ervice, public domain), 
and bottom: photograph from the same spot taken in 2024 (by author), showing increased land cover and density of 
forested areas due to fire suppression.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 7
frequency, fires tend to act more intensely and more destructively, due to the altered conditions 
in which they emerge. Fire scientists and land managers call this the suppression trap, or the 
firefighting trap (Xanthopoulos et  al., 2020 ), because once one starts suppressing fires, it’s hard 
to come back from that distortion. For example, if land managers or park staff just let a 
fire-suppressed forest burn or intentionally set fire to it, the increased fuel loading will cause 
an intense, high severity fire, killing most of what is in it—the trees and the soil—and make 
it uncontrollable. Thus, land stewards must resort to other techniques to get such landscapes 
back to a healthier, fire-safe condition before wild or prescribed burning can once again be 
beneficial, such as by mechanically thinning out trees.
Thus, fire management policies and techniques have changed and unevenly evolved since 
fire suppression was widely implemented, and its impacts and missteps have been experienced 
and studied over the past century. Yosemite National Park is a place where these changes can 
be observed. Yosemite had very robust and well-funded fire suppression operations in place, 
right up to the 1960s. It was equipped with fire mititias  and cooperative agreements with the 
US Forest Service and the California d epartment of Forestry that aggressively put out fires 
(Pyne, 2023 ). ‘Scenic’ concerns were primary, followed by public safety. Major shifts began in 
the 1960s, including the publication of the influential Leopold Report (officially called Wildlife 
Management in the National Parks ) which scathingly criticised pervasive fire suppression in 
Yosemite and other National Parks for its impacts on wildlife and the ecological functioning of 
the landscape (Pyne, 2023 ). The recommendations from the Leopold Report were incorporated 
in the National Park Service’s 1968 operational policies (its Green Book) and brought about a 
paradigm shift from fire control to fire management (Kilgore, 2005 ; Pyne, 2023 ). These manage -
ment policies were soon implemented in Yosemite and other National Parks, allowing some 
lightning-caused fires to burn and the implementation of prescribed burning. In 1984, the 
California Wilderness Act designated 95% of Yosemite as legal wilderness, thus further mandating 
wildfire to be integrated into the stewardship of the Park.
Again, evolution in land-fire management in the western U.S. and elsewhere is highly uneven. 
Movements from control to stewardship are variable across agencies, organisations and regions. 
The evolution is also non-linear across time, as progressive stewardship can easily regress back 
to control-based mandates based on specific circumstances, mishaps, or political action.
Yosemite itself has seen many back-and-forth shifts in how it tends to fire, particularly when 
its tending methods are more proactive, like mechanical tree thinning. Yosemite Park staff are 
implementing these practices where they think it is needed and beneficial to address decades 
of fire suppression, as well as aesthetic concerns. These acts of care are not being implemented 
without pushback. Most recently in 2022, the Earth Institute, an environmental non-profit based 
in the Bay Area, filed a lawsuit against Yosemite Superintendent Cicely Muldoon, the larger park 
service, and the department of the Interior under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) 
for failing to conduct a full environmental review of two thinning projects in the park (Justia 
US Law, 2023 ). When interviewed by the press, representatives from the Earth Institute compared 
the work being done to logging and argued that the projects had the potential to increase 
wildfire risk and negatively impact habitat for endangered species (Kohlruss, 2022 ).
And while a district court ultimately sided with the defendants, citing that the projects still 
fell within Yosemite’s 2004 Fire Management Plan, the litigation opened up larger questions 
about the language used to define care in the age of fire and the ways in which these terms 
can wield power. The projects in Yosemite have been labelled many different things beyond 
thinning, including biomass removal, fuel reduction, logging, and clearcutting with each of 
these terms affecting people’s perceptions of what is actually happening on the ground, and why.
In this manuscript, I ask and explore, what does it mean to care and tend to Yosemite? What 
could  it mean? What about many other landscapes that face similar types of stewardship chal -
lenges in a post-colonial era of accelerated change? Care—as concept or set of practices—is 
complex, multifaceted, and plays a major role in determining how landscapes look and function 
8 B. MILLIGAN
across social, aesthetic, material, ecological and political domains. I am specifically concerned 
with how we care for care  in landscapes, and in the following section collate recent, cross-disciplinary 
scholarship of care to build a conceptual framework for the care of landscapes. I test this frame -
work through the case study of Yosemite National Park, where I conducted fieldwork, interviews 
and archival research. The paper concludes by speculating on what the future of landscape care 
might become for Yosemite National Park and other fire-climate altered landscapes.
Tending to care
One can care about anything. A fish. A beach. One’s hair. The impending loss of stable climate. 
My specific interest here is the care and stewardship of landscapes. I define landscape is a 
dynamic spatial and temporal medium; one composed of a diverse and shifting assembly of 
materials and beings. I understand them to always be in a state of emergent becoming, with 
every landscape being plural and multiple, since it can be reshaped into any number of qual -
itatively different formations (Milligan, 2015 ). And perhaps most importantly, landscapes and 
people have been co-evolving and co-creation on another since humans took form and began 
sculpting their surroundings.
My approach to landscape care is structured by four interwoven tenants: relationality, temporality, 
politics and transformability. I have distilled this framework with the help of many care scholars. 
And to disclose my positionality, as a designer, I seek to care for the unsettling  of damaging land -
scape practices and legacies. I seek to shed light on hidden and devalued work of actively caring 
for land, and to assist in debunking the wilderness myth, which purports that pre-colonised land -
scapes were devoid of human design and habitation, thus legitimising their exploitation (d enevan, 
1992 ; dowie, 2011 , 2019 ). I look to retire the thoroughly colonial concept of nature  as a form of 
othering, or as phenomena separable from humans, for all the unique and misleading damage 
and displacements that ontological construct has caused (Cronon 1996 ; Purdy, 2015 ).
Relationality
Care is difficult to pinpoint because it is inherently relational and comes about through asso -
ciation and connection. As Sara Jacobs and Taryn Weins state (2023, p.2), ‘care is not easily 
defined as it is always mutually constituted: all relations involve care and all care creates and 
remakes relations’ . With care, there is less emphasis on the individual, since one is typically 
caring for , caring with,  or being cared for . The defining questions concern who is caring for whom 
(or what) and how the person, being or thing being cared for is affected by the care received. 
In this way, care is a relational practice that can be assessed according to its purpose, partic -
ularities and power dynamics (Tronto, 2010 ).
Care is a pervasive, diverse, and an improvisational part of everyday life (Middleton & Samanani, 
2021 ). It is unavoidable and necessary. The claiming of a we, or assuming a shared collective 
we, has been well problematised in political critiques of who speaks for who (for example, 
problematising the assumed we in the Anthropocene or Capitalocene) (Chakrabarty, 2021 ; Moore, 
2016 ). Relational notions of care—necessarily pulls us back into notions of we, which Jacobs 
and Weins define as the ‘the relational self who is connected to and shaped by other subjects, 
spaces, and processes related to almost every aspect of life’ and this definition suggests that 
‘care is reciprocal between people and other-than-human relations’ (Jacobs & Wiens, 2023 , p. 6).
As relational practices, care can operate across scales and species and material boundaries. As 
scholars across environmental humanities, science and technology studies, feminism, post-humanities, 
and critical geography have emphatically expressed, care needs to be extended to the vast majority 
of phenomena that are not human, but are with us (de La Bellacasa, 2017 ). In this way, we care 
with  (Tronto, 2019 ) the larger and more diverse worlds and landscapes we inhabit and make.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 9
Reciprocity implies the fostering of mutually beneficial relationships through exchanges, actions 
and belief systems. It is a kind of relational care that author and botanist Robin Kimmerer and 
others identify as intrinsic to Indigenous cosmologies and traditional ecological practices (Anderson, 
2005 ; Hankins, 2024 ; Manning, 2023 ; Kimmerer, 2011 ; Whyte, 2020 ) Care in this sense, is one that 
assumes inherent kinship between people and land, wherein: ‘what we do to the land we do to 
ourselves…What’s good for the land is good for the people’ (Kimmerer, 2011 , p. 258).
The ethos of reciprocity is the opposite of that of settler colonialism and extractive capitalism. 
For Kimmerer ( 2011 ), what she calls reciprocal restoration  is the care needed to repair past 
destructive actions, which ‘recognises that it is not just the land that is broken, but our rela -
tionship to it, ’ and which requires ‘repair of both ecosystems and cultural services while fostering 
renewed relationships of respect, responsibility, and reciprocity’ (p. 258).
Temporality
Care is always bound to time and how it is experienced. For example, when  does one perceive 
that care is needed in a particular situation? When does one actually act on that realisation 
and why? How effectual is the care, based on when it occurs and the contingencies of the 
context at that moment? How long does care need to be provided, or how frequently does it 
need to be repeated? Care, repair and maintenance practices are ‘inescapably timely phenomena, 
bridging past and future in distinctive and sometimes surprising ways’ (Jackson, 2014 , p. 223).
Care scholars have critiqued the notion of a singular, standardised conception of time, as 
well as ideologies of positivism and linear progress (de La Bellacasa, 2015 ). Many argue for 
temporal diversity that recognises that time is diversely made through the practices we enact 
and engage in. This is the notion of temporality, or time as an embodied, political, and situated 
experience (Adam & Groves, 2007 ; Rifkin, 2017 ).
Landscapes contain a multitude of interacting temporalities that are subject to change and 
manipulation (Milligan, 2022 ). For example, the impacts of fire suppression policies in California’s 
forested lands have worsened over time in terms of ecological degradation, and the intensity and 
size of wildfires (Macd onald et  al., 2023 ). This was widely experienced (directly and through media) 
in the d eadly Camp fire of 2018 that rapidly burned through the town of Paradise, and the mas -
sive fires of 2020, such as the LNU complex fire. These fires produced enough smoke to severely 
degrade air quality over large swaths of the state for weeks. With these events in mind, wildfires 
have become a shared issue of concern. In turn, the state’s government is allocating more funds 
to fire stewardship and crafting policies to increase prescribed and cultural (Indigenous) burning.
Politics
We tend to care about the things we are attuned to. Or said another way, what we care about 
determines what we care about, shaped by the specific political, social, cultural, ecological, and 
technological contexts we inhabit (Mattern, 2018 ). differences in life experiences lead to different 
notions of care, which can be in conflict. For example, Yosemite’s fire management staff have, 
for decades, tried to let wildfires burn, wherever and whenever it is deemed safe enough to 
do so. Through learned experience, they know that regular burning reduces fire risks and reduces 
undesirable fire behaviour and its impacts. But if one is a visitor to Yosemite Park, and arrives 
to find the skies full of smoke, they might question why that should be. Locals who econom -
ically depend on servicing and housing visiting tourists, are likely going to have similar opinions 
about poor air quality in the Park. Similarly, a government official can be swayed to immediate 
and short-term conditions (i.e. prevent fires and keep the skies clear) at the expense of 
longer-term safety and landscape ecological health. In this illustration, we see how different 
the experience and aesthetics of fire can be, depending on how it is encountered. These aes -
thetic interpretations are inherently political.
10 B. MILLIGAN
A ‘Critical Politics of Care’ focuses on how landscapes are constituted through specific kinds 
of caring relations (Jacobs & Wiens, 2023 , p. 2). Care is not just a normative good thing, but 
rather a politically entangled act and should be carefully approached as such. Attending to the 
politics of care requires place-based specificity in landscape care studies, combined with critical 
reflection on why the need (or perceived need) for care exists and who benefits from it, and 
assessing if that care reflects systemic historic inequities, or is in pursuit of more just outcomes 
(Jacobs & Wiens, 2023 ).
Visibility and legibility of care are strong factors to consider in these critical politics, as 
invisibility is tightly linked to dynamics of power and control (Jackson, 2014 ; Mattern, 2018 ). 
The same holds for how care is represented and its aesthetic/experiential qualities.
Transformability
If landscapes and society are always in transition, it follows that so is care. The point of critically 
engaging care is to open transformative possibilities for what care might become, and what it 
can do. If we live in a ‘broken world’ created by our own designs and design legacies (Cephas 
et al. 2022 ; Jackson, 2014 ), then what we need to study is how worlds can be put back together 
in new and better ways, through care (Fits and Krazny, 2019 ; Jackson, 2014 ; Mattern, 2018 ). 
Care can be a practice of possibility that can unsettle the status quo and potentially create 
new and more just landscapes (Cephas et  al., 2022 ; Jacobs & Wiens, 2023 ). This is care as active 
speculation and mode of design investigation entailing a synthesis of the relationality, tempo -
rality, and politics of care as a basis for intentional change.
Here, I find Middleton and Samanani’s Hermeneutics of Care  (2021) useful, as it embraces the 
active, affective role researchers play in what they study. In their own research interviewing 
first time parents, it became clear that care was not a matter of fact  or knowable object dis -
tanced from them as researchers. Rather, they were enmeshed in the everyday improvisational 
workings of care with their subjects, which for them brought about a greater sense of respon -
sibility, efficacy and ethics in care research. This entails ‘staying with the trouble within matters 
of concern, resisting reducing accounts to familiar “matters of fact” and instead approaching 
analysis as a situated, inter-subjective form of attention, commitment, and responsiveness’  
(Middleton & Samanani, 2021 , p. 39).
I approach my work in Yosemite in a similar way. I bring a transformative agenda to stewarding 
landscapes. I (and others I collaborate with) explore what future possibilities for caring for Yosemite—
and other lands in California—might be. I am testing and speculating on what might become 
(Milligan & Schlickman, forthcoming). My approach is knowingly and intentionally subjective and 
does not seek finite solutions or answers to the complex challenges of care in this landscape.
In the next two sections, I apply the conceptual tools outlined here to two care examples 
in Yosemite National Park.
An inferno and a grove
The Washburn Fire started on 7 July 2022 in Yosemite National Park, near the southwest corner 
of the Mariposa Grove, a park feature famous for its numerous giant sequoias. The fire could have 
easily spread uphill into this grove, or into the nearby park town of Wawona, but fire crews were 
able to halt its entry into both areas due to past thinning and prescribed fire treatments. In con -
trast, they were unable to stop the fire from spreading to untreated lands with over a century of 
fire suppression. These dense, sub-alpine forests were filled with accumulated fuels, which facilitated 
rapid fire spread, intense fire behaviour, and high resistance to control efforts (Hankin et al., 2023 ). 
The Washburn fire burned through 1,977 hectares of these lands before being contained.
I walked through the Washburn fire’s footprint one year after it occurred. Throughout, I saw 
vast swaths of closely spaced dead trees ( figures 7  and 8). The soil was still almost entirely bare 
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 11
Figure 7.  photograph of forests within the Washburn Fire (2022) footprint within Yosemite national p ark. Image taken 
roughly one year after the fire, July 2023.
Figure 8.  photograph of forests within the Washburn Fire (2022) footprint within Yosemite national p ark. Image taken 
roughly one year after the fire, July 2023.
12 B. MILLIGAN
of vegetation; likely inert and devoid of life due to the extreme heat generated by the fire. It 
had a peculiar crunchy sound when walked on. It does not take a scientist to see that much 
of this burn was of high severity, or exhibiting 80% mortality of vegetation (Keeley, 2009 ). And 
the chance for a reburn in scars like this is high, given the many dead trees that remain. How 
this landscape will recover, or what it might evolve into from this novel condition—in tandem 
with accelerating climate change impacts (including higher air temperatures, more severe drought 
conditions, and lengthening fire seasons)—is unknown.
Why were the town of Wawona and the Mariposa Grove spared, even though they were 
literally in the line of fire? The unequivocal answer is years of active fire stewardship (Hankin 
et  al., 2023 ). Both areas had received numerous fuel reduction treatments and prescribed burns 
by park staff prior to the Washburn Fire. Over time, this greatly reduced fuel loads and tree 
density—two key factors of fire intensity. Thus, when fire staff tried to suppress or hold the 
line of the fire at these areas, they were able to. In the untreated fire-suppressed areas, feral 
fire immolated the landscape uncontrollably.
I walked the line between the edge of the Washburn Fire and the Mariposa grove. Along 
that threshold, you can see two worlds and two temporalities juxtaposed in space: the distorted 
cadences of fire suppression, emerging as ever-more colonial wreckage on one side, and on 
the other, laborious care to unmake that legacy ( figure 9 ).
It is clear why the town of Wawona would need preventative fire treatments, but why the 
Sequoia groves? Sequoiadendron giganteum  is a fire-adapted species, native to Mediterranean 
landscapes of California. Why should it need protection? Again, it is the excessive fuel loading 
in suppressed fire conditions, or being adjacent to those conditions at the time of a burn. Sequoias 
are extremely tall for a reason. It keeps their crowns out of reach of the fires they evolved with. 
But not for the higher intensity and higher reaching flames caused by fire suppression combined 
with a warming climate. Such fires can ladder  their way up into the canopy of the trees and kill 
them, which is well understood by those tending to the patterns of change (Shive et  al., 2022 ).
Figure 9.  photograph of the untreated edge of the Washburn fire footprint (foreground), and the fire-managed Mariposa 
grove in the background, Yosemite national p ark. Image taken on July 2023.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 13
What does it mean to ‘care’ for sequoia groves, as an imperilled species? Perhaps it means 
that the conditions they find themselves in are so ‘denatured’ by human practices and the 
effects of those practices, that if not actively tended to, they will likely be extinct in the near 
future. Recall that one of Frederick Law Olmsted’s key design moves for Yosemite Park was to 
put a ring road around the Mariposa Grove to act as a break to prevent fires from entering it 
(Olmsted et  al., 1952 ). If colonialism made natures conceived as something other than itself, a 
projection of sorts, what is such ‘nature’ now, if it necessitates our action to exist? Should we 
act/care? Who should be doing that caring and how?
Stewarding wilds
Like the Washburn Fire, the Red Fire occurred in the summer of 2022 in Yosemite National Park. 
It burned a total of 3,385 hectares of the Illilouette Creek Wilderness. But if you walk through 
the Red Fire footprint now, it looks nothing like the Washburn’s. Here you will experience vast 
and verdant open meadows, areas of unburned and lightly burned forest, and scattered spots of 
higher intensity burning ( figures 10  and 11). What you see is called pyrodiversity, or variation in 
spatio-temporal fire patterns (Steel et  al., 2021 ), which in turn generates landscapes of patchy, 
diverse plant communities.
Bob Barbee, Jan van Wagtendonk, Steve Botti, Harold Biswell, and others were key figures 
in implementing what was, at the time, a radical act, given decades of fire suppression mandates 
in the western US. Fire had to be strategically fought for to happen in Yosemite (Pyne, 2023 ; 
Van Wagtendonk, 2007 ). These practices were most advanced in the Illilouette Wilderness, 
southwest of Yosemite Valley, which is a remote part of the park with slightly less granitic drama 
and no public roads. Away from the crowds and largely contained by its own topographic bowl, 
these lands have mostly been allowed to burn when ignited by lighting. In mapping the 
Figure 10.  photograph of the Illilouette Basin, July 2023.
14 B. MILLIGAN
overlapping perimeters of the fires across the last 50 years, there are so many that it is hard to 
find a symbology that can effectively show them all ( figure 12 ).
The Illilouette Valley is an anomaly in the larger vastness of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. 
It is a landscape where you can see what more diverse mountain watersheds composed of 
conifer forests, shrublands, meadows, and aspen groves look like through a different regimen 
of care. Scientists who have been doing the care-time  work (de La Bellacasa, 2015 ) of meticu -
lously monitoring changes in this landscape have observed transformative, beneficial effects 
(Boisramé et  al., 2019 ; Stephens et  al., 2021 ). Among them, habitat diversity and biodiversity 
have increased significantly, with forest cover being reduced, and meadows, grasslands, and 
shrubland increasing in extent. Changes in vegetative communities have changed the basin’s 
hydrology, which has shifted towards increased snowpack, streamflow, and subsurface water 
storage, which in turn increases drought resiliency. The more frequent fire regimes also reduce 
high severity, uncontrollable fire risks, and the smoke they generate is significantly less than 
from more intense fires.
While hiking through the Illilouette with fire scientists Scott Stephens and Brandon Collins, 
they remarked on how much there is still to learn. From their many years of careful observation 
of this basin, they find that there is still so much unexplained variance and complexity in the 
landscape patterns they see (Buckley, 2023 ). And given that the dynamic phenomena they 
monitor is emerging from the peculiar legacy of fire suppression, which is unfurling within the 
context of accelerating global warming and its cascading effects, ‘everything is novel’ (Buckley, 
2023 ). Historic baselines, which are elusive to define, may have little semblance or use in setting 
stewardship targets for the present, and even less relevance for future landscapes.
Tending to what might become
Yosemite Park’s pyro experiments in the Illilouette watershed show that fire-dependent land -
scapes may recover from decades of bad care, if cared for differently. For the Illilouette, this 
Figure 11.  photograph of the Illilouette Basin, within the Red Fire (2022) footprint. Image taken on July 2023.
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 15
means letting lightning-ignited wildfires happen and intervening only when necessary. To date, 
no intentional fires have been started by Park staff in the Illilouette and the basin has no pre -
scribed burn unit.
But should there be? In pre-colonial California, scientists think that fire frequency intervals 
far exceeded what would have been expected from lightning-caused ignitions alone; a strong 
indication of Indigenous people intentionally and additionally burning the land for desired out -
comes (Anderson, 2005 ), and this almost certainly occurred in the Illilouette. Today, there are 
areas within the Illilouette where wildfires haven’t occurred for more than a decade (the historical 
record seems to show that fire intervals of 9 years or less was common in pre-colonial times 
(Buckley, 2023 ). Should park staff intentionally set fires in these zones as Indigenous people 
likely would have in the past? And more generally, should fire experiments be conducted in 
Yosemite to foster greater pyrodiversity and habitat conditions for threatened species? The answer 
among fire scientists, ecologists and fire managers is an urgent and emphatic yes (Buckley, 2023 ). 
But how to make that socially and politically palatable is another question.
Park staff are often directed to contain or put out wildfires in the Illilouette or other areas 
if it creates high smoke levels in Yosemite Valley, particularly during prime tourist season or 
when multiple fires happen simultaneously. Should Park staff be allowed to re-start these sup -
pressed fires at more opportune times; a ‘relight policy’ (Buckley, 2023 ) to compensate for 
suppression mandates? Retired Yosemite National Park Fire Chief dan Buckley thinks so, and 
for decades tried to institute a ‘catch and release’ program wherein a wildfire is contained (as 
needed) until it can become free-ranging. Given that such a wildfire would not have been fully 
suppressed (extinguished), it would not be considered a prescribed burn and thus would still 
be considered wild. While in the ‘catch’ phase, the fire would require tending to keep it burning, 
which park staff have done in the past, such as when the local Air Pollution Control district 
Figure 12.  Mapping of historic fire perimeters (courtesy of calFire geospatial data) within the Illilouette Basin. The darker 
shades of grey correspond to the number of overlapping fire-perimeters (more fires appear as darker shades), illustrating 
high pyro-diversity within the basin.
16 B. MILLIGAN
asked them to keep a fire small until after Labour day. Two days after that holiday weekend, 
his crew erased the containment lines and ‘the wildfire did its thing—with very little human 
intervention until winter snows snuffed it out’ (Buckley, 2024 ).
Wilderness advocates may take issue with some of these hands-on, proactive interventions. 
Of note, 94% of Yosemite (including all of the Illilouette Basin), falls within a wilderness desig -
nation and its management protocols. The park’s most current Wilderness Management plan 
(1989) acknowledges that Wilderness management  is a contradiction in terms (with wilderness 
typically defined as land uncultivated and uninhabited by humans), but necessary, given how 
wilderness has become increasingly scarce through land use and development. But there are 
also contradictions in the plan’s guiding principles:
‘Wilderness management should not mold nature to suit people…Rather it should manage human use 
and influences so that natural processes are not altered. Managers should do only what is necessary to 
meet wilderness objectives, and use only the minimum tools, force, and regulation required to achieve 
those objectives. ’ These are the principles guiding wilderness management in Yosemite (Yosemite National 
Park, 1989 , p. 9).
In the context of trying to amend colonial mistakes and adapt to an increasingly destabilised 
climate, how should managers ‘minimally’ act so as leave ‘natural’ processes unaltered? There 
are profound contradictions here, and ontologically, the assumption that wilderness is unmolded 
by people is wrong. In the Illilouette, its untenable, as it has been recast by people multiple 
times: first by thousands of years of Indigenous/traditional ecological practices, and then by 
settler colonialism, which created the wilderness myth purporting that California’s landscapes 
were devoid of humans (Cronon, 1996 ; dowie, 2011 ), which provided the rationale to displace 
those people and their land tending practices. We now seem to be in a third type of recasting: 
returning fire to the landscape and relearning how best to work with it.
Yosemite National Park staff are currently updating their Wilderness Management Plan , now called 
the Wilderness Stewardship Plan  (Yosemite National Park, n.d.). At a backpacking retreat in the 
summer of 2023 in the Illilouette Basin, Park staff and scientists and myself came together to think 
through many of the stewardship challenges they face, particularly with respect to fire (Buckley, 
2023 ). One proposed idea is to change how wilderness is understood and defined, arguing that 
protecting wilderness is, above all, about protecting the processes  that make the landscapes we 
value (Buckley, 2023 ). As a case in point, let us briefly return to the threatened sequoia groves.
About 130 kilometres south of Yosemite are Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks. In 
2020 and 2021, large, forested areas of these parks were burned in high-severity fires due to 
the combined impact of fire suppression and climate change. Park staff are of the opinion that 
‘natural regeneration may not be sufficient to support self-sustaining groves into the future, 
particularly as the fires killed an unprecedented number of reproductive sequoia trees in the 
groves themselves’ (National Park Service, n.d.). If the sequoia groves are not able to regenerate, 
they will convert to shrub-dominated plant communities (rather than forest), which could have 
a range of detrimental ecological impacts.
Park staff are tending to this concern by planting sequoia seedlings in select areas where 
post-fire survey data indicates regeneration is unlikely (National Park Service, n.d.). For park 
staff, this is akin to what the sequoias ‘would have done naturally  had they not experienced 
extensive severe fire effects during recent fires’ (National Park Service, n.d., italics added). But 
not everyone sees it that way. Four environmental groups have since filed a different lawsuit 
against the National Park Service for planting the seedlings, claiming that ‘ Nature  does not need 
our help’ , and that ‘we should still allow these natural  ecosystems to respond as they want to  
the changes brought about by the changing climate’ (Park & Vranken, 2023 , italics added), based 
on the minimal to non-intervention mandates of the 1964 Wilderness Act.
When the Wilderness Act was penned in 1964, it is very likely that its authors had minimal 
awareness of impending human-caused climate change and its impacts. The same is likely true 
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 17
of the mismeasures of fire suppression policies. Here again we see different temporalities col -
liding and political genres being torqued in different directions. To be clear, environmentalists 
are suing to ensure that an imperilled charismatic tree is not actively cared for. They are arguing 
to just let it be . But is this stance unknowingly embroiled in and advancing colonial ideologies 
of nature and wilderness—of mythical lands in California that do not need, benefit, or rely on 
human tending, even though they always have since people were around (Anderson, 2005 )?
This is the contested, post-colonial feral wilderness  we live in. It is an anthropogenic age of 
fire that begets ever more fire (Pyne, 2021 ). An age of accelerated change for nearly all land -
scapes, which are poised to morph and migrate into new forms. As park staff and scientists 
know, without active intervention, there will be wholesale transitions in ecosystems (Buckley, 
2023 ). In this context, what is cared for and how? And what are the limits of what can be cared 
for if everything is in fast forward transformation?
Yosemite National Park has a goal of beneficially burning 6,475 hectares of the park per year. 
This goal is not consistently met (and when it is, its typically the large, destructive burns that 
fill the quota). Park staff face a variety of challenges in meeting these targets, like limited per -
sonnel and funding to do the work. Other challenges are political and ideological, as former 
fire chief dan Buckley says, ‘putting fires out is always easier than starting them’ (Personal 
Communication, September 2023). Letting wildfires burn or intentionally starting them comes 
with liability issues and immediate risks. Politically, it is easier to suppress fire, but that delays 
and compounds risks and problems into the future for others to deal with.
Yosemite Park staff can prioritise the care of select areas, such as the Mariposa Grove, if they 
are small and valued enough to do so. But many areas, such as those burned in the Washburn 
Fire, reveal limits of how much land can be cared for. Park staff must choose where they focus 
their efforts and share a sense of urgency in making those decisions. As one staff member said, 
with respect to climate change impacts, ‘I thought we had more time…we don’t’ (Buckley, 2023 ).
If Yosemite National Park is struggling to meet its fire stewardship goals—a proactive leader 
in this domain—imagine the rest of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, California as a whole, and 
much of the western US. What is care in the context of knowing we cannot save all the world 
as it rapidly becomes something other than what we have known? How are these triage of care  
decisions to be made (Milligan, 2024 )?
Care spans scales. As a national park, Yosemite is dependent on the funding it gets from 
Congress, enmeshing it in Federal governance. The rest it gets through park entrance fees tied 
to individual people who travel to it from all over the world. How might Yosemite further 
leverage its multi-scaler social networks to help care for itself, its staff, and perhaps landscapes 
beyond its defined boundary? We might ask the same question of other organisations—be they 
Federal and state agencies or NGOs.
What about tending to relations with Indigenous people whose lands were taken from them? 
In California, there have been recent efforts to acknowledge Indigenous stewardship and sov -
ereignty, particularly with respect to cultural burning and Indigenous sovereignty (Legiscan, 
n.d.; Wildfire and Forest Resilience Task Force, 2022 ). How the park addresses past and ongoing 
legacies of colonialism is a critical care question. In what ways might Indigenous tribes be 
consulted and integrated in stewardship practices and goals for the park that also benefit them? 
Are there ways the park might be co-managed? Might more of its staff and leadership positions 
be assumed by Indigenous people? Might land be given back, and Indigenous sovereignty be 
acknowledged? As Tiffany Kaewen dang writes, ‘Land is the most essential aspect of all forms 
of colonialism’ (dang, 2021 , p. 1004). And ‘If colonialism is about the control of land, then 
conversely, decolonisation requires the complete subversion of the power(s) controlling that 
land. d ecolonisation starts with land’ (dang, 2021 , p. 1004–1005). Giving land back is potentially 
the most reparative, transformative acts of care that can be done, but this has historically been 
politically hard to achieve. But the land back movement is gaining momentum and happening 
in places across California (Cowan, 2024 ). Can this happen in Yosemite?
18 B. MILLIGAN
Perhaps the only way to know or thoughtfully explore what is possible and what might be 
desired, as collective visions for a future Yosemite, is by doing the slow, caring work of making 
and building new relationships that actively tend to past mistakes.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Yosemite Park staff for all their assistance with this research, and to dan Buckley and Garrett 
dickman in particular for multiple interviews and extensive guided fieldwork within the Park. I would also like 
to thank Emily Schlickman for initial research we conducted on Yosemite.
Research ethics and consent
The manuscript was shared with the fieldwork participants identified in the manuscript to verify accuracy and 
to offer corrections. Participants consented to text content and being identified/named in the text via email 
correspondence.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes on contributor
Brett Milligan  is a professor of landscape architecture at the University of California, d avis, and is a founding 
member of the dredge Research Collaborative. At UC davis, he is the director of the Metamorphic Landscapes 
Lab, dedicated to advancing multi-benefit adaptations to accelerated landscape change through design research 
and transdisciplinary practices. Much of his work is based in California, reworking colonial legacies of land rec -
lamation, water infrastructure and fire suppression. Recent projects include Public Sediment/Unlock Alameda 
Creek for the Bay Area Resilient by design Competition, Franks Tract Futures, delta Island Adaptations, and Just 
Transitions in the Sacramento-San Joaquin d elta: drought, Sea-Level Rise and Salinity, funded by the University 
of California’s Multicampus Research Programs and Initiatives grant. He is the co-author of two recent book 
publications: d esign by Fire: Resistance, Co-Creation and Retreat in the Pyrocene (Routledge), and Silt Sand Slurry: 
dredging, Sediment, and the Worlds We Are Making (ORO ARd ).
Data availability statement
No data other than in the manuscript is available.
References
Adam, B., & Groves, C. ( 2007 ). Future Matters: Action, Knowledge, Ethics . Brill.
Anderson, K. M. ( 2005 ). Tending the Wild: Native American Knowledge and the Management of California’s Natural 
Resources . University of California Press.
Boisramé, G. F. S., Thompson, S. E., Tague, C., & Stephens, S. L. ( 2019 ). Restoring a natural fire regime alters the 
water balance of a Sierra Nevada catchment. Water Resources Research , 55(7), 5751–5769. https://doi.
org/10.1029/2018WR024098
Buckley, d . (2023 ). Yosemite National Park, Illilouette Basin hiking retreat.
Buckley, d . (2024 ). Correspondence with author.
Cephas, J., Marjanović, I., & Miljački, A. ( 2022 ). Pedagogies for a broken world. Journal of Architectural Education , 
76(2), 2–4. https://doi.org/10.1080/10464883.2022.2097491
Chakrabarty, d . (2021 ). The Climate of History in a Planetary Age . University of Chicago Press.
Cowan, J. ( 2024 ). In California, tribal members are reclaiming the land of the flowing water. The New York Times . 
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/06/16/us/california-native-american-tribes.html
Cronon, W. ( 1996 ). The trouble with wilderness: or, getting back to the wrong nature. Environmental History , 1(1), 
7–28. https://doi.org/10.2307/3985059
dang, T. K. ( 2021 ). decolonizing landscape. Landscape Research , 46(7), 1004–1016. https://doi.org/10.1080/014263
97.2021.1935820
LANdSCAPE  RESEARCH 19
de La Bellacasa, M. P . ( 2015 ). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social Studies 
of Science , 45(5), 691–716. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312715599851
de La Bellacasa, M. P . ( 2017 ). Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds . University of Minnesota 
Press.
denevan, W. M. ( 1992 ). The Pristine Myth: The landscape of the Americas in 1492. Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers , 82(3), 369–385. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.1992.tb01965.x
dowie, M. ( 2011 ). Conservation refugees: The hundred-year conflict between global conservation and native peoples . 
MIT press.
dowie, M. ( 2019 ). The myth of a wilderness without humans. https://thereader.mitpress.mit.edu/
the-myth-of-a-wilderness-without-humans/
Fitz, A., Elke, K., and Architekturzentrum W., eds. ( 2019 ). Critical care: Architecture and urbanism for a broken plan -
et. MIT Press.
Forest History Society. ( n.d. ). U.S. Forest Service Fire Suppression . https://foresthistory.org/research-explore/
us-forest-service-history/policy-and-law/fire-u-s-forest-service/u-s-forest-service-fire-suppression/
Hankin, L. E., Anderson, C. T., dickman, G. J., Bevington, P ., & Stephens, S. L. ( 2023 ). How forest management 
changed the course of the washburn fire and the fate of Yosemite’s Giant Sequoias ( Sequoiadendron giganteum ). 
Fire Ecology , 19(1), 40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42408-023-00202-6
Hankins, d . L. ( 2024 ). Climate resilience through ecocultural stewardship. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America , 121(32), e2310072121. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310072121
Jackson, S. J. ( 2014 ). Rethinking repair. In Media technologies: Essays on communication, materiality, and society . 
221–239.
Jacobs, S., & Wiens, T. ( 2023 ). Landscapes of care: Politics, practices, and possibilities. Landscape Research, 49 (3), 1–17.
Justia US Law. ( 2023 ). Earth Island Institute v. Cicely Muldoon, et al, No. 22-16483 (9th Cir., Justia US Law). https://
law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/ca9/22-16483/22-16483-2023-09-12.html
Keeley, J. E. ( 2009 ). Fire intensity, fire severity and burn severity: A brief review and suggested usage. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire , 18(1), 116–126. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF07049
Kilgore, B. M. ( 2005 ). Fire management in parks and protected areas: Introduction and summary. In The George 
Wright Forum , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 8–11. George Wright Society.
Kimmerer, R. ( 2011 ). Restoration and reciprocity: The contributions of traditional ecological knowledge. Human 
Dimensions of Ecological Restoration . Island Press. 257–276.
Kohlruss, C. ( 2022 ). Yosemite sued for logging, lawsuit by CA conservation group, Fresno Bee, June 16th. https://
www.fresnobee.com/news/california/yosemite/article262477057.html
Legiscan. ( n.d.). AB642 | 2021–2022 | Regular Session | Amended, https://legiscan.com/CA/text/AB642/id/2416063
Loveridge, E. W. ( 1944 ). The Fire Suppression Policy of the US Forest Service. Journal of Forestry , 42(8), 549–554.
Macd onald, G., Wall, T., Enquist, C. A. F., LeRoy, S. R., Bradford, J. B., Breshears, d . d., Brown, T., Cayan, d ., dong, 
C., Falk, d . A., Fleishman, E., Gershunov, A., Hunter, M., Loehman, R. A., van Mantgem, P . J., Middleton, B. R., 
Safford, H. d ., Schwartz, M. W., & Trouet, V. ( 2023 ). drivers of California’s changing wildfires: A state-of-the-knowledge 
synthesis. International Journal of Wildland Fire , 32(7), 1039–1058. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF22155
Manning, B. R. M. ( 2023 ). Relationships, respect, and reciprocity: approaches to learning and teaching about 
Indigenous cultural burning and landscape stewardship. In J Sikina, d Jessie, G Jody, S. F Samara, & E Edward 
Teaching Environmental Justice: Practices to Engage Students and Build Community .
Mattern, S. ( 2018 ). Maintenance and care. Places Journal  https://placesjournal.org/article/maintenance-and-care/ . 
https://doi.org/10.22269/181120
Middleton, J., & Samanani, F. ( 2021 ). Accounting for care within human geography. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers , 46(1): 29–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12403
Miller, C., & davis, B. ( 2009 ). Quantifying the consequences of fire suppression in two California national parks. 
In The George Wright Forum.  (vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 76–88). George Wright Society.
Milligan, B., & Schlickman, E. (forthcoming). Futuring of fire. Journal of Landscape Architecture , Wildfires  Special 
Issue, 26–39.
Milligan, B. ( 2024 ). “Triage of Care” , in, “Field Notes on Repair: 2. Places Journal , https://placesjournal.org/article/
field-notes-on-repair-2/
Milligan, B. ( 2022 ). Accelerated and decelerated landscapes. Places Journal  https://placesjournal.org/article/
accelerated-and-decelerated-landscapes/ . https://doi.org/10.22269/220208
Milligan, B. ( 2015 ). Landscape migration. Places Journal . https://doi.org/10.22269/150629
Moore, J.W. ed., ( 2016 ). Anthropocene Or capitalocene?: Nature, history, and the crisis of capitalism . Pm Press.
National Park Service. ( n.d.). Re-establish tree seedlings in severely burned giant sequoia groves and adjacent 
fisher habitat in sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks. https://parkplanning.nps.gov/projectHome.
cfm?projectId=107200
National Park Service. ( 2022 ). Scenic Vista Management Plan, Yosemite National Park, https://www.nps.gov/yose/
getinvolved/vista.htm
20 B. MILLIGAN
National Park Foundation. ( 2023 ). A new generation preserves tribal land and culture in America’s national parks, 
https://www.nationalparks.org/news-and-updates/media-appearances/new-generation-preserves-Tribal-land-cultur
e-national-parks
Olmsted, F. L., et  al. ( 1952 ). The Yosemite Valley and the Mariposa Grove of Big Trees: A Preliminary Report. 
Landscape Architecture Magazine , 45(1), 12–25.
Park, J., & V., Vranken, J. ( 2023 ). Why environmentalists are suing the National Park Service to prevent it from 
planting trees, CNN, https://www.cnn.com/2023/11/27/us/national-park-sequoia-planting-lawsuit-climate
Purdy, J. ( 2015 ). After nature: A politics for the Anthropocene . Harvard University Press.
Pyne, S. J. ( 2021 ). The Pyrocene: How we created an age of fire, and what happens next . University of California Press.
Pyne, S. J. ( 2023 ). Pyrocene Park: A Journey into the Fire History of Yosemite National Park . University of Arizona 
Press.
Rifkin, M. ( 2017 ). Beyond settler time: Temporal sovereignty and Indigenous self-determination . duke University Press.
Schlickman, E., & Milligan, B. ( 2023 ). Design by fire: Resistance, co-creation and retreat in the Pyrocene . Taylor & 
Francis.
Shive, K. L., Wuenschel, A., Hardlund, L. J., Morris, S., Meyer, M. d ., & Hood, S. M. ( 2022 ). Ancient trees and mod -
ern wildfires: declining resilience to wildfire in the highly fire-adapted giant sequoia. Forest Ecology and 
Management , 511, 120110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2022.120110
Spence, M. ( 1996 ). dispossessing the wilderness: Yosemite Indians and the National Park Ideal, 1864–1930. Pacific 
Historical Review , 65(1), 27–59. https://doi.org/10.2307/3640826
Steel, Z. L., Brandon, M., Collins, d . B., Sapsis., & S. L., Stephens. ( 2021 ). Quantifying pyrodiversity and its drivers. 
Proceedings. Biological Sciences , 288(1948), 20203202. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.3202
Stephens, S. L., Thompson, S., Boisramé, G., Collins, B. M., Ponisio, L. C., Rakhmatulina, E., Steel, Z. L., Stevens, J. 
T., van Wagtendonk, J. W., & Wilkin, K. ( 2021 ). Fire, water, and biodiversity in the Sierra Nevada: A possible 
triple win. Environmental Research Communications , 3(8), 081004. https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/ac17e2
Southard, L. F. ( 2011 ). The history of cooperative forest fire control and the Weeks Act. Forest History Today, Spring/
Fal, 17–20.
Travis, W. R. ( 2007 ). New geographies of the American West: Land use and the changing patterns of place . Island Press.
Tronto, J. C. ( 2010 ). Creating caring institutions: Politics, plurality, and purpose. Ethics and Social Welfare , 4(2), 
158–171. https://doi.org/10.1080/17496535.2010.484259
Tronto, J. C. ( 2019 ). Caring architecture. In F Angelika, K Elke, & W Architekturzentrum, eds. Critical care: Architecture 
and urbanism for a broken planet . MIT Press.
Van Wagtendonk, J. W. ( 2007 ). The history and evolution of wildland fire use. Fire Ecology , 3(2), 3–17. https://doi.
org/10.4996/fireecology.0302003
Wildfire and Forest Resilience Task Force. ( 2022 ). California’s Strategic Plan for Expanding the Use of Beneficial Fire , 
https://wildfiretaskforce.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/californias-strategic-plan-for-expanding-the-use-
of-beneficial-fire.pdf
Whyte, K. ( 2020 ). Against crisis epistemology. In Routledge handbook of critical Indigenous studies.  (pp. 52–64). 
Routledge.
Xanthopoulos, G., Leone, V., & d elogu, G. M. ( 2020 ). The suppression model fragilities: The firefighting trap. In 
Extreme Wildfire Events and Disasters , pp. 135–153. Elsevier.
Yosemite National Park. ( 1989 ). Wilderness management plan , https://parkplanning.nps.gov/document.cfm?parkId
=347&projectId=47112&documentId=69176
Yosemite National Park. (n.d). Wilderness Stewardship Plan , https://parkplanning.nps.gov/projectHome.
cfm?projectId=47112
