The diversity of ignorance and the ignorance of
diversity: origins and implications of “shadow
diversity ”for conservation biology and
extinction
Serena Turton-Hughes1, George Holmes1and Christopher Hassall2
1School of Earth and Environment, Faculty of Environment, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK and2School of Biology, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK
Abstract
Biodiversity shortfalls and taxonomic bias can lead to inaccurate assessment of conservation
priorities. Previous literature has begun to explore practical reasons why some species are
discovered sooner or are better researched than others. However, the deeper socio-culturalcauses for undiscovered and neglected biodiversity, and the value of collectively analysing speciesat risk of unrecorded, or “dark ”, extinction, are yet to be fully examined. Here, we argue that a
new label (we propose “shadow diversity ”) is needed to shift our perspective from biodiversity
shortfalls to living, albeit unknown, species. We suggest this linguistic shift imparts intrinsicvalue to these species, beyond scientific gaze and cultural systems. We review research on
undiscovered, undetected and hidden biodiversity in the fields of conservation biology, macro-
ecology and genetics. Drawing on philosophy, geography, history and sociology, we demonstratethat a range of socio-cultural factors (funding, education and historical bias) combine with
traditional, practical impediments to limit species discovery and detection. We propose using a
spectrum of shadow diversity which enables a complex, non-binary and comprehensiveapproach to biodiversity unknowns. Shadow diversity holds exciting potential as a tool to
increase awareness, appreciation and support for the conservation of traditionally less studied
wildlife species and sites, from soil microbes to less charismatic habitat fragments. We advocatefor a shift in how the conservation community and wider public see biodiversity and an increasein popular support for conserving a wider range of life forms. Most importantly, shadow
diversity provides appropriate language and conceptual frameworks to discuss species absent
from conservation assessment and at potential risk of dark extinction.
Impact statement
Contemporary approaches to the study of biodiversity have emphasised the great complexity of
natural systems in terms of the composition of biological communities and the many inter-actions within them. Practical conservation measures have reacted to these emerging themes,
with the gradual introduction of new survey methods and new conservation approaches. In this
review, we describe the ways in which our knowledge of biodiversity has arisen and theconsequences of the gaps in our understanding of the living world. We argue that there is a
need for a proactive approach to the conservation of nature that incorporates uncertainty and the
unknown. We explore dark extinctions (those species that go extinct before being discovered)and unknown biodiversities (those species that are still unknown to science), offering “shadow
diversity ”as a collective term to broaden perspectives of what can be included in conservation
considerations. The article provides a guide for future multidisciplinary considerations of causesof shadow diversity and taxonomic biases in conservation science and ecology. We conclude witha series of four challenges presented by shadow diversity with suggestions for directions of future
research: (i) problems of detection, (ii) problems of language, (iii) problems of valuation and
(iv) problems of practical application. Such findings should be of interest to academics who areexamining interdisciplinary responses to conservation and extinction, as well as conservationists
who are developing frameworks for the sustainable conservation of natural resources.
Introduction
The contemporary phase of anthropogenic biodiversity decline has been described as a “mass
extinction ”on the basis of the rates of species loss (Barnosky et al. 2011 ). However, a sizeable but
uncertain fraction of that loss is likely to comprise “dark extinctions ”of species already extinct
but never known to science (Tedesco et al. 2014 ; Chisholm et al. 2016 ; Lambdon and CronkCambridge Prisms: Extinction
www.cambridge.org/ext
Overview Review
Cite this article: Turton-Hughes S, Holmes G
and Hassall C (2024). The diversity ofignorance and the ignorance of diversity:
origins and implications of “shadow diversity ”
for conservation biology and extinction.Cambridge Prisms: Extinction ,2,e 1 8 ,1 –21
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21
Received: 29 September 2023
Revised: 05 May 2024Accepted: 19 June 2024
Keywords:
unknown diversity; dark extinction; taxonomic
bias; biodiversity shortfalls; scientific ignorance
Corresponding author:
Serena Turton-Hughes;
Email: S.Turton-Hughes@leeds.ac.uk
© The Author(s), 2024. Published by Cambridge
University Press. This is an Open Access article,distributed under the terms of the CreativeCommons Attribution licence ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0 ), which
permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and
reproduction, provided the original article isproperly cited.
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
2020 ). Despite our increasing ability to detect and monitor the
natural world, there will almost certainly be further dark extinctions
in the future (Pimm et al. 2014 ). Understanding and preventing
dark extinctions is important for accurate historical records ofenvironmental destruction (Boehm and Cronk 2021 ) and for
uncovering hidden or cryptic species for conservation purposes
(Mili ćet al. 2019 ). Beyond the practicalities of environmental
protection, we also note the moral and emotional imperatives for
seeing, mourning and processing the loss of unknown life (see, for
instance, Head 2016 ; Jørgensen 2019 ). Here, we develop a comple-
mentary concept to dark extinction that we term “shadow
diversity ”. This concept is derived from an exploration of the
significance of extant, unknown species but emphasises the pres-ence of unknown taxa as opposed to their absence. Contemporaryconservation science is aware of the need to incorporate uncertainty
and unknowns, evidenced by numerous statistical tools and models
for this purpose (for instance, see Chao et al. 2017 ; MacKenzie et al.
2017 ; Benoit et al. 2018 ). Here, we complement quantitative
approaches, by providing a multidisciplinary analysis focussed on
revealing processes beyond conservation that generate and main-tain biodiversity ’s unknowns. We offer a conceptual framework
that can help researchers, policymakers and the general public to
articulate those unknowns, explore their causes and mitigate theirconsequences to produce more taxonomically holistic conservationpractices, systems and solutions.
This review extends past an acknowledgement of the existence
of living and extinct unknown and unrecorded biodiversity, toexamine social, cultural, political factors and psychological biases
that contribute to ignorance that is unevenly distributed across the
phylogenetic Tree of Life and different habitats. We begin byexamining unknown extinctions and biodiversity in the context
of conservation science. Next, we review the literature on unknown
extinctions and unknown biodiversity. We argue for the concept of“shadow diversity ”for two key purposes: firstly, as a useful tool to
enable the discussion of otherwise nebulous absent lifeforms; and,
secondly, as a framework to explore deeper multidisciplinary ori-gins of taxonomic biases of unknown species that might informfuture philosophical and scientific thinking. We examine literature
dealing with reasons for this imbalance of knowledge across the
Tree of Life and provide a model to deepen cross-disciplinaryexplorations of causes of ignorance and how to overcome this.
Finally, we provide four challenges posed by shadow diversity
and suggest how shadow diversity can impact conservation. Bydemonstrating the socio-cultural origins of our (conservation sci-
entists and beyond) ignorance, we propose multi- and interdiscip-
linary approaches to understanding, managing and buildingsocietal relations with biodiversity, including biodiversity at risk
of extinction that cannot be named but can be noticed.
Unknown extinctions and unknown biodiversity in
conservation science
Conservation biology is a crisis discipline (Soulé 1985 ), tackling the
extinction crisis (Barnosky et al. 2011 ). To accomplish this aim,
conservation biology answers questions about what life forms are indanger of extinction and how they can be saved, monitoringbiodiversity at local and global levels using species population sizes,
trends and extinction rates. Conservation scientists work with
international bodies, such as the IUCN (International Union forConservation of Nature), to provide data that informs the conser-
vation status of assessed species. The IUCN conservation status of a
species informs policies and legal protections for that species(Rodrigues et al. 2006 ). Since high proportions of biodiversity are
thought to be unknown (Mora et al. 2011 ), experts calculate esti-
mates for where these undiscovered species might be (Moura and
Jetz2021 ). The IPBES (Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform
on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services) provides detailed and,
whilst imperfect, well-founded quantitative estimates for biodiver-
sity trends (IPBES 2019 ). Despite the robustness of the data, the
interpretation of those trends has proven controversial in some
areas of society so it was necessary to add a question-and-answer
page explaining and defending the IPBES Global Biodiversity 2019report (Purvis 2019b ). That Purvis ’s response was needed echoes
Morton ’s comparison that providing statistical data for govern-
ment and public interpretation leaves it open to individuals ’“
men-
tal construct ”of cause and effect (Morton 2016 ,14). In spite of a
large team of experts choosing “conservative ”estimates for the
IPBES (Purvis 2019a ), the IPBES report continues to provoke
extinction denial (Lees et al. 2020 ).
There is a growing body of literature in conservation that recog-
nises the importance of what we have termed shadow diversity.
The need to investigate unknown species for the purpose of improv-ing conservation assessment accuracy has been thoroughly estab-
lished (Bickford et al. 2007 ;F išer et al. 2018 ; Cornwell et al. 2019 ).
Scientists have repeatedly attempted to quantify the number ofundiscovered species: one paper even thanked colleagues “support-
ing our decision not to provide yet another conjectural estimate of
the total number of species on Earth ”(Scheffers et al. 2012 ). Such
estimates cover many taxa, from microalgae (Jouannais and Pizzol2022 ) and ants (Kass et al. 2022 ), soil biodiversity (Anthony et al
2023 ), through to full global figures (Mora et al. 2011 ; IPBES 2019 ).
However, we do not have calculations for every taxon (Purvis2019b ), such as fresh-water nematodes (Anthony et al 2023 ). Esti-
mates that we have vary widely as researchers compensate in dif-
ferent ways for incomplete data, such as extinction data beyondIUCN red lists (Régnier et al 2015 ). The accuracy of and assump-
tions within these estimates means the number of undiscovered
species remains a contested area. Scheffers et al. ( 2012 ) are right to
urge caution towards global estimates, especially where small-scalelocal data is used to extrapolate large-scale estimates, due to the
questionable estimates that this leads to. In the absence of precise
numerical accuracy, we can say that there seems more than suffi-cient evidence of a current biodiversity crisis and within this, what
we term shadow diversity is a global challenge. What these figures do
not inform us of is how these species knowledge gaps occurred.
In addition to debates over the interpretation of existing data,
undiscovered species for which there are no data may experience a
higher likelihood of extinction (Liu et al. 2022 ). As Purvis ( 2019b )
writes “Ignoring them would therefore be not only silly but
decidedly unscientific. The question is, how best to consider them? ”
We ask the same question. In our review, we steer away fromconsidering undiscovered species in a purely quantitative sense.Instead, we develop a different approach that examines the under-
lying causes of our lack of knowledge about certain taxa and
involves an expansion of interdisciplinary enquiry into the practiceof conservation. By working alongside longstanding quantitative
estimates of biodiversity trends and extinctions, we hope to provide
a multidisciplinary, qualitative framework for understanding thecauses and consequences of the loss of those taxa that lie beyond the
reach of conventional statistics. In developing this shadow diversity
framework, we review literature specific to unknown extinctionsand undiscovered biodiversity from different disciplinary angles.The results are not intended as a solution to any individual com-
ponent of the extinction crisis, but rather as an alternative2 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
perspective that may be useful in evaluating the systemic drivers
and consequences of the existence of poorly recorded, threatened
taxa, grounded in a deeper understanding of where unknowns
come from.
A review of unknowns
It has long been recognised that human-induced extinctions are
occurring before species are formally described. For example, Ains-worth ( 1976 ,296) predicted numerous species of fungi and insects
would be extinct before their scientific discovery. High rates of
biodiversity loss present a race against time to find species beforethey are lost (Costello et al. 2013 ). Initially, specific species, par-
ticularly birds and snails, were posthumously recorded as extinct
based on zooarchaeological techniques or physical remains (Olson
and James 1982 ; Pimm et al. 1994 ; Steadman 1995 ; Bouchet and
Abdou 2003 ; Richling and Bouchet 2013 ; Cooke et al. 2023 ). More
recently, statistical models have been employed to estimate the
quantities of undiscovered species extinctions (Tedesco et al.2014 ; Chisholm et al. 2016 ; Kristensen et al. 2020 ; Lum et al.
2021 ). To comprehend how future unrecorded extinctions might
occur and how this could be minimised, it is also essential tounderstand trends in research on extant unknown biodiversity.
Concerns around ignorance of what species are still unknown,
where they are located, what conservation solutions are needed to
conserve them, and the implications that might follow their extinc-tion are well-known to conservation biologists as biodiversity
shortfalls (Lomolino 2004 ; Bini et al. 2006 ; Cardoso et al. 2011 ;
Diniz-Filho et al. 2013 ; Hortal et al. 2015 ). Though we note pro-
posals for additional shortfalls (for example: Cornwell et al. 2019 ;
Martin et al. 2023 ), we summarise the seven main shortfalls in
Figure 2 . These shortfalls highlight the types of knowledge lacking
to enable improved conservation information useful in preventing
and managing anticipated future extinctions. In order to review the
lacking knowledge itself, rather than the types of knowledge lack-ing, we explored studies focused on unknown biodiversity, bothextant and extinct, as we describe below.
Methods
We examined twelve terms used to describe unknown species
extinctions. This provided 34 relevant results, which we analysed
in full (see Supplementary Table S2 for details including search
terms, exclusions and a full reference list). Additionally, we under-took a second review using thirteen terms hitherto used to describe
unrecorded species, taxa and biodiversities. We searched the Web
of Science database using a “topic ”search for publications up to
2023, with exclusions for irrelevant subject areas, such as astro-
physics. We used the search terms “unknown taxa ”OR“unknown
taxon ”,“unknown species ”and “unknown biodiversity ”OR
“unknown diversity
”for each term, including American-English
spelling alternatives where appropriate. We utilised a mixed-
methods multi-level approach to the literature (Grant and Booth
2009 ). Within this, we explored quantitative trends ( Figure 1b ,
Supplementary Figure S6 ), as well as a critical narrative analysis
of pre-existing reviews, and a systematised approach to analyse
literature for each of the thirteen terms, reviewing 188 papers indepth (Supplementary Table S3 ). As the number of results was high
(see Supplementary Figure S6 ), we noted, but excluded from quan-
titative analysis, a further four synonyms with fewer than tenpublications ( Supplementary Table S3 ). The range of termsincluded hidden diversity, cryptic taxa, false absences and unknown
diversity (see Figure 1 for a full list).
Overview of results
According to our review, “cryptic extinction ”was the most frequent
term used in research regarding unknown extinctions. However,
there was insufficient data to suggest it as a dominant term for
unknown extinctions as the number of publications per term in thissearch was small ( Figure 1a ). The most used prefix for unknown
biodiversity was “cryptic ”(cryptic taxa, species and diversity),
followed by “undescribed ”and then “unknown ”(Figure 1b , see
also Supplementary Figure S6 ). Some results from this second
search employed the term in the context of highlighting a species
was a new discovery (and therefore had previously been cryptic or
unknown) see Supplementary Table S3 ). Even with allowances
considered for this limitation, to date, our results suggest there
has been more research effort on unknown extant species in con-
servation sciences than anthropogenic unknown extinctions. Themain trends apparent from our review were mixed patterns in
approaches for unknown extinctions and a split macro-, microscale
trend for unknown biodiversity; use of deficit language that empha-sises gaps without recognising the anthropocentric causes of those
gaps and failure to engage with what might be missing; and impre-
cise use of terms that complicate the creation of a coherent pictureon neglected taxa. These results led us to conclude that a new term
would provide a useful tool to support consideration of unnamed
biodiversity, both within and beyond conservation.
Patterns in approaches
The relatively small number of articles on unknown extinctions did
not show many overarching patterns with certainty. Our review
found that work on unknown extinction varies across disciplinary
approaches and scales ( Supplementary Table S2 ). Most work to date
estimates lost species within a taxonomic group and there was anotable pattern in research towards using statistical approaches.
Whilst Tedesco et al. ( 2014) tested their model on regional and global
datasets, most statistical approaches worked at the mesoscale withislands as a key theme (unknown bird, plant and butterfly extinctions
in Singapore and St Helena (Chisholm et al. 2016; Kristensen et al.
2020;L a m b d o na n dC r o n k 2020;T h e n ge ta l . 2020)). Exceptions to a
species-based focus included loss of genetic biodiversity (Ledig 1993;
Ayoub and Hayashi 2008) and habitat loss (Bastian 2020). By com-
parison, literature that examines specific elements of unknown diver-sity (see Supplementary Table S3
) has broadly focused on one of two
main approaches. Firstly, macro-scale quantitative estimates can be
calculated using probability and extrapolation from current data to
map where we are most likely to find hitherto undiscovered biodiver-sity. Secondly, recent studies have used microscale, very often genetic,
approaches to describe and classify cryptic diversity.
Micro approaches focus on uncovering species new to Western
scientific knowledge, with the largest proportion of literature
focused on cryptic species ( Figure 1b andSupplementary Figure S6 )
and on the discussion of novel methods used to find them. Someauthors discuss microscale studies within the wider context of
conservation biology (Sales et al. 2018 ; Mili ćet al. 2019 ; Kortmann
et al. 2022 ), but a considerable proportion do not make explicit links
to applied conservation and focus, instead, on the fundamentaldiscovery of new taxa only (Grabowski et al. 2017 ; Morinière et al.
2019 ; Sharkey et al. 2021 ).Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 3
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Numerous models attempt to quantify ignorance, both for
imperfect ecological and conservation data collection (Chao et al.
2017 ; MacKenzie et al. 2017 ; Benoit et al. 2018 ); and particular
taxonomic groups. These large, often macro-, quantified estimatesfrequently take the form of proportions of species discovered
compared to species yet unknown (Joppa et al. 2011 ; Hawksworth
and Lücking 2017 ; Stork 2018 ) and mapping at a global scale where
the remaining undiscovered species are predicted to be (Moura and
Jetz2021 ; Gatti et al. 2022 ). Here, there is a repeated theme of using
quantitative modelling to estimate past and anticipated extinctionsand imagine scales of what might have been and what might yet be
lost. Undiscovered biodiversity estimates provide practical impli-
cations by highlighting geographical areas that might benefit mostfrom international conservation funding or taxonomic support(Moura and Jetz 2021 ).
On the other hand, models for both dark extinctions and
undetected extant biodiversity can struggle to perform well withlesser-known taxa and rare taxa, the two categories most in need of
conservation (Giam et al. 2011 ; Roberts et al. 2016 ; Liu et al. 2022 ).
Chao and colleagues note that their model for calculatingundetected diversity will only perform well for difficult-to-detect
species where there is a similar chance of detecting those species
during sampling (similar detection probability) (Chao et al. 2017 ,
2927). This makes it appropriate for estimating undiscovered treespecies, for example (Gatti et al. 2022 ). However, their model does
not work well for species with variable detection probabilities, such
as microbes (Chao et al. 2017 , 2927), though it has been argued that
these should be a key focus for anticipated dark extinction conser-
vation (Veresoglou et al. 2015 ; Guerra et al. 2021 ; Redford 2023 ).
Occupancy models and false absences tend to focus on those speciesthat conservationists already know and seek, rather than undiscov-
ered species (Smith et al. 1996 ; MacKenzie et al. 2003 ). Rare species
are known to be methodologically challenging in these models(Jeliazkov et al. 2022 ). In practice, the inadequacy of models to
handle rarity means extremely rare species are sometimes removed
from detection rate calculations altogether (Driscoll 2010 ). Each of
the three models used to estimate dark extinctions is suited toexamining species where we already have good records. For
example, Tedesco ’s(2014 p. 1363) tool requires data from taxa
whose discovery curve has already levelled. This is not practical forhuge portions of the Tree of Life, such as the kingdom of fungi,
where the species discovery curve is still rising (Hawksworth and
Lücking 2017 ,4).
Lack of clarity
Of the terms we reviewed, some have been used since the mid-
twentieth century and earlier ( Figure 1 ), yet the boundaries and
definitions of these labels remain unclear ( Supplementary Table S3 ).
For example, “cryptic species ”has been used in the past to refer to
species that are hard to detect due to their physical location orappearance (Claridge et al. 2004 ), but more recent use has
been related to the taxonomic splitting of morphologically identical
species using genetic sequencing (
Supplementary Table S3 ). Hidden
diversity for plants can mean locally rare or dormant (Carrasco-Puga et al. 2021 ) as well as “overlooked by traditional sampling ”
(Pärtel 2014 ). Hidden diversity, other than in plants, sometimes
refers to species that can be uncovered using genetic sequencingtechniques (Sales et al. 2018 ), thus overlapping with one use of
cryptic diversity. Hidden diversity is at times used as a combined
term for unknown diversity and suspected cryptic diversity, or bothwithin the same article (Mili ćet al. 2019 ).Further inconsistent uses occur where a term is only used in the
title or abstract of an article and not defined (Shipunov et al. 2008 ;
Grabowski et al. 2017 ). Undefined terms cause ambiguity and the
reader is left to infer or interpret the type of unknown biodiversityunder discussion, leading to a multitude of understandings from
these terms. This variety of meanings, many of which are employed
interchangeably across different labels, make it difficult to comparewithin and across the body of research literature regarding cur-
rently unknown taxa, likely to be at high risk of extinction (Giam
et al. 2011 ). Exacerbating problems of ambiguity, discussions of
terms and concepts generally examine one element in isolation:
Several reviews examine cryptic species only (Knowlton 1993 ;
Bickford et al. 2007 ;F išer et al. 2018 ; Chenuil et al. 2019 ). Other
studies review one kingdom only, such as the communities of fungihidden within plants and insects (Blackwell and Vega 2018 ). With
such overlaps of definitions, a shared umbrella term that allows for
a spectrum of unknowns would be helpful to link studies withdifferent terms that are all focused on the same concepts.
A deficit approach
Based on our review of studies describing the extinction of
unknown taxa, most employ deficit language to refer to lost bio-
diversity, as we will discuss in detail below. However, we found
“dark extinction ”to be distinctive amongst the reviewed terms,
because Lambdon and Cronk ’s(2020 ) and Boehm and Cronk ’s
(2021 ) choice of language provides the first clearly defined non-
deficit named term. Additionally, their publications incorporatedhistorical and geographical factors specific to their study location ofSt Helena, such as the phases of and ecological impacts from
European settlers (and their more-than-human fellow travellers)
on the island. These location-specific historical factors providedtime-bound context for inferred, estimated and documented spe-
cies extinctions (see Supplementary Table S2 ). The name “dark
extinction ”is a play on “dark matter ”from cosmology: “almost
certain to exist but remains theoretical ”(Boehm and Cronk 2021 ,
1), like the anthropogenic extinctions that have already occurred,
many of which will remain theoretical with no tangible corpses,carcasses, or preserved detritus. Given that there will be futureextinctions of unknown species, dark extinction represents both a
useful, non-deficit term in conservation biology and an accessible
label suitable for discussion with the wider public.
Deficit language is arguably more problematic for undiscovered
biodiversity since it could impact the way we think about extant
biodiversity (Lupyan et al. 2020
). This deficit terminology for
known biodiversity comes in two forms: Firstly, research which
refers to the biodiversity shortfalls outlined above ( Figure 2 ) speaks
to scientific knowledge deficits, not to the species implicated withinthis deficit. The second form of labels comprises specific terms for
types of unknowns. Categories “cryptic ”and“hidden ”imply that the
species is being cryptic or is in hiding. Limited to human senses, thisis our perspective: we find fungi growing within another species hardto detect, so it seems that the fungi are hiding from us. However,
fungi have no notion of hiding, fungi are not sentient, nor trying to be
cryptic. As Fi šer et al. ( 2018,624)n o t e , “cryptic species may not be
cryptic to other community members ”:m u s h r o o mh u n t e r s ,f o r
instance, utilise dogs to help them locate matsutake mushrooms
(Tsing 2015), hinting matsutake are less cryptic to at least some
nonhuman species. “Hidden ”and “undiscovered ”are terms placed
upon species and situations to express the difficulties experienced by
Western scientific, human knowledge-making in trying to find thesespecies. It suggests the problem is with the undetected species.4 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
The same notion of deficit language applies not just to labelling
unknown species, but also to macro-focused models that highlightthe absence and emptiness of our ideas. This focus means the causes
of the obscurity of this life go overlooked. Crucially, if we think of
unknown species in terms of absence from records, or emptiness,these species are more difficult to relate to, imagine relationships
with, create policies for, value in ethical terms and ultimately, toaddress their loss. Van Dooren ( 2022 ) provides an example of
building relationships with unknown forms of life: he can imagine
extinct snails through the assistance of their taxonomic names0510152025303540
1993
1994
1995
1996
19971998
1999
2000
20012002
2003
20042005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023snoitacilbupfo.onevitalumluC
YearLabels found in Web of Science database searches for types of unno/g415ced ex/g415nc/g415ons
cryp/g415c crypto dark hidden
invisible secret undescribed undetected
undocumented unknown unrecognised unrecorded
02000400060008000100001200014000160001800020000
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021ecneicSfobeWmorfsnoitacilbupforebmuN
databasesearch
YearCumula/g415ve ar/g415cles published on shadow diversity topics, past 50 years
cryp/g415c dark falseabsence(s) hidden
neglected overlooked undescribed undetected
undiscovered undocumented unknown unrecognised
unrecorded(a)
(b)
Figure 1. (a) A stacked area graph showing the number of publications on unknown extinction topics over time. The graph starts at the year 1993 with one publicati on on ‘secret
extinction ’and tracks a further eleven terms published over time to the present day (2023). (b) A stacked area chart showing 13 labels found in literature relating to shadow diversity
language and the cumulative total number of publications found in the Web of Science database for each term under a ‘topic ’search, plotted over time for the past 50 years. The
shape of the graph becomes increasingly exponential towards the right-hand side.Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 5
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
which provide some individuality and semitangibility for him to use
in snail storying. There are multitudes of nameless lifeforms poten-tially threatened by extinction. Until now, we lacked an umbrella
term to discuss these.
Shadow diversity
We suggest the terms and concepts from the above review of
unknown extinction literature ( Figure 1b ) should be examined
collectively as a spectrum of “shadow diversity ”(Figure 3 ). In a
linguistic sense, this new term, “shadow ”acknowledges the other-
ness of these species more positively: shadows are caused by
another object obscuring light. This shifts the “problem ”from thebiodiversity in question to the obscuring object. Rather than imply-
ing that the action of un-seeing is caused by the species in question,the action might be the human gaze, priorities, choices, biases, tools
utilised, or methods employed to survey an ecosystem. This adjust-
ment does not seek to remove agency from shadow species, but toremove any blame or negative connotations to these forms of life
falling into shadow diversity. Employing constructive language,
positively referring to forms of life previously confined to unnamed,undescribed forms, may prove helpful in shifting approaches to
communicating dark extinctions and shadow diversity. Whilst the
nature of much of shadow diversity means individual species maynot yet or ever be nameable species, by using the term “shadow
diversity ”we have an appropriate, non-deficit, linguistic tool with
Figure 2. Summary of seven biodiversity shortfalls, adapted from Hortal et al. ’Table 1 ( 2015 ,525) and wider article. Each hexagon provides the name of a biodiversity shortfall, a
short definition, and an example of the type of extinction-related question that reveals the significance of that type of biodiversity data. Cornwel l et al. ( 2019 ) suggest a further Venn
shortfall where Linnaean, Wallacean, Darwinian and Raunkiæran intersect, arguing all four are needed for sufficient biodiversity knowledge for co nservation decision-making.6 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
which to discuss, both within and beyond conservation biology, life
forms which are at potentially substantial risk of extinction.
In an ecological sense, we define shadow diversity as those
species that are present in an area but that are not known to occur
there. This definition is sufficiently precise for use by conservationbiologists, yet also appropriat e for wider public communication
and engagement. Shadow diversity incorporates invisible, neg-
lected, overlooked and unrecorded known or unknown speciesthat are likely to be missed by current ecological sampling. In this
sense, we have focused on taxonomic biodiversity, but the shadow
diversity spectrum ( Figure 3 ) is hopefully adaptable for others to
use to discuss and incorporate all biodiversity types (genetic,taxonomic, functional). Undiscovered biodiversity cannot be
categorised as homogenous “unknown unknowns ”and our know-
ledge of undiscovered species does not remain stationary: inFigure 3 we provide labels to communicate this heterogeneityand allow discussion of movement within a spectrum of shadow
diversity. We subdivide the spec trum of shadow diversity into four
categories: ignored shadow diversity, which can be known but
humans deem unimportant; obscured shadow diversity, where we
have evidence that a species exists, but it remains undescribed;undiscovered shadow diversity, where we are aware of a lack of
knowledge and actively plan to account for this, as for dark taxa,
unnamed or formally undescribed species with only fragments ofDNA recorded (Page 2016 ;R y b e r ga n dN i l s s o n 2018 ), as well as
functions performed in an ecosystem suggestive of undiscovered
species; and unimagined shadow diversity, that lies completelybeyond our current capabilities and awareness (see Figure 3 and
Table 1 for full details). Shadow diversity is, therefore, an umbrella
term that incorporates all terms in Figure 1b , but enables access-
ible communication of the varying levels of unknowns for differ-ent types of biodiversity.
Figure 3. (a) The spectrum top-left shows increasingly known charismatic biodiversity extending towards the left side and shadow diversity, increasingly un known, extending to the
right. (b) We zoom in to the shadow diversity side of the spectrum, encompassing four subcategories of shadow diversity, with deeper levels of ignoran ce as we travel towards the
right-hand side of the spectrum.Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 7
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Shadow diversity represents not only an umbrella term for
groups of taxa but also a framework within which we can critiqueand enhance systems of biological knowledge. For instance, we
should explore why some species remained obscured, whilst others
have not. Whilst heterogeneous, species falling within these com-ponents of hitherto unclearly named biodiversity share a common
potential fate: a lack of accurate conservation assessment. Such
species are unable to enter the conservation system that couldafford them effective legal protection (Betts et al. 2020 ) and public
interest due to the current conservation discourse centred on the
IUCN Red List that requires identifying species in order to monitorthem (Lorimer 2015 ). Undiscovered biodiversity cannot gain entry
to this system until it is “discovered ”and formally described via
Western scientific and taxonomic protocols (Ryberg and Nilsson
2018 ). We can see evidence of conservationists ’frustrations
towards “taxonomic impediments ”(barriers which delay taxon-
omists ’work, such as insufficient experts and resources) where
conservationists suggest alternative interim systems to speed upspecies ’entry to the conservation system with strikingly similar
patterns in the past 40 years (Ramsay 1986 , Sharkey et al. 2021 ). An
overarching term would enable an integrated approach to speciesexcluded from the conservation system, with better acknowledge-
ment of sliding scales of knowledge about unknowns.It is worth spending a moment to delineate the concept of
shadow diversity that we develop in this work from other conceptsassociated with taxonomy and conservation. For instance, shadow
diversity stands in contrast to the concepts of umbrella species and
flagship species. Both concepts single out one species as a focaltaxon for conservation, either to propel a conservation campaign to
the public (flagship species) or with the assumption (or hope) that
in protecting that one species with its habitats and ecologicalnetworks then the remaining biota will be successfully preserved
(umbrella species) (Simberloff 1998 ). Umbrella and flagship species
tend to be macrofauna, to the detriment of focusing on otherimportant species, such as invertebrates (Cardoso 2011 ). Shadow
diversity, by contrast, forces our gaze to the smaller, the overlooked,
the microscopic life and does not try to quantify that diversity. This
shift in perspective builds on work from neglected biodiversity,such as soil ecologists (Wyckhuys 2021 ) and deep-sea specialists
(Fanelli et al. 2021 ). Hence, shadow diversity does not require yet
more quantification of diversity, but rather a call to rethink con-servation practice by critiquing the origins of these unknowns. A
second instructive comparison is between shadow diversity and
“dark diversity ”, which is already a term in conservation biology.
Dark diversity refers to (scientifically described) species that we
expect to find in a given location based on ecological conditions, butTable 1. Exploring categories of ignorance from Gross ( 2007 ) in relation to shadow diversity subcategories
Term Definition Interpretation for shadow diversity Example
Ignored Negative knowledge is“Knowledge
about what is not known, butconsidered as unimportant or
even dangerous ”(Gross 2007 ,
751)This transposes neatly onto scenarios and species that are
neglected in biodiversity sampling or studies: species known toscience, yet not considered sufficiently valuable or significant for
measurement or study. It refers to a level of intentional choice
(see Proctor 2008 ).Distribution of urban rabbits or rats.
This category is in danger ofunnoticed extinctions, as in the
case of Berger ( 2008 ).
Obscured Missing from Gross ’s definitions and
process of ignorance, wecompare this subcategory tounknown knowns.For the purposes of biodiversity, this relates to species for which
there are scientific records, but where practicalities preventfurther knowledge or make this difficult to achieve. Examples ofthis would collected species in herbariums and museums, yet to
be described and lacking taxonomic expertise; holding a
comprehensive list of species of a certain kingdom on record, butno taxonomic expertise available to survey a region being studied(both considered forms of “taxonomic impediment ”); or habitats
in extreme locations where species inhabiting the area mayalready be known to science, but cannot be surveyed accuratelydue to physical inaccessibility of a site, also referred to as
“habitat impediment ”(Mammola et al. 2021 ).Missing data for bryophytes,
orchids, asters, and begonias(Ratnasingham and Hebert 2007 ;
Cornwell et al. 2019 ; Bánki et al.
2022 ); herbarium and museum
specimens, yet to be describedand lacking taxonomic expertise.
Undiscovered Non-knowledge “Knowledge about
what is not known but taking itinto account for future planning ”
(Gross 2007 ,751)This speaks to the work of predictions for undiscovered biodiversity
at global (Moura and Jetz 2021 ) and national scales (such as Lum
et al. 2021 ). The scientific community knows undiscovered species
remain and has estimated numbers and locations for this,although they have yet to be found. This shares similarities with
Kerwin ’s(1993 ) known unknowns but goes further in the inclusion
in planning and prioritising future research. This action-orientedaspect is particularly relevant for the field of conservation whichis action-oriented and calls for urgent work.Cone Snails (Chivian et al. 2003);
mycorrhizal fungi (Society forProtection of UndergroundNetworks (SPUN) 2021 );
likelihood of new fungal species
(Banchi et al. 2018 ; Cheek et al.
2020 ); suspected additional
cryptic species amongst insectsthought to be generalists (Sheikhet al. 2022 ) and lichens (Lücking
et al.
2014 ); habitat type:
inaccessible tropical location
(Scheffers et al. 2012 ); deep sea
(Jamieson et al. 2021 ).
Unimagined Nescience “Lack of any knowledge: a
prerequisite for a total surprisebeyond any type of anticipation –
can lead to ignorance and non-
knowledge but belongs to adifferent epistemic class from theabove terms. ”(Gross 2007 ,751)Reserved for extreme unknown-unknown forms of biodiversity,
beyond our current capabilities of awareness and only accessiblein retrospect.Awareness during (or prior to) the
1970s of the Chromista taxonomic
kingdom, established in 1981
(Cavalier-Smith 2018 ).8 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
which are absent from that location (Pärtel et al. 2011 ). It therefore
focuses on understanding and quantifying the absence of known,expected species in contrast to shadow diversity, which focuses on
life that is present in a location but remains unobserved, unre-
corded, or unknown and the reasons for that lack of knowledge.
Shadow diversity builds on work completed on biocultural
extinction which frames culture as inextricably linked to biological
extinctions (Ladle et al. 2023 ). Biocultural extinction seeks to under-
stand how socio-cultural processes and values contribute to extinc-
tion. Shadow diversity asks similar questions about the origins of
extant biodiversity ignorance, albeit shadow diversity sees a moredual system of influence where culture influences conservation, asper biocultural extinction, but conservation practices also influence
culture ( Figure 4 ). Finally, whereas biocultural extinction aims to
measure the cultural value of species at risk of conservation, shadow
diversity aims to change the perception of how we can engage with
unknown biodiversity.
In addition to accurate data regarding how many species remain
and where they are, there are numerous examples where studying
previously neglected biodiversity has demonstrated a significantecological role of that species, which had been overlooked. For
instance, a review of pollinator projects revealed that non-syrphid
Diptera (flies excluding hoverflies) are important pollinators (Orford
et al. 2015). Recent studies of underground and phyllosphereValues, beliefs, biasesGeographical and
habitat biasesTechnologyFundingPolitical
agendasCurrent
socio-cultural
values
Conservation discourse
Taxonomic biasManifestations, processes and structuresDoing of research
ResearcherAvailable
methods and
resources
Data
collection
and analysisinstitutional
priorities and
agenda
monitoring,
indicators
and
measurescurrent
knowledgeeducation,
curriculum,
training
colleagues
and peers
authority
figures and
managementCultural and historical contextinstitutional barriers financial barriers language barriers
Research OutputsAcademic
publicationsPopular media
communications
Exhibits
and
displaysRegional,
national,
international
reportsprejudice and
descriminationtechnological barrierspolicies and
procedures
Figure 4. A diagram showing the cycle of factors perpetuating ignorance of shadow diversity.Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 9
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
microbiota highlight the important ecosystem functions performed
by previously unknown species, including nematodes, fungi andbacteria (Mercado-Blanco et al. 2018;C u s t ó d i oe ta l . 2021;C h i a l v a
et al. 2022). Looking ahead, many functions and ecosystem services
have yet to be realised. Fungi are a good example of such unknownpotential, such as “mycomediation ”which uses currently known
fungi to decompose harmful agents in the environment (Harms
et al. 2011;M c C o y 2016). It is highly likely that there will be manyfuture uses of currently unknown fungi, given estimates suggest
90 percent of fungi remain undiscovered (Cheek et al. 2020)a n d
predictions that these fungi will be useful for future medicines (Hyde
et al. 2019).
Behind arguments for improving conservation outcomes, lie
arguments around our limited understanding of global biodiversity
(Treurnicht et al. 2017 ; Fisher et al. 2018 ; Stork 2018 ; ter Steege et al.
2020 ; Moura and Jetz 2021 ). Despite awareness of these shortfalls,As a conservation concept, shadow diversity enables 
improved handling of speculative or inaccessible 
ecosystems, such as previously speculative whale fall
ecosystems which are now well-established (Bastian, 
2020; Smith et al. 2019).
Moves away from biodiversity power relations where all
species must be controlled and accounted for by the
taxonomic system: potential to feed-into de-growth and
de-colonial discourses.
Recognition of the transience of what we choose to
conserve now - place on shadow diversity spectrum is 
not fixed.
Scope for the arts to explore unimagined sides of 
shadow diversity, perhaps shadow diversity (Figure 4) or
its inspired artwork will generate new interpretations of 
“other worlds” (Carver 2023) which will in turn inspire
those working in conservation.Supports moving away from solely species-based
conservation, bolstering support for habitat and
ecosystem-level conservation. 
For species-focused work, shadow diversity can offer a
prompt to more consistently and explicitly acknowledge
unrecorded biodiversity, using existing metrics.
Ability to distinguish between obscured, undiscovered, 
unimagined biodiversity, enables targeting specific 
challenges relevant to levels of ignorance, rather than
homogenous ‘unknowns’.
Supports critical reflections on the origins of shadow
diversity (Figure 4), encouraging historically-grounded
and reflexive conservation practice and teaching.
A public term for shadow diversity means previously 
marginalised biodiversity becomes more widely 
discussed, leading to more interest, funding and
eventually, taxonomists in their area.
Aids conceptualisation of the unknowns of extinction
estimates in a manner which may appeal to individuals 
less comfortable with statistics.
Bringing unknown biodiversity to the public imagination
may lead to increased appreciation for obscured
biodiversity, in daily life and local areas. At an individual 
level, this could impact daily choices, such as 
composting and diet – with wider implications for health
and social equity (Ishaq et al. 2021, Robinson et al. 
2022) . 
Aids public understanding and care of unseen
biodiversity, thus supporting conservation behaviours in
community and private spaces.Policymakers can use shadow diversity to critique policy
prior to implementation and ensure any taxonomic 
biases are minimized. An example of this would be
England (UK)’s Biodiversity Net Gain (BNG) policy, 
arguably a missed opportunity for invertebrate
conservation (Duffus et al. 2024).
Policymakers may use shadow diversity as part of 
justifying larger areas for conservation protection to
account for uncertainties and the future potential of yet 
undiscovered life.
In education, shadow diversity supports a
multidisicplinary approach to conservation, providing a
way to engage with nature beyond identifying and
counting species and including imagined life in local
nature (such as in soils and under tree bark). Shadow
diversity can support extending cross-curricular
biodiversity content beyond charismatic macro-flora, 
fauna, and funga, and bringing ignored shadow diversity 
(such as microbes) beyond the biology classroom, 
helping to shift influence on future scientists,
taxonomists, and wider society (Figure 4) . Shadow
diversity:
implications
for
conservation
practice
t
i
sts
,
4
)
.Public
understanding 
and supportPolicy and 
educationConservation 
BiologyThinking tools and 
frameworks
A
i
d
s
pub
li
c
u
b
i
od
i
v
e
r
sit
y
,
t
h
u
s 
c
o
mm
The suggestions above are not intended to be followed prescriptively but serve to
demonstrate how the language and framework of shadow diversity have the
potential to instigate ripple effects in surprising directions. We consider a wide view
of conservation practice including education, policymaking, and public engagement 
(see Figure 4).
Figure 5. A diagram showing specific examples of shadow diversity as a useful tool for conservation, covering a spectrum from small-scale, individual, throug h to metacognitive
discourses at wider levels.10 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
factors such as false absence and undetected species (Chao et al.
2017 ,2020 ) frequently remain excluded from smaller-scale com-
munity ecology estimates (Devarajan et al. 2020 ; Richter et al.
2021 ). Not only are more local biodiversity estimates therefore
not showing the full picture, but this is not always being accounted
for in studies used to inform conservation decisions. Despite argu-
ments for the importance of studying shadow diversity, despiteawareness of biodiversity shortfalls and practical steps to remedy
these, what remains to be explored are the deeper reasons why
shadow diversity continues to be neglected by researchers, fundersand wider society.
Origins of shadow diversity
Existing discussionsAn overview of shadow diversity literature ( Supplementary Table S3 )
revealed numerous gaps in fully connecting causes for overlookingtypes of lifeforms with their wider contexts and impacts of these
contexts. We will outline those issues here, showing why a broader
and deeper multidisciplinary perspective is needed to understand whyconservation data is more complete for some areas of the Tree of Life.
The majority of reviewed literature focused on themes of tech-
nical and practical reasons why some species have been describedand studied for longer with more effort. These reasons include ourknowledge of taxonomic boundaries and the technical aspects of
determining those boundaries (Fi šer et al. 2018 ; Chenuil et al. 2019 )
and taxonomic impediments (Engel 2021 ). Similarly, Hortal et al.
(2015 ) cite practical elements of methods and available technology
as limiting factors to human knowledge, whilst other studies focus
on overcoming these practical technological limits, as in the case ofincreased species descriptions due to molecular sequence data
(De Clerck et al. 2013 ). In some cases, we can infer social factors
from elements such as the high rate of cryptic species identified intemperate regions, linked to the location of taxonomists andresources (Bickford et al. 2007 ), yet those social factors must be
inferred since they are not explicitly discussed.
A second less common theme in the literature was the roles
played by individual taxonomists and researchers. For example,
findings in taxonomic disparities for genomic sequencing of non-
human primates suggested a combination of factors influenced thechoices of the researcher, including the feasibility of a study, and
interest in the species (Hernandez et al. 2020 ). De Clerck et al. ( 2013 ,
217) emphasise the key contributions of a few prolific, named
taxonomists in describing algal species. Their analysis overlooks
what might have enabled those particular male German, Russian
and Irish taxonomists to provide disproportionate species descrip-tions. These issues are relevant when we know, for instance, thatduring the nineteenth-century surge in the taxonomic description of
species, women were excluded from formal education, the profes-
sionalization of science and scientific publication (Maroske and May2018 ). One example is the noted British author Beatrix Potter: as a
female, self-studying lichenology and mycology in nineteenth-
century Britain, she was excluded from the Linnaean Society ofLondon due to being female, despite her advanced illustrations,
microscopy, studies of fungi and lichens and submitting a paper
in 1897 (Schmid 1999 ; Watling 2000 ; Breedlove 2019 ). This is an
example of historical context, discrimination and prejudices con-tributing to who became or did not become, professional taxonom-
ists. Thus, who was encouraged and able to become part of the
“disproportionate taxonomic effort ”was not determined purely by
chance or interest. Overall, superficial or proximate explanations forvariation in the rates of species discoveries miss historical context
and potential root causes for what might initially seem objective
practicalities of location (Moura et al. 2018 ) or individual prefer-
ences.
We can find engagement with more socially focused causes in
studies that concentrate on specific taxonomic groups and scen-
arios rather than macro-studies. For instance, Blackwell ( 2011 , 434)
discuss increased interest in medical mycology due to a rise in
fungal infections caused by AIDS cases, along with an increase in
chytrid systematics driven by amphibian biodiversity loss, attrib-uted to this fungal group. There is no discussion, however, explain-
ing how concern with fungal infection feeds back into the system of
taxonomic and conservation knowledge creation. In a furtherexample, De Clerck et al. ( 2013 ) cite World War I and World
War II as factors for explaining changes in the rate of descriptions
of algal species. De Clerck et al. ’
consideration is not extended,
however, to discuss how or why wars impacted algal species dis-coveries or algal taxonomists; they are treated as isolated practical-
ities. Still, consideration of such questions is pertinent given that
other areas, such as mycorrhizal fungi, continued to see researchand publications through the wars and interwar period (for
instance, Rayner and Neilson-Jones 1944 ), suggesting that other
factors impacted which species discovery rates accelerated or decel-erated from 1914 to 1945.
A small number of previous studies within the literature on
species discovery rates and taxonomic bias include social and cul-
tural causes for species discovery and non-discovery. However,social causes are constrained as isolated, often quantitative, factors,
such as proximity to a research institution (Meyer et al. 2015 ),
human density and the number of taxonomists working in an area(Moura and Jetz 2021 ). These factors are treated separately and there
is no deeper exploration of what may have caused more taxonomists
to work in a given location, nor the powers, legacies and traditionsthat accompany research institutions, such as the imperial legacy of
Kew Botanical Gardens ( Supplementary Table S4 ). In a similar
fashion and using quantitative methods, Stefano et al. ( 2023 )
emphasised socio-cultural causes of the uneven distribution ofstudies and interests in different species. However, many of the
socio-cultural elements hold a practical focus, such as utility to
humans. Stefano and colleagues rightly note that aspects of utilitycan be linked to culture, but they provide no more depth around
how different cultures may impact views or values of utility, such as
Brown ’s investigations of valuing different species of fungi in the
Yunnan Province of China (Brown 2019 ). Finally, focusing on a lack
of care for deep sea knowledge by non-scientists, Jamieson et al.
(2021 ) consider some psychological, philosophical and ethical fac-
tors as causes for the unpopularity of deep-sea conservation. How-
ever, they dichotomise between the objective scientist and subjective
non-scientist: “While scientists approach the deep sea in a highly
objective way …the layperson is more likely to develop different
perspectives based on alternative, nonscientific sources ”(Jamieson
et al. 2021 ). In their work, scientists retain immunity to these factors,
working to correct misinformation and cultural myths of non-scientists, rather than acknowledging scientists as individuals
impacted by some of the same factors. This is despite work that
points to the importance of history, culture and education in valuespeople construct of species (Czech et al. 1998 ; Genovart et al. 2013 ;
Heise 2016 ) and the choice of study species (Wilson et al. 2007 ).
What is missing is a consideration of the complex underlying
societal and individual factors that contribute to the formation ofvalues and motivations (see Eccles and Wigfield 2020 ). With these
exceptions noted, direct, pragmatic considerations, such as speciesCambridge Prisms: Extinction 11
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
accessibility (Mammola et al. 2021 ), take precedence in other
academic literature. We agree that such practicalities as new
methods and technology play a significant role. However, our
review adds to this dialogue by adding multi- and interdisciplinaryroot causes of shadow diversity and using this understanding to
provide new solutions, avenues of research and insights for
approaching biodiversity conservation which account for a net-work of deep historical and socio-cultural factors.
A deeper, multidisciplinary approach
Various disciplinary approaches have been used to explore why
ignorance exists. Smithson ’s review of ignorance notes “ignorance
can be understood only in reference to a social context, and that a
great proportion of ignorance is created and maintained by peoplethemselves, rather than being imposed on us by an intractableuniverse ”(1989 ,219). The materials we have reviewed suggest
methods already exist that might enable us to better study shadow
diversity. This includes technological advances, particularly DNAbarcoding and metabarcoding from environmental DNA (eDNA),
which began in the 1990s (Giovannoni et al. 1990 ). These methods
provided new ways to sample for and identify taxon. New methodsfor imagery, such as microCT scans (Stoev et al. 2013 ; Akkari et al.
2015 ), make previously hard-to-see species more visible, and acous-
tic monitoring provides nonvisual methods for data sampling(Mooney et al. 2020 ; Parsons et al. 2022 ; Wood et al. 2021 ). Despite
these methods, taxonomic bias toward studying well-known species
persists (Titley et al. 2017 ; Stefano et al. 2023 ). In other words,
shadow diversity and anticipated dark extinctions with it will notbe solved by overcoming practical limitations and new methods
alone; we must additionally consider deeper factors that impact how
species are valued by societies, academic disciplines and individuals.
To account for the persistence of taxonomic and conservation
biases, Figure 4 shows a complex web of factors that act in a cyclical
nature. We are not the first to point to cyclical, self-perpetuatingknowledge in the Western conservation system (Lorimer 2015 )o r
taxonomic knowledge (Stefano 2023 ). Beyond conservation, we
note the traditions in history, philosophy and science studies toexplore the historicity and cultural origins of ignorance (Proctor2008 ; Schiebinger 2008 ) and acknowledge the scientist as an indi-
vidual tied to their experiences of society as a human (Latour 1993 ,
Prescod-Weinstein 2022 ). Our diagram, however, is distinct in
showing the role of wider historical, socio-cultural and political
factors in this looped system in conservation, and to this end, we
hope it will be of use to highlight the multidisciplinary effortrequired to explore shadow diversity at the edge of ignorance. Whilst
this model is not exhaustive and inevitably takes a broad and
therefore somewhat generalised view, its purpose is to illustrate,first, the range of factors influencing knowledge-making around the
study of species, ecology and conservation; second, how some of
these factors interact; and thirdly, the feedback loop inherent withinthe social, cultural and political networks which have the potential toexacerbate pre-existing biases within the system if left unchecked.
The overall cycle in the diagram ( Figure 4 ) shows the import-
ance of historical context in informing values, beliefs and biaseswith which the conservation discourse is imbued (Heise 2016 ).
This, in turn, informs the structures and manifestations of the
conservation discourse: the predecided content of an ecology mod-ule’s curriculum, the biodiversity indicators and the institutions,
documents and individuals which hold power. Working under and
within all of these factors and affected by them on multiple levels(Czech et al. 1998 ; Eccles and Wigfield 2020 ), is the “doing ofresearch ”: the individual people, methods and tools used to gener-
ate“new”
data. It is this doing of research, spurred by requirements
for meeting targets, funding, personal and institutional require-
ments and personal desires to share new findings, which leads to theformation of research outputs. These in turn provide materials that
feed into political thinking, challenging or supporting previously
formed views.
The nature of the system makes unorthodox thinking or research
difficult and leads to a pattern of studying what has already been
well-studied because it has supportive infrastructure, colleagues andknowledge records already in place. To the left, Figure 4 gives
examples of barriers, for people and ideas whose entry into the
system of knowledge is impeded. Barriers of prejudice and discrim-ination based on language, colonial legacies and non-western formsof knowledge in access to academic publishing and power have been
documented elsewhere (Canagarajah 2002 ; Lillis and Curry 2013 ;
Politzer-Ahles et al. 2020 ; Hernandez 2022 ; Sumida Huaman 2022 ).
It is beyond the scope of this article to give copious examples here.
Instead, we provide a range of references and examples to accom-
pany and support this diagram in Supplementary Table S4 . Below,
we will present a worked example of the rise in understanding and
study of mycorrhizal fungi to illustrate the dynamics of some of the
factors shown on the diagram.
Worked example: mycorrhizal fungi
Prior to the 1850s, mycorrhizal fungi fell under unimagined shadow
diversity and we have good historical records of its move leftwardson the shadow diversity spectrum ( Figure 3 ). Mycorrhizal fungi are
now known to be a symbiotic partnership between a colonised plant
root and its colonising fungus (Smith and Read 2007 ) in the majority
of terrestrial plants. They demonstrate one characteristic of shadowdiversity, in that it is hard to see the fungus-root interface with the
naked eye and is less well-known to the public due in part to its
subterranean nature (Tsing 2015 ,139). The discovery of mycorrhiza
required technological elements, such as the microscope. The bot-
anist, Frank, also played a key role being credited with preparing
detailed drawings and the theory which recognised the symbioticnature of the fungus-plant partnership (Trappe 2005 ). However,
multiple factors created the circumstances under which this discov-
ery was made, so moving mycorrhizal fungi to everyday ecosystem
discussions today. For instance, Frank ’s research was funded by the
German State Forestry Department with the intent to commercialise
truffle production in Prussia (Ainsworth 1976 ,100), thus revealing
factors of funding; the cultural and economic value of truffles in thatplace and time; and a political situation which provided means,
infrastructure and impetus to fund such a venture.
Once Frank ’s discovery had been made and published in 1885,
social and historical contexts caused a slow uptake of the idea of a
mutual relationship between plant and fungus (Rayner and
Neilson-Jones 1944 ). For Frank ’s peers, overarching negative atti-
tudes towards fungi had persisted for centuries in wider society,where fungi were seen as lower forms of plants, such as the famous
descriptor of fungi as “excrement of the earth ”(Thacker 1758 , 67).
This contributed to a poor reception of the notion that fungi couldbe anything other than pathogenic to plants. Two further context-
ual factors illustrate the controversial nature of Frank ’s assertions:
Firstly, although fungi formerly remained under the plant kingdomuntil 1969 (Whittaker 1969 ), contemporary amateur and profes-
sional botanists already recognised fungi as distinct from other
plants and cryptograms. In 1864, for example, Plues used separatesections for mosses, ferns and fungi in her book Rambles in Search12 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
of Flowerless Plants (Plues 1864 ). Secondly, Frank ’s work appeared
26 years after Darwin ’s 1859 Origin of the Species when the bio-
logical principle of competition between species was gaining atten-
tion. In this context, Frank ’s suggestion that two different
organisms, assumed to be in competition, were actually operating
to the mutual benefit of one another, was highly controversial. This
in turn forms part of a wider struggle through time for acceptance ofsymbiosis, over competition-based species interactions (Gontier
2016 ). Frank persisted in his research and publications (Trappe
2005 ) and the notion of mycorrhizal fungi as valuable aids to their
host plants slowly developed. Visibility of this value, however, was
initially quite restricted to a specialised scientific community (see
Ainsworth 1976 ; Bonfante 2018 ; North American Conference on
Mycorrhizae 1985 ).
Our journey now reaches a different turning point in the rise of
mycorrhizal fungi ’s status and knowledge in science: the work of
Francis and Read (Francis and Read 1984 ) and Simard ( 1997 ).
Francis and Read showed the transfer of carbon between plants
through fungi and Simard ’s work showed this was happening
beyond laboratory experiments, in real forest ecosystems, betweendifferent species of trees with different quantities of carbon trans-
ferred depending on the situation of the receiving tree (Sheldrake
2020 , 168 –169). Simard mentions personal struggles with peers in
her forestry network in North America, who were heavily investedin free-to-grow policies, which supported the eradication of other
species not selected for cultivation (Simard 2022 ). However, in the
wider scientific community, reception for these works was vastlydifferent and was received more positively overall compared to that
received by Frank a century earlier. Sheldrake emphasises the
serendipitous timing of Simard ’s work with network theory, the
expansion of the internet, combined with the metaphor of “wood
wide web ”(Sheldrake 2020 ,170). Nixon ( 2021 ) argues that society ’s
hope for mutualistic interspecies forest relations was a reaction toneoliberal capitalism. In addition to these sociocultural elements
suggested by others, we argue the situation had changed signifi-
cantly due to several rounds of conservation knowledge productionvia the process shown in Figure 4 .
Firstly, infrastructure, in terms of institutions, organisations and
communicated written knowledge grew via multiple rounds of
conservation knowledge production ( Figure 4 ). For instance, Smith
and Read ( 2007 , ix) note the profound impact of Harley ’s first book
dedicated to mycorrhizal fungi in 1959, providing a guide for new
researchers entering the field. Similarly, a more positive reception forFrancis and Read ’s and Simard ’s work was in part due to the respect-
ability of studying mycorrhizal fungi: appropriate academic journals
welcomed mycorrhizal knowledge, partially under Harley (a well-respected botanist with a specialism in mycorrhizal fungi), who
became an editor of New Phytologist , making it a key place for
mycorrhizal fungi publications (Bonfante
2018 ,984) and increased
the respectability of mycorrhizologists (Koide and Mosse 2004 ).
Finally, economic factors further bolstered impetus and interest in
mycorrhizal fungi. The first half of the twentieth century saw a rise in
appreciation for mycorrhizal fungi, due to their potential in improv-ing forest productivity and subsequent financial benefits from this.
This was especially important for Western Europeans during settler
colonialism, planting fast-growing pines on ill-suited soils for thispurpose, and replacing timber stocks following world wars (Rayner
and Neilson-Jones 1944 ; Harley 1957 ).
Mycorrhizal fungal knowledge also includes examples of bar-
riers to entry in action: we glimpse the potential exclusion of non-western-scientific knowledge when Simard ( 2022 ,66) gives an
example of fungal mutualism known by Coast Salish people. Dueto the oral nature of this knowledge system, we cannot be sure when
the earliest understanding of symbiotic relations occurred beyond
the Western scientific knowledge systems and conventions, but it
seems likely this originated before the nineteenth century. Pre-cluded from entry into the current knowledge on fungi by language,
cultural barriers, power imbalances from the colonial takeover of
North America, and prejudices instilled in settler-colonists thatalternative modes of knowing were inferior, such knowledge is only
recently beginning to gain recognition.
Overall, we can see how utilising this model can support a rich
understanding of the complexities behind discoveries and hope this
diagram may be useful to inspire further multidisciplinary explor-
ations regarding why some parts of the Tree of Life are betterknown than others. To conclude Figure 4 ’s looped system: the
origins of shadow diversity are inherently multi- and interdiscip-
linary. Investigations into shadow diversity need to mirror this: it is
not sufficient to examine biological methods, entirely separatedfrom the societies, structures and people utilising those methods.
Challenges and directions for further research in shadow
diversity
Biodiversity shortfalls discussed earlier provide a breakdown of the
challenges of biodiversity ignorance for conservation and conser-
vation scientists. Examining shadow diversity, for conservationscientists, researchers working across other disciplines and the
general public, brings its own set of challenges that will need to
be addressed. The greatest challenge of shadow diversity is theproblem of handling unknown unknowns, or unimagined shadow
diversity. This is a pragmatic issue regarding how to detect the
undetectable, yet it is also a cognitive challenge in how to concep-tualise total unawareness. These unknowns go beyond individualminds and into communities of practice and knowledge: conser-
vation biology, biogeography and ecogeography communities, for
example, have an awareness of the limitations of known biodiver-sity (Lomolino 2004 ; Hortal et al. 2015 ). We, therefore, utilise
Gross ’s(2007 ) A sociological exploration of knowledge and ignor-
ance, as this offers nuanced understandings, but also helps tocapture the dynamism and at times active processes involved in
ignorance and knowledge-making, see Table 1 .
Returning to our challenge of unknown unknowns, firstly, we can
see that by using a spectrum and categories within shadow diversity(Figure 3 ), we can be more specific about how undetectable a type of
biodiversity is. Whilst some deep-shadow diversity falls into nesci-
ence, numerous categories are within reach. We can visualise themovement of a species from non-knowledge to unknown knowns as
it is discovered to be two or more genetically distinct species
(previously a cryptic species). Echoing van Dooren ’s(2014)c a l lt o
work at the “edge of extinction ”, we can further acknowledge that
understanding the boundaries of our knowledge is itself a step
towards discoveries and knowing. The unknowns of shadow diver-sity therefore span nescience and ignorance ( Figure 3 ,Table 1 ). These
specific types of unknowns highlight four challenges of working with
shadow diversity, which will be outlined below. Throughout, the keyis mapping boundaries of known unknowns for future use.
Challenge 1: Cognitive challenges of handling
incomprehensible life forms
There are limits and differences to human senses compared to
nonhumans. Examples of this include insects ’ability to seeCambridge Prisms: Extinction 13
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
ultraviolet light which the human eye cannot (Cronin and Bok
2016 ; Mazza et al. 2010 ); human inability to detect and interpret
chemical signals released by plants (Manetas 2012 , 181 –182); and
the ability of Anopheles gambiae (malarial mosquito) to detect
carbon dioxide (Jones et al. 2007 ), which unaided humans cannot.
The limits of human senses mean the way we interact with the
world provides us with different cognitive experiences compared tononhumans and our senses cannot detect signals that might other-
wise alert us to the presence of other life. Our senses make us prone
to overlooking forms of biodiversity invisible to the naked eye, orwhere their life cycle means they are easily overlooked by humans,
such as desert plants with long, dormant lifecycles (Carrasco-Puga
et al. 2021 ). The lack of direct experience with shadow diversity
presents problems for phenomenological approaches to knowledge,which require direct experiences (Rehorick and Bentz 2008 , 3). In
addition to this, measurability is arguably a key feature of biodiver-
sity (Sarkar 2019 ). If we cannot sense it, we cannot measure it. This
raises questions of whether it is possible for us to meaningfully
engage with that which we cannot sense. Some of the new ecological
techniques, such as eDNA discussed in A deeper, multidisciplinary
approach section, seem ripe for exploring the boundaries of what
we can sense and how.
Challenge 2: Ineffability of mid- and deep-shadow diversity
“Die Grenzen meiner Sprache bedeuten die Grenzen meiner Welt ”
(Wittgenstein 1922 /2010, 144), translated to English as “the limits
of my language mean the limits of my world ”(Wittgenstein
1922 /2010, 74). This quote relates to the notion that since we use
language to consciously think, if we do not have language, we
cannot think about it and therefore it cannot exist to us. The
absence of language impacts public engagement (Richling andBouchet 2013 ) with nameless shadow diversity, particularly given
the evidence that language impacts the way we perceive what we see
(Lupyan et al. 2020 ).
Language limitations share parallels with the knowledge-
making system for biodiversity ( Figure 4 ) in that it is only once a
species is catalogued and named by science that it enters the systemto qualify for conservation assessment and potential protection(Lorimer 2015 ). In this case, we echo Wittgenstein by saying the
limits of binominal nomenclature mean the limits of our current
conservation system. The lack of scientific names and records forspecies has been a repeated “taxonomic impediment ”which has
arisen from genetic sequencing (Ryberg and Nilsson 2018 ; Zamani
et al. 2022a ,2022b ). Examining NGOs (non-governmental organi-
sations) and datasets that deal with conservation, language plays an
important role in classifying a species ’conservation status (IUCN
2022 ) and in placing a species in its “correct ”place on the phylo-
genetic tree in its taxonomic kingdom (Bánki et al. 2022 ; OneZoom
2022 ). Life forms that cannot be classified for extinction risk due to
lack of data are labelled “data deficient ”
(DD). Prior to “shadow
diversity ”, there was no positive way of referring to this missing
biodiversity within the system. This extends beyond the conserva-
tion system and entangles public perception of biodiversity and
what we are able to mourn for (Barnett 2019 ).
Without stories, categories and labels of individual species, it is
unclear how to communicate meaningfully about shadow diversity
so that someone without highly specialised knowledge can allowshadow diversity to enter their imagination, a problem highlighted
by Bastian ’s(2020 ) work on unknowns. However, absence of lan-
guage does not need to be so limiting: perhaps, it provides oppor-tunities to explore language used in other forms of knowledge. Oneexemplar is Robin Wall Kimmerer ’s examples of “the grammar of
animacy ”, providing an innately different approach to conceiving
other living beings around us ( 2015 ,55–59) through their move-
ments not just their names, and new ways to consider the movementof species through learning the Anishinaabe word “Puhpowee ”from
Keewaydinoquay ’s work, meaning “the force which causes mush-
rooms to sprout from the earth overnight ”(Kimmerer 2015 ,49).
There is also the potential for working with known species of similar
types to those we do not know, to bring us closer to the edge of our
knowledge, as van Dooren ( 2022 ) exemplifies in his explorations of
lost snails. How we communicate shadow diversity, particularly
beyond conservation experts, may feed into the conservation system
for knowledge ( Figure 4 ) in new ways and is, therefore, an area
deserving of further exploration.
Challenge 3: Valuing and caring for unknowns
As discussed earlier, academic papers have suggested that shadow
diversity may hold resources of value to society (Wheeler et al.
2012 ). Until they are fully mapped and discovered, this is only
speculation and cannot be easily valued within ecosystem services.Due to the Raunkiæran shortfall of shadow diversity (Hortal et al.
2015 ; seeFigure 2 ), we can only speculate how the loss of ecosystem
services might interact with other extinction risk factors. Our notknowing about these functions does not mean they do not exist, as isexemplified by studies that highlight species previously neglected
but providing key ecosystem functions such as pollination (Orford
et al. 2015 ; Lopes et al. 2021 ). How we care for parts of ecosystems
we do not know exist presents a dilemma for how we attribute value
to unquantified biodiversities. Puig de la Bellacasa ’s(2015 ) research
explores human interactions with soil as a form of care, thus earlyinvestigations into valuing a form of shadow diversity have begun.
Challenge 4: Cognition to tangible action
One potential necessary element of defining the bounds of bio-
diversity is that of measurability (Sarkar 2019 ) and this is particu-
larly relevant regarding conservation policies, such as the Aichi
targets (Mcowen et al. 2016 ) and the most recent Kunming-
Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (Convention on Bio-logical Diversity 2022 ). Shadow diversity ’s nebulous qualities are
challenging for policies that require measured progress and targets.
When handling potential and probabilities for new biodiversities,how can we advocate for shadow diversity so that it warrants
reflection in conservation policies, despite inherent uncertainties?
We do not advocate creating new quantitative estimates or modelsfor shadow diversity. The challenge instead is to consider tangible
actions that might arise from inherently non-tangible parts of
shadow diversity.
Implications of shadow diversity for conservation
Whilst shadow diversity includes numerous conceptual and prac-
tical challenges, it also provides opportunities for various shifts in
conservation and beyond. We aim for shadow diversity to act as auseful catalyst for further discussions and creativity regarding how
to use this term and framework. We offer a range of suggestions in
Figure 5 for how implementing shadow diversity as a term and a
framework can benefit conservation biology and beyond. It is
insufficient and impractical to demand ecologists and those work-
ing in conservation sciences ‘solve ’shadow diversity alone: it has
come about from society-wide, culture-wide and history-wide14 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
factors. Failure to engage in multidisciplinary approaches to
improve awareness of shadow diversity will result in continued
neglect of those domains of life.
The continued existence of shadow diversity is not, we suggest,
necessarily a problem for solving outright, but rather a way of
thinking to add to our conservation toolkit. This way of thinking
strengthens existing calls to abandon species-based approaches toresearch. For example, soil scientists argue for a shift to food-web-
based approaches to research to overcome previous taxonomic
biases (Wyckhuys et al. 2021 ). Where more taxonomic approaches
to research are needed or used, such as in nationwide conservation
strategies, shadow diversity can be employed as a reflexive tool to
check for adequate coverage of various groups of life ( Figure 5 ),
echoing calls made on behalf of a historically underfunded taxon,such as fungi (Oyanedel et al. 2022 ) and a more conscious employ-
ment of the factors perpetuating ignorance of shadow diversity
(Figure 4 ). By grouping 13 terms ( Figure 1b ) under the umbrella
of shadow diversity, complementary concepts are more visible and
we can more readily share advances in one area of shadow bio-
diversity as a potential model for elevating greater inclusion forother lifeforms still deeper in shadows (such as success in momen-
tum for improved inclusion of fungi, outlined in Haelewaters et al.
(2024 )). Rather than discussing “unknown unknowns ”, shadow
diversity further provides shared linguistic means ( Figure 3 and
Table 1 ) to distinguish more precisely the extent to which a par-
ticular area of biodiversity is unknown and for whom, compared to
the overlapping and unclear set of terms highlighted by our review(Lack of clarity section). Shadow diversity also supports wider
public engagement through accessible terminology to articulate
unknowns, as well as recognise the role of wider society in shapingwhat biodiversity remains unknown ( Figure 4 ), thus supporting
arguments to routinely engage the wider public more systematically
in soil biodiversity (Byrne 2022 ), for instance.
Summary and further research required
The literature reviewed for this overview review suggests firstly
that conservation biology and numerous specialist fields including
ecogeography, biogeography and macroecology are aware of short-
falls in biodiversity data, which means a recognition of our inabilityto“complete the picture ”of biodiversity is already in place. We
argue that the term “shadow diversity ”is a useful way of referring
to missing and undiscovered biodiversity. Shadow diversity pro-vides a comprehensive term to explore multidisciplinary aspects
of anticipated dark extinctions and neglected organisms. Whilst
some work has been done that begins to highlight socioeconomiccauses for shadow diversity, we have argued a wider web of root
causes, including historical, sociocultural and biopolitical factors
also impact reasons why some biodiversities are left understudieddespite the availability of methods to investigate them. The multi-disciplinary nature of the causes of shadow diversity makes a com-
pelling case for a multidisciplinary approach to further research in
this area.
Dealing with nescient levels of unknowns may seem like an
impossible task. However, rewards from progress regarding current
total unknowns can be most impactful for the progression ofscientific knowledge (Loxdale et al. 2016 ). We hope that this review
and subsequent research will lead to a greater focus on overcoming
human limitations through a richer understanding of shadowdiversity ’s origins and by shifting our language to reflect this. Work
in extinction studies leads us to suggest there will need to be
innovative approaches to slow the extinction crisis. Van Dooren(2014 ) uses the notion of working at the edge of extinction. We
suggest working at the edge of ignorance of extinction through
shadow diversity may become a useful part of this approach.
Open peer review. To view the open peer review materials for this article,
please visit http://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21 .
Supplementary material. The supplementary material for this article can be
found at http://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21 .
Data availability statement. The authors confirm that the data supporting
the findings of this study are available within the article and its supplementarymaterials.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank the Bodleian Library
Special Collection team for providing ST-H with archival access to John Laker
Harley ’s collected works. The authors also wish to thank the three anonymous
reviewers for their valuable and insightful comments on an earlier version of thisarticle and Emily Diamand for her helpful comments on an earlier version of the
Worked example: mycorrhizal fungi section of this article.
Author contribution. ST-H completed a three-layered, mixed method review
of the literature, December 2021 –February 2022 and updated this across 2022
and 2023. All authors debated, conceptualised and agreed on the term “shadow
diversity ”. ST-H wrote the manuscript and created all the figures and tables. GH
and CH provided supervision, critical feedback, guidance and input, including
reviewing and editing of the manuscript.
Financial support. Funding for this research comes from the Leverhulme
Trust, via the University of Leeds Extinction Studies Doctoral Training Pro-
gramme.
Competing interest. The authors declare no competing interests exist.
References
Ainsworth GC (1976 [2009]) Introduction to the History of Mycology , digitally
printed edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Akkari N ,Enghoff H and Metscher BD (2015) A new dimension in docu-
menting new species: high-detail imaging for Myriapod taxonomy and first
3D Cybertype of a new millipede species (Diplopoda, Julida, Julidae). PLoS
One10(8), e0135243. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135243 .
Anthony MA ,Bender SF and van der Heijden MGA (2023) Enumerating soil
biodiversity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(33),
e2304663120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2304663120 .
Ayoub NA and Hayashi CY (2008) Multiple recombining Loci Encode MaSp1,
the primary constituent of dragline silk, in widow spiders (Latrodectus:
Theridiidae). Molecular Biology and Evolution 25(2), 277 –286. https://doi.
org/10.1093/molbev/msm246 .
Banchi E ,Stankovic D ,Fernández-Mendoza F ,Gionechetti F ,Pallavicini A
and Muggia L (2018) ITS2 metabarcoding analysis complements lichen
mycobiome diversity data. Mycological Progress 17(9), 1049 –1066. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11557-018-1415-4 .
Bánki O, Roskov Y ,Döring M ,Ower G ,Vandepitte L ,Hobern D ,Remsen D ,
Schalk P ,DeWalt RE ,Keping M ,Miller J ,Orrell T ,Aalbu R ,Adlard R ,
Adriaenssens EM ,Aedo C ,Aescht E ,Akkari N ,Alfenas-Zerbini P ,Alonso-
Zarazaga MA ,Altenburger K ,Alvarez B ,Alvarez F ,Anderson G ,Anti ć
DZ,Antonietto LS ,Appeltans W ,Arango C ,Artois T ,Arvanitidis C ,
Atkinson S ,Auffenberg K ,Baeyens W ,Bailly N ,Baker E ,Bamber R ,
Bandesha F ,Bank R ,Barber A ,Barber-James H ,Barbosa JP ,Barthe J-F ,
Bartolozzi L ,Bartsch I ,Beccaloni G ,Bellamy CL ,Bellan-Santini D ,Bel-
linger PF ,Ben-Dov Y ,Bernot J ,Bezerra TN ,Bieler R ,Bisby F ,Bitner MA ,
Blasco-Costa I ,Bock P ,Bouchard P ,Bouchet P ,Bourgoin T ,Boury-
Esnault N ,Bouzan R ,Boxshall G ,Boyko C ,Brandão S ,Braun H ,Bray
R,Brock PD ,Bronstein O ,Bruce N ,Bueno-Villegas J ,Burckhardt D ,Bush
L,Böttger-Schnack R ,Büscher T ,Błażewicz-Paszkowycz M ,Cairns S ,
Calonje M ,Carballo JL ,Cardoso L ,Carrera-Parra L ,Castilho RC ,Cata-
lano S ,Chatrou LW ,Chevillotte H ,Christiansen KA ,Cianferoni F ,
Cigliano MM ,Coleman CO ,Collins A ,Corbari L ,Cordeiro R ,Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 15
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
CoreoideaSF Team ,Cornils A ,Costello M ,Crosby MR ,Cruz-López JA ,
Culham A ,Cárdenas P ,Daly M ,Daneliya M ,Dauvin J-C ,Davie P ,Davison
AJ,De Broyer C ,De Prins J ,De Prins W ,DeSalle R ,Decker P ,Decock W ,
Deem LS ,Defaye D ,Dekker H ,Dellapé PM ,Dempsey DM ,Den Heyer J ,
Deneudt K ,Deprez T ,Dippenaar SM ,Dmitriev DA ,Dohrmann M ,Doner
S,Dorkeld F ,Downey R ,Ducarme F ,Dutilh BE ,Díaz M-C ,Eades DC ,
Eibye-Jacobsen D ,Eisendle U ,Eitel M ,El Nagar A ,Emig C ,Emig CC ,
Encarnação SC da ,Engel MS ,Enghoff H ,Evans GA ,Evenhuis NL ,Faber
M,Farjon A ,Fauchald K ,Fautin D ,Favret C ,Fernández-Rodríguez V ,
Figueroa D ,Fišer C,Forró L ,Forstner M ,Francis A ,Froese R ,Fuchs A ,
Furuya H ,Gabelle C ,Gao Y ,Garcia-Alvarez O ,García ML ,Gardner M ,
Garic R ,Garnett S ,Gasca R ,Gattolliat J-L ,Gaviria-Melo S ,Gerken S ,
Gibson D ,Gibson R ,Gielis C ,Giribet G ,Gittenberger A ,Glasby C ,Glover
AG,Gofas S ,Grabowski M ,Granado A de A ,Gray A ,Grimaldi DA ,Gross
O,Grun TB ,Guerra-García JM ,Guglielmone A ,Guilbert E ,Guimarães S ,
Gusenleitner J ,Gómez-Noguera SE ,Haas F ,Hadfield KA ,Hagborg A ,
Hajdu E ,Harrach B ,Harris L ,Harrison RL ,Hassler M ,Hayward BW ,
Heads SW ,Hendrickson RC ,Hendrycks E ,Henry TJ ,Herbert D ,Her-
nandes FA ,Hernandez F ,Hernández-Crespo JC ,Herrera Bachiller A ,
Hine A ,Ho J ,Hodda M ,Hoeksema B ,Hoenemann M ,Holovachov O ,
Holstein J ,Hooge M ,Hooper J ,Hopcroft R ,Hopkins H. ,Horak I ,Horton
T,Hosoya T ,Houart R ,Hošek J,Hughes L ,Huijbers C ,Häuser C ,Iniesta
LFM ,Ivanenko S ,Janssen R ,Janssens F ,Jarms G ,Jaume D ,Jazdzewski K ,
Johnson KP ,Junglen S ,Jóźwiak P ,Kabat A ,Kami ński MJ ,Kanda K. ,
Kantor Y ,Karanovic I ,Kathirithamby J ,Kelly M ,Kim Y-H ,King R ,Kirk
P,Kitching I ,Klautau M ,Knowles NJ ,Koenemann S ,Korovchinsky NM ,
Kotov A ,Kouwenberg J ,Kovács Z ,Krapf A ,Krapp-Schickel T ,Krishna K. ,
Krishna V ,Kristensen RM ,Kroh A ,Kroupa AS ,Krupovic M ,Kuhn JH ,
Kury AB ,Kury MS ,Kvaček J,Köhler F ,Lado C ,Lambert AJ ,Lambert G ,
Lazarus D ,Le Coze F ,LeCroy S ,Leduc D ,Leermakers M ,Lefkowitz EJ ,Li-
Qiang J ,Lichtwardt R (†),Lobanov A ,Lohrmann V ,Lojen S ,Londoño-
Mesa M ,Longhorn SJ ,Lorenz W ,Lowry J ,Lujan-Toro BE ,Lumen R ,Lyal
C,Lyal CH ,Lyangouzov I ,Lörz A-N ,Macklin JA ,Madin L ,Maehr MD ,
Magill RE ,Magnien P ,Mah C ,Mal N ,Mamo B ,Mamos T ,Manconi R ,
Marek P ,Marshall B ,Martin JH ,Martin SL ,Martínez-Melo A ,Maslin B ,
McFadden C ,McKamey S ,McMurtry JA ,Medvedev S ,Mees J ,Mendes AC ,
Merrin K ,Mesa NC ,Messing C ,Migeon A ,Miller DR ,Mills C ,Minelli A ,
Miskelly A ,Mokievsky V ,Molodtsova T ,Mongiardino Koch N ,Mooi R ,
Morandini A ,Moreira da Rocha R ,Morrow C ,Mushegian AR ,Narita JPZ ,
Nealova L ,Nery DG ,Neu-Becker U ,Neubauer TA ,Neubert E ,Neuhaus B ,
Newton A ,Ng Kee Lin P ,Nguyen A ,Nibert ML ,Nicolson D ,Nijhof A ,
Nishikawa T ,Norenburg J ,Novoselova M ,Noyes J ,O’Hara T ,Ochoa R ,
Oksanen HM ,Oosterbroek P ,Opresko D ,Orton RJ ,Osborne R ,Osigus H-
J,Oswald JD ,Ota Y ,Otte D ,Ouddane B ,Ouvrard D ,Paleobiology
Database contributors ,Pape T ,Paulay G ,Pauly D ,Paxton H ,Petrusek
A,Peña Santiago R ,Picton B ,Pisera A ,Pitkin B ,Poore G ,Pulawski WJ ,
Pyle R ,Páll-Gergely B ,Pérez-García JA ,Rainer H ,Raz L ,Read G ,Rees T ,
Rein JO ,Reip H ,Reuscher M ,Richling I ,Rius M ,Robertson DL ,Robert-
son T ,Robinson G ,Robinson GS (†),Rogacheva A ,Romani L ,Rosenberg
G,Rubino L ,Ruggiero M ,Ríos P ,Rützler K ,Sabanadzovic S. ,Salazar-
Vallejo S. ,Sanborn A ,Sartori M ,Saucède T ,Schierwater B ,Schilling S. ,
Schmid-Egger C ,Schmidt-Rhaesa A ,Schneider S. ,Schoolmeesters P ,
Schotte M ,Schuchert P ,Schuh RT ,Schönberg C ,Scoble M ,Segers H ,
Senna A ,Serejo C ,Sforzi A ,Sharma J ,Shear W ,Shenkar N ,Short M ,
Siciński J,Siddell SG ,Siegel V ,Sierwald P ,Silva ES ,Simmonds P ,Sim-
mons E ,Simonsen T ,Sket B ,Smith AD ,Smith DB ,Smith VS ,Smol N ,
Soulier-Perkins A ,South EJ ,Souza-Filho JF ,Spearman L ,Spelda J ,Stam-
par S. ,Steger J ,Steiner A ,Stemme T ,Sterrer W ,Stevenson D ,Stiewe MBD ,
Stjernegaard Jeppesen T ,Stoev P ,Strand M ,Stueber G ,Stöhr S. ,Suzuki N ,
Suárez-Morales E ,Swalla B ,Swedo J ,Szumik C ,Sánchez-Ruiz M ,Söder-
ström L ,Taiti S ,Takiya DM ,Tandberg AH ,Tang D ,Tavakilian G ,Taylor
J,Tchesunov A ,Thessen A ,Thomas JD ,Thomas P ,ThripsWiki ,Thuesen
E,Thurston M ,Thuy B ,Timm T. ,Todaro A ,Turiault M ,Turon X ,Tyler S ,
Uetz P ,Ulmer JM ,Uribe-Palomino J ,Vacelet J ,Vachard D ,Vader W ,Van
Dooerslaer K ,Vandamme A-M ,Vanhoorne B ,Vanreusel A ,Varsani A ,
Venekey V. ,Vinarski M ,Vonk R ,Vos C ,Väinölä R ,Walker PJ ,Walker-
Smith G ,Walter TC ,Wambiji N ,Wartel M ,Warwick S ,Watling L ,Weaver
H,Webb J ,Welbourn WC ,Wesener T ,Whipps C ,White K ,Wieneke U ,Wilson GDF ,Wilson R ,Wirth CC ,World Spider Catalog ,Yesson C ,Yoder
M,Yu DSK ,Yunakov N ,Zahniser J ,Zanol J ,Zarucchi J ,Zeidler W ,Zerbini
FM,Zhang ZQ ,Zhao Z. ,Ziegler A ,Zinetti F ,d’Hondt J-L ,de Moraes GJ ,de
Reus M ,de Voogd N ,ten Hove H. ,ter Poorten JJ ,van Nieukerken EJ ,van
Soest R ,van Tol J ,von Konrat M ,Łobocka M ,ITIS, International Com-
mittee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), and The Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew (2022) Catalogue of Life Checklist . (Version 2022-04-26), Leiden, Neth-
erlands: Catalogue of Life. https://doi.org/10.48580/dfpk .
Barnett JT (2019) Naming, mourning, and the work of earthly coexistence.
Environmental Communication 13(3), 287 –299. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17524032.2018.1561485 .
Barnosky A ,Matzke N ,Tomiya S ,Wogan G ,Swartz B ,Quental T ,Marshall C ,
McGuire J ,Lindsey E ,Maguire KC ,Mersey B and Ferrer E (2011) Has the
Earth ’s sixth mass extinction already arrived? Nature 471,5 1–57.https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature09678 .
Bastian M (2020) Whale falls, suspended ground, and extinctions never
known. Environmental Humanities 12(2), 454 –474. https://doi.org/10.1215/
22011919-8623219 .
Benoit D ,Jackson DA and Ridgway MS (2018) Assessing the impacts of
imperfect detection on estimates of diversity and community structurethrough multispecies occupancy modeling. Ecology and Evolution 8(9),
4676 –4684. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.4023 .
Berger J (2008) Undetected species losses, food webs, and ecological baselines: a
cautionary tale from the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, USA. Oryx 42(1),
139–142. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605308001051 .
Betts J ,
Young RP ,Hilton-Taylor C ,Hoffmann M ,Rodríguez JP ,Stuart SN
and Milner-Gulland EJ . (2020) A framework for evaluating the impact of the
IUCN Red List of threatened species. Conservation Biology 34(3), 632 –643.
https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13454 .
Bickford D ,Lohman DJ ,Sodhi NS ,Ng PKL ,Meier R ,Winker K ,Ingram KK
and Das I (2007) Cryptic species as a window on diversity and conservation.
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 22(3), 148 –155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tree.2006.11.004 .
Bini LM ,Diniz-Filho JAF ,Rangel TFLVB ,Bastos RP and Pinto MP (2006)
Challenging Wallacean and Linnean shortfalls: knowledge gradients andconservation planning in a biodiversity hotspot. Diversity and Distributions
12(5), 475 –482. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1366-9516.2006.00286.x .
Blackwell M (2011) The Fungi: 1, 2, 3 …5.1 million species? American Journal
of Botany 98(3), 426 –438. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1000298 .
Blackwell M and Vega FE (2018) Lives within lives: hidden fungal biodiversity
and the importance of conservation. Fungal Ecology 35, 127–134.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.funeco.2018.05.011 .
Boehm MMA and Cronk QCB (2021) Dark extinction: the problem of
unknown historical extinctions. Biology Letters 17(3), 20210007. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2021.0007 .
Bonfante P (2018) The future has roots in the past: the ideas and scientists that
shaped mycorrhizal research. New Phytologist 220(4), 982 –995. https://doi.
org/10.1111/nph.15397 .
Bouchet P and Abdou A (2003) Endemic land snails from the Pacific Islands
and the museum record: documenting and dating the extinction of theterrestrial Assimineidae of The Gambier Islands. Journal of Molluscan Studies
69(3), 165 –170. https://doi.org/10.1093/mollus/69.3.165 .
Breedlove B (2019) Beatrix Potter, author, naturalist, mycologist. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 25(9), 1786 –1787. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2509.
AC2509 .
Brown M (2019) Yi ethnomycology: wild mushroom knowledge and use in
Yunnan, China. Journal of Ethnobiology 39(1), 131 –157. https://doi.org/
10.2993/0278-0771-39.1.131 .
Byrne LB (2022) The essence of soil biodiversity. Conservation Letters 15(6),
e412900. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12900 .
Canagarajah AS (2002) A Geopolitics of Academic Writing . Pennsylvania, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Cardoso P ,Erwin TL ,Borges PAV and New TR (2011) The seven
impediments in invertebrate conservation and how to overcome them.Biological Conservation 144(11), 2647 –2655. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bio-
con.2011.07.024 .
Carrasco-Puga G ,Díaz FP ,Soto DC ,Hernández-Castro C ,Contreras-López
O,Maldonado A ,Latorre C and Gutiérrez RA (2021) Revealing hidden16 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
plant diversity in arid environments. Ecography 44(1), 98 –111. https://doi.
org/10.1111/ecog.05100 .
Carver L (2023) Seeing no net loss: making nature offset-able. Environment and
Planning E: Nature and Space 6(4), 2182 –2202. https://doi.org/10.1177/
25148486211063732 .
Cavalier-Smith T (2018) Kingdom Chromista and its eight phyla: a new
synthesis emphasising periplastid protein targeting, cytoskeletal and peri-
plastid evolution, and ancient divergences. Protoplasma 255(1), 297 –357.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00709-017-1147-3 .
Chao A ,Chiu C-H ,Colwell RK ,Magnago LFS ,Chazdon RL and Gotelli NJ
(2017) Deciphering the enigma of undetected species, phylogenetic, and
functional diversity based on Good-Turing theory. Ecology 98(11),
2914 –2929. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecy.2000 .
Chao A ,Kubota Y ,Zelený D ,Chiu C-H ,Li C-F ,Kusumoto B ,Yasuhara M ,
Thorn S ,Wei C-L ,Costello MJ and Colwell RK (2020) Quantifying sample
completeness and comparing diversities among assemblages. Ecological
Research 35(2), 292 –314. https://doi.org/10.1111/1440-1703.12102 .
Cheek M ,Nic Lughadha E ,Kirk P ,Lindon H ,Carretero J ,Looney B ,Douglas B ,
Haelewaters D ,Gaya E ,Llewellyn T ,Ainsworth AM ,Gafforov Y ,Hyde K ,
Crous P ,Hughes M ,Walker BE ,Campostrini Forzza R ,Wong KM and
Niskanen T (2020) New scientific discoveries: plants and fungi. Plants, People,
Planet 2(5), 371 –388.https://doi.org/10.1002/ppp3.10148 .
Chenuil A ,Cahill AE ,Délémontey N ,Du Salliant du Luc E and Fanton H
(2019) Problems and questions posed by cryptic species. A framework toguide future studies. In E. Casetta, J. Marques da Silva and D. Vecchi, eds.,
From Assessing to Conserving Biodiversity: Conceptual and Practical Chal-
lenges , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 77 –106. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-10991-2_4 .
Chialva M ,Lanfranco L and Bonfante P (2022) The plant microbiota: com-
position, functions, and engineering. Current Opinion in Biotechnology 73,
135–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2021.07.003 .
Chivian E ,Roberts CM and Bernstein AS (2003) The threat to cone snails.
Science 302(5644), 391 –391. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.302.5644.391b .
Chisholm RA ,Giam X ,Sadanandan KR ,Fung T and Rheindt FE (2016) A
robust nonparametric method for quantifying undetected extinctions. Con-
servation Biology 30(3), 610 –617. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12640 .
Claridge AW ,Mifsud G ,Dawson J ,Saxon MJ ,Claridge AW ,Mifsud G ,
Dawson J and Saxon MJ (2004) Use of infrared digital cameras to investigate
the behaviour of cryptic species. Wildlife Research 31(6), 645 –650. https://
doi.org/10.1071/WR03072 .
Convention on Biological Diversity (2022) COP15: Nations Adopt Four Goals,
23 Targets for 2030 In Landmark UN Biodiversity Agreement. https://
www.cbd.int/article/cop15-cbd- press-release-final-19dec2022 (accessed
29 September 2023).
Cooke R ,Sayol F ,Andermann T ,Blackburn TM ,Steinbauer MJ ,Antonelli A
and Faurby S (2023) Undiscovered bird extinctions obscure the true mag-
nitude of human-driven extinction waves. Nature Communications 14(1),
8116. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-43445-2 .
Cornwell WK ,Pearse WD ,Dalrymple RL and Zanne AE (2019) What we
(don ’t) know about global plant diversity. Ecography 42(11), 1819 –1831.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04481 .
Costello MJ ,May RM and Stork NE (2013) Can we name Earth ’s species before
they go extinct? Science 339(6118), 413 –416. https://doi.org/10.1126/sci-
ence.1230318 .
Cronin TW and Bok MJ (2016) Photoreception and vision in the ultraviolet.
Journal of Experimental Biology 219(18), 2790 –2801. https://doi.org/
10.1242/jeb.128769 .
Custódio V ,Gonin M ,Stabl G ,Bakhoum N ,Oliveira MM ,Gutjahr C and
Castrillo G (2021) Sculpting the soil microbiota. The Plant Journal 109(3).
https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.15568 .
Czech B ,Krausman PR and Borkhataria R (1998) Social construction,
political power, and the allocation of benefits to endangered species. Conser-
vation Biology 12(5), 1103 –1112. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-
1739.1998.97253.x .
De Clerck O ,Guiry MD ,Leliaert F ,Samyn Y and Verbruggen H (2013) Algal
taxonomy: a road to nowhere? Journal of Phycology 49(2), 215 –225. https://
doi.org/10.1111/jpy.12020 .Devarajan K ,Morelli TL and Tenan S (2020) Multi-species occupancy models:
review, roadmap, and recommendations. Ecography 43(11), 1612 –1624.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04957 .
Diniz-Filho JAF ,Loyola RD ,Raia P ,Mooers AO and Bini LM (2013)
Darwinian shortfalls in biodiversity conservation. Trends in Ecology & Evo-
lution 28(12), 689 –695. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2013.09.003 .
Driscoll DA (2010) Few beetle species can be detected with 95% confidence
using pitfall traps. Austral Ecology 35(1), 13 –23.https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1442-9993.2009.02007.x .
Duffus NE ,Lewis OT ,Grenyer R ,Comont RF ,Goddard D ,Goulson D ,
Ollerton J ,Townsend MC ,Webb JA ,Wilson RI andErmgassen SOSE
zu(2024) Leveraging Biodiversity Net Gain to Address Invertebrate Declines
in England. preprint. https://ecoevorxiv.org/repository/view/6667/ (accessed
22 April 2024).
Eccles JS and Wigfield A (2020) From expectancy-value theory to situated
expectancy-value theory: a developmental, social cognitive, and socioculturalperspective on motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology 61,
101859. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2020.101859 .
Engel MS ,Ceríaco LMP ,Daniel GM ,
Dellapé PM ,Löbl I ,Marinov M ,…
Zacharie CK (2021) The taxonomic impediment: a shortage of taxonomists,
not the lack of technical approaches. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society
193(2), 381 –387. https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlab072 .
Fanelli E ,Bianchelli S ,Foglini F ,Canals M ,Castellan G ,Güell-Bujons Q ,
Galil B ,Goren M ,Evans J ,Fabri M-C ,Vaz S ,Ciuffardi T ,Schembri PJ ,
Angeletti L ,Taviani M and Danovaro R (2021) Identifying priorities for the
protection of deep Mediterranean Sea ecosystems through an integrated
approach. Frontiers in Marine Science 8.https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2021.
698890 .
Fišer C,Robinson CT and Malard F (2018) Cryptic species as a window into the
paradigm shift of the species concept. Molecular Ecology 27(3), 613 –635.
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.14486 .
Fisher MA ,Vinson JE ,Gittleman JL and Drake JM (2018) The description and
number of undiscovered mammal species. Ecology and Evolution 8(7),
3628 –3635. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.3724 .
Francis R and Read DJ (1984) Direct transfer of carbon between plants
connected by vesicular –arbuscular mycorrhizal mycelium. Nature 307
(5946), 53 –56.https://doi.org/10.1038/307053a0 .
Gatti RC ,Reich PB ,Gamarra JGP ,Crowther T ,Hui C ,Morera A ,Bastin J-F ,
de-Miguel S ,Nabuurs G-J ,Svenning J-C ,Serra-Diaz JM ,Merow C ,
Enquist B ,Kamenetsky M ,Lee J ,Zhu J ,Fang J ,Jacobs DF ,Pijanowski
B,Banerjee A ,Giaquinto RA ,Alberti G ,Zambrano AMA ,Alvarez-Davila
E,Araujo-Murakami A ,Avitabile V ,Aymard GA ,Balazy R ,Baraloto C ,
Barroso JG ,Bastian ML ,Birnbaum P ,Bitariho R ,Bogaert J ,Bongers F ,
Bouriaud O ,Brancalion PHS ,Brearley FQ ,Broadbent EN ,Bussotti F ,
Silva WC da ,César RG ,Češljar G ,Moscoso VC ,Chen HYH ,Cienciala E ,
Clark CJ ,Coomes DA ,Dayanandan S ,Decuyper M ,Dee LE ,Pasquel JDA ,
Derroire G ,Djuikouo MNK ,Do TV ,Dolezal J ,ĐorđevićIĐ,Engel J ,Fayle
TM,Feldpausch TR ,Fridman JK ,Harris DJ ,Hemp A ,Hengeveld G ,
Herault B ,Herold M ,Ibanez T ,Jagodzinski AM ,Jaroszewicz B ,Jeffery
KJ,Johannsen VK ,Jucker T ,Kangur A ,Karminov VN ,Kartawinata K ,
Kennard DK ,Kepfer-Rojas S ,Keppel G ,Khan ML ,Khare PK ,Kileen TJ ,
Kim HS ,Korjus H ,Kumar A ,Kumar A ,Laarmann D ,Labrière N ,Lang M ,
Lewis SL ,Lukina N ,Maitner BS ,Malhi Y ,Marshall AR ,Martynenko OV ,
Mendoza ALM ,Ontikov PV ,Ortiz-Malavasi E ,Camacho NCP ,Paquette
A,Park M ,Parthasarathy N ,Peri PL ,Petronelli P ,Pfautsch S ,Phillips OL ,
Picard N ,Piotto D ,Poorter L ,Poulsen JR ,Pretzsch H ,Ramírez-Angulo H ,
Correa ZR ,Rodeghiero M ,Gonzáles RDPR ,Rolim SG ,Rovero F ,
Rutishauser E ,Saikia P ,Salas-Eljatib C ,Schepaschenko D ,Scherer-Lor-
enzen M ,ŠebeňV,Silveira M ,Slik F ,Sonké B ,Souza AF ,Stere ńczak KJ ,
Svoboda M ,Taedoumg H ,Tchebakova N ,Terborgh J ,Tikhonova E ,
Torres-Lezama A ,Plas F van der ,Vásquez R ,Viana H ,Vibrans AC ,
Vilanova E ,Vos VA ,Wang H-F ,Westerlund B ,White LJT ,Wiser SK ,
Zawi ła-Nied źwiecki T ,Zemagho L ,Zhu Z-X ,Zo-Bi IC and Liang J (2022)
The number of tree species on Earth. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 119(6).https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2115329119 .
Genovart M ,Tavecchia G ,Enseñat JJ and Laiolo P (2013) Holding up a mirror
to the society: children recognize exotic species much more than local ones.Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 17
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Biological Conservation 159, 484–489.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2012.
10.028 .
Giam X ,Scheffers BR ,Sodhi NS ,Wilcove DS ,Ceballos G and Ehrlich PR
(2011) Reservoirs of richness: least disturbed tropical forests are centres of
undescribed species diversity. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 279(1726), 67 –76.https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2011.0433 .
Giovannoni SJ ,Britschgi TB ,Moyer CL and Field KG (1990) Genetic diversity
in Sargasso Sea bacterioplankton. Nature 345(6270), 60 –63.https://doi.
org/10.1038/345060a0 .
Gontier N (2016) Symbiogenesis, history of. In Kliman RM (ed.), Encyclopedia
of Evolutionary Biology. Vol. 4 . Oxford: Academic Press, pp. 261 –271.https://
www.academia.edu/24874775/Symbiogenesis_History_of (accessed 5 May
2024).
Grabowski M ,Wysocka A and Mamos T (2017) Molecular species delimitation
methods provide new insight into taxonomy of the endemic gammarid
species flock from the ancient Lake Ohrid. Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Society 181(2), 272 –285. https://doi.org/10.1093/zoolinnean/zlw025 .
Grant MJ and Booth A (2009) A typology of reviews: an analysis of 14 review
types and associated methodologies. Health Information & Libraries Journal
26(2), 91 –108. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x .
Gross M (2007) The unknown in process: dynamic connections of ignorance,
non-knowledge and related concepts. Current Sociology 55(5), 742 –759.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0011392107079928 .
Guerra CA ,Bardgett RD ,Caon L ,Crowther TW ,Delgado-Baquerizo M ,
Montanarella L ,Navarro LM ,Orgiazzi A ,Singh BK ,Tedersoo L ,Vargas-
Rojas R ,Briones MJI ,Buscot F ,Cameron EK ,Cesarz S ,Chatzinotas A ,
Cowan DA ,Djukic I ,van den Hoogen J ,Lehmann A ,Maestre FT ,Marín C ,
Reitz T ,Rillig MC ,Smith LC ,de Vries FT ,Weigelt A ,Wall DH and
Eisenhauer N (2021) Tracking, targeting, and conserving soil biodiversity.
Science 371(6526), 239 –241. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd7926 .
Haelewaters D ,Quandt CA ,Bartrop L ,Cazabonne J ,Crockatt ME ,Cunha SP ,
De Lange R ,Dominici L ,Douglas B ,Drechsler-Santos ER ,Heilmann-
Clausen J ,Irga PJ ,Jakob S ,Lofgren L ,Martin TE ,Muchane MN ,Stallman
JK,Verbeken A ,Walker AK and Gonçalves SC (2024) The power of citizen
science to advance fungal conservation. Conservation Letters [preprint],
e13013. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.13013 .
Harley JL (1957) The fungal partners of forest trees. In BBC European Service
General News Talk 70. Oxford: Bodliean Library. The radio series was The
Frontiers of Knowledge (No. 70). The specific special collection this docu-ment can be found in in the archive I accessed was: Papers and correspond-
ence of John Laker Harley, 1911-1990, 1930-1991. Bodleian Library,
University of Oxford. GB 161 J.L. HARLEY PAPERS (accessed 27th July2023).
Harms H ,Schlosser D and Wick LY (2011) Untapped potential: exploiting
fungi in bioremediation of hazardous chemicals. Nature Reviews Microbiol-
ogy9(3), 177 –192. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2519 .
Hawksworth DL and Lücking R (2017) Fungal diversity revisited: 2.2 to 3.8
million species. Microbiology Spectrum 5(4), 1 –17.https://doi.org/10.1128/
microbiolspec.funk-0052-2016 .
Head L (2016) Hope and Grief in the Anthropocene: Re-Conceptualising
Human –Nature Relations . London: Routledge.
Heise UK (2016) Imagining Extinction: The Cultural Meanings of Endangered
Species . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hernandez, J (2022) Fresh Banana Leaves: Healing Indigenous Landscapes
Through Indigenous Science . Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Hernandez, M ,Shenk, MK and Perry, GH (2020) Factors influencing taxo-
nomic unevenness in scientific research: a mixed-methods case study of non-human primate genomic sequence data generation. Royal Society Open
Science 7(9), 201206. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201206 .
Hortal J ,de Bello F ,Diniz-Filho JAF ,Lewinsohn TM ,Lobo JM and Ladle RJ
(2015) Seven shortfalls that beset large-scale knowledge of biodiversity.Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 46, 523 –549. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-112414-054400 .
Hyde KD ,Xu J,Rapior S ,Jeewon R ,Lumyong S ,Niego AGT ,Abeywickrama
PD,Aluthmuhandiram JVS ,Brahamanage RS ,Brooks S ,Chaiyasen A ,
Chethana KWT ,Chomnunti P ,
Chepkirui C ,Chuankid B ,de Silva NI ,
Doilom M ,Faulds C ,Gentekaki E ,Gopalan V ,Kakumyan P ,Harishchan-
dra D ,Hemachandran H ,Hongsanan S ,Karunarathna A ,KarunarathnaSC,Khan S ,Kumla J ,Jayawardena RS ,Liu J-K ,Liu N ,Luangharn T ,
Macabeo APG ,Marasinghe DS ,Meeks D ,Mortimer PE ,Mueller P ,Nadir
S,Nataraja KN ,Nontachaiyapoom S ,O’Brien M ,Penkhrue W ,Phukham-
sakda C ,Ramanan US ,Rathnayaka AR ,Sadaba RB ,Sandargo B ,Samar-
akoon BC ,Tennakoon DS ,Siva R ,Sriprom W ,Suryanarayanan TS ,Sujarit
K,Suwannarach N ,Suwunwong T ,Thongbai B ,Thongklang N ,Wei D ,
Wijesinghe SN ,Winiski J ,Yan J ,Yasanthika E and Stadler M (2019) The
amazing potential of fungi: 50 ways we can exploit fungi industrially. Fungal
Diversity 97(1), 1 –136. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13225-019-00430-9 .
IPBES (2019) Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Ser-
vices of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services. https://zenodo.org/record/5657041 (accessed 26 January
2022).
Ishaq SL ,Parada FJ ,Wolf PG ,Bonilla CY ,Carney MA ,Benezra A ,Wissel E ,
Friedman M ,DeAngelis KM ,Robinson JM ,Fahimipour AK ,Manus MB ,
Grieneisen L ,Dietz LG ,Pathak A ,Chauhan A ,Kuthyar S ,Stewart JD ,
Dasari MR ,Nonnamaker E ,Choudoir M ,Horve PF ,Zimmerman NB ,
Kozik AJ ,Darling KW ,Romero-Olivares AL ,Hariharan J ,Farmer N ,
Maki KA ,Collier JL ,O’Doherty KC ,Letourneau J ,Kline J ,Moses PL
and Morar N (2021) Introducing the microbes and social equity working
group: considering the microbial components of social, environmental, and
health justice. MSystems 6(4).https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00471-21 .
IUCN (2022) The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. https://www.iucnre
dlist.org/en (accessed 17 May 2022).
Jamieson AJ ,Singleman G ,Linley TD and Casey S (2021) Fear and loathing of
the deep ocean: why don ’t people care about the deep sea? ICES Journal of
Marine Science 78(3), 797 –809. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsaa234 .
Jeliazkov A ,Gavish Y ,Marsh CJ ,Geschke J ,Brummitt N ,Rocchini D ,Haase
P,Kunin WE and Henle K (2022) Sampling and modelling rare species:
conceptual guidelines for the neglected majority. Global Change Biology 28
(12), 3754 –3777. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16114 .
Jones WD ,Cayirlioglu P ,Grunwald Kadow I and Vosshall LB (2007) Two
chemosensory receptors together mediate carbon dioxide detection in Dros-
ophila. Nature 445(7123), 86 –90.https://doi.org/10.1038/nature05466 .
Joppa LN ,Roberts DL ,Myers N and Pimm SL (2011) Biodiversity
hotspots house most undiscovered plant species. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108(32), 13171 –13176. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1109389108 .
Jørgensen D (2019) Recovering Lost Species in the Modern Age: Histories of
Longing and Belonging . London: The MIT Press.
Jouannais P and Pizzol M (2022) Stochastic ex-ante LCA under multidimen-
sional uncertainty: anticipating the production of undiscovered microalgalcompounds in Europe. Environmental Science & Technology 56(22),
16382 –16393. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c04849 .
Kass JM ,Guénard B ,Dudley KL ,Jenkins CN ,Azuma F
,Fisher BL ,Parr CL ,
Gibb H ,Longino JT ,Ward PS ,Chao A ,Lubertazzi D ,Weiser M ,Jetz W ,
Guralnick R ,Blatrix R ,Lauriers JD ,Donoso DA ,Georgiadis C ,Gomez K ,
Hawkes PG ,Johnson RA ,Lattke JE ,MacGown JA ,Mackay W ,Robson S ,
Sanders NJ ,Dunn RR and Economo EP (2022) The global distribution of
known and undiscovered ant biodiversity. Science Advances 8(31), eabp9908.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abp9908 .
Kerwin A (1993) None too solid: medical ignorance. Knowledge 15(2), 166 –185.
https://doi.org/10.1177/107554709301500204 .
Kimmerer, RW (2015) Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific
Knowledge and the Teachings of Plants . Minneapolis, MN: Milkweed Editions.
Knowlton, N (1993) Sibling species in the sea. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 24(1), 189 –216. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.24.110193.
001201 .
Koide RT and Mosse B (2004) A history of research on arbuscular mycorrhiza.
Mycorrhiza 14(3), 145 –163. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-004-0307-4 .
Kortmann M ,Roth N ,Buse J ,Hilszcza ński J,Jaworski T ,Morinière J ,Seidl R ,
Thorn S and Müller JC (2022) Arthropod dark taxa provide new insights
into diversity responses to bark beetle infestations. Ecological Applications 32
(2), e2516. https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2516 .
Kristensen NP ,Seah WW ,Chong KY ,Yeoh YS ,Fung T ,Berman LM ,Tan HZ
and Chisholm RA (2020) Extinction rate of discovered and undiscovered
plants in Singapore. Conservation Biology 34(5), 1229 –1240. https://doi.
org/10.1111/cobi.13499 .18 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Ladle RJ ,Alves-Martins F ,Malhado ACM ,Reyes-García V ,Courchamp F ,
Minin ED ,Roll U ,JarićI and Correia RA (2023) Biocultural aspects
of species extinctions. Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 1, e22. https://doi.
org/10.1017/ext.2023.20 .
Lambdon P and Cronk Q (2020) Extinction dynamics under extreme conser-
vation threat: the flora of St Helena. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 8.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2020.00041 .
Latour B (1993) We Have Never Been Modern , Porter C (trans). Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ledig F (1993) Secret extinctions –the loss of genetic diversity in forest
ecosystems. In Fenger MA, Miller EH, Johnson JA and Williams EJR (eds),
Our Living Legacy: Proceedings of a Symposium on Biological Diversity .
Canada: Royal British Columbia Museum, pp. 127 –140.
Lees AC ,Attwood S ,Barlow J and Phalan B (2020) Biodiversity scientists must
fight the creeping rise of extinction denial. Nature Ecology & Evolution 4(11),
1440 –1443. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-020-01285-z .
Lillis T and Curry MJ (2013) English, scientific publishing and participation in
the global knowledge economy. In E. J. Erling and P. Seargeant (eds), English
and Development: Policy, Pedagogy and Globalization . Bristol: Multilingual
Matters, 220 –242.
Liu J ,Slik F ,Zheng S and Lindenmayer DB (2022) Undescribed species have
higher extinction risk than known species. Conservation Letters , e12876.
https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12876 .
Lomolino MV (2004) Conservation biogeography. In L. R. Heaney and M. V.
Lomolino (eds), Frontiers of Biogeography: New Directions in the Geography
of Nature , Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 293 –296.
Lopes AV ,Porto RG ,Cruz-Neto O ,Peres CA ,Viana BF ,Giannini TC and
Tabarelli M (2021) Neglected diversity of crop pollinators: lessons from the
world ’s largest tropical country. Perspectives in Ecology and Conservation 19
(4), 500 –504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecon.2021.06.004 .
Lorimer J (2015) Wildlife in the Anthropocene: Conservation after Nature .
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Loxdale HD ,Davis BJ and Davis RA (2016) Known knowns and unknowns in
biology. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 117(2), 386 –398. https://
doi.org/10.1111/bij.12646 .
Lücking R ,Dal-Forno M ,Sikaroodi M ,Gillevet PM ,Bungartz F ,Moncada B ,
Yánez-Ayabaca A ,Chaves JL ,Coca LF and Lawrey JD (2014) A single
macrolichen constitutes hundreds of unrecognized species. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111(30), 11091 –11096. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1403517111 .
Lum D ,Tedesco PA ,Hugueny B ,Giam X and Chisholm RA (2021) Quanti-
fying the relative performance of two undetected-extinction models. Conser-
vation Biology 35(1), 239 –248. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13562 .
Lupyan, G ,Rahman, RA ,Boroditsky, L and Clark, A (2020) Effects of
language on visual perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 24(11),
930–944. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.08.005 .
MacKenzie, DI ,Nichols, JD ,Hines, JE ,Knutson, MG and Franklin, AB
(2003) Estimating site occupancy, colonization, and local extinction when
a species is detected imperfectly. Ecology 84(8), 2200 –2207. https://doi.
org/10.1890/02-3090 .
MacKenzie, DI ,Nichols, JD ,Royle, JA ,Pollock, KH ,Bailey, L and Hines, JE
(2017) Occupancy Estimation and Modeling: Inferring Patterns and Dynamics
of Species Occurrence , Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mammola S ,Lunghi E ,Biland žija H ,Cardoso P ,Grimm V ,Schmidt SI ,
Hesselberg T and Martínez A (2021) Collecting eco-evolutionary data in the
dark: impediments to subterranean research and how to overcome them.Ecology and Evolution 11(11), 5911 –5926. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.7556 .
Manetas, Y (2012) Alice in the Land of Plants: Biology of Plants and Their
Importance for Planet Earth . Weber, C (trans). London: Springer.
Maroske, S and May, TW (2018) Naming names: the first women taxonomists
in mycology. Studies in Mycology 89,6 3–84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
simyco.2017.12.001 .
Martin TE ,Bennett GC ,Fairbairn A and Mooers AO (2023) ‘Lost ’taxa and
their conservation implications. Animal Conservation 26(1), 14 –24.https://
doi.org/10.1111/acv.12788 .
Mazza CA ,Izaguirre MM ,Curiale J and Ballaré CL (2010) A look into the
invisible: ultraviolet-B sensitivity in an insect (Caliothrips phaseoli) revealedthrough a behavioural action spectrum. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:Biological Sciences 277(1680), 367 –373. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.
2009.1565 .
McCoy, P (2016) Radical Mycology: A Treatise on Seeing & Working with Fungi .
Portland, OR: Chthaeus Press.
Mcowen, CJ ,
Ivory, S ,Dixon, MJR ,Regan EC ,Obrecht A ,Tittensor DP ,
Teller A and Chenery, AM (2016) Sufficiency and suitability of global
biodiversity indicators for monitoring progress to 2020 targets. Conservation
Letters 9(6), 489 –494. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12329 .
Mercado-Blanco J ,Abrantes I ,Barra Caracciolo A ,Bevivino A ,Ciancio A ,
Grenni P ,Hrynkiewicz K ,Kredics L and Proença DN (2018) Belowground
microbiota and the health of tree crops. Frontiers in Microbiology 9, 1006.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2018.01006 .
Meyer C ,Kreft H ,Guralnick R and Jetz W (2015) Global priorities for an
effective information basis of biodiversity distributions. Nature Communi-
cations 6(1), 8221. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9221 .
MilićD,Radenkovi ćS,Ačanski J and Vuji ćA(2019) The importance of
hidden diversity for insect conservation: a case study in hoverflies (the
Merodon atratus complex, Syrphidae, Diptera). Journal of Insect Conserva-
tion23(1), 29 –44.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10841-018-0111-7 .
Mooney TA ,Di Iorio L ,Lammers M ,Lin T-H ,Nedelec SL ,Parsons M ,
Radford C ,Urban E and Stanley J (2020) Listening forward: approaching
marine biodiversity assessments using acoustic methods. Royal Society Open
Science 7(8), 201287. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201287 .
Mora C ,Tittensor DP ,Adl S ,Simpson AGB and Worm B (2011) How many
species are there on earth and in the ocean? PLoS Biology 9(8), e1001127.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127 .
Morton T (2016) Dark Ecology: For a Logic of Future Coexistence . New York:
Columbia University Press.
Morinière J ,Balke M ,Doczkal D ,Geiger MF ,Hardulak LA ,Haszprunar G ,
Hausmann A ,Hendrich L ,Regalado L ,Rulik B ,Schmidt S ,Wägele J-W
and Hebert PDN (2019) A DNA barcode library for 5,200 German flies and
midges (Insecta: Diptera) and its implications for metabarcoding-based
biomonitoring. Molecular Ecology Resources 19(4), 900 –928. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1755-0998.13022 .
Moura M ,Costa, H ,Peixoto, M ,Carvalho, AL ,Santana, D and Vasconcelos, H
(2018) Geographical and socioeconomic determinants of species discovery
trends in a biodiversity hotspot. Biological Conservation 220.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biocon.2018.01.024 .
Moura MR and Jetz, W (2021) Shortfalls and opportunities in terrestrial
vertebrate species discovery. Nature Ecology & Evolution 5(5), 631 –639.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-021-01411-5 .
Nixon R (2021) The less selfish gene: forest altruism, neoliberalism, and the Tree
of Life. Environmental Humanities 13(2), 348 –371. https://doi.org/10.1215/
22011919-9320189 .
North American Conference on Mycorrhizae (1985) Proceedings of the 6th
North American Conference on Mycorrhizae : June 25 –29, 1984, Bend, Ore-
gon, U.S.A . Corvallis, OR: Oregon State University, Forest Research Labora-
tory. http://archive.org/details/CAT87872759 (accessed 26 July 2023).
Olson, SL and James, HF (1982) Fossil birds from the Hawaiian islands:
evidence for wholesale extinction by man before Western contact. Science
217(4560), 633 –635. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.217.4560.633 .
OneZoom (2022) OneZoom Tree of Life Explorer. https://www.onezoom.org/
life.html/@=304358?img=best_any&anim=flight#x888,y350,w0.1922(accessed 17 May 2022).
Orford, KA ,Vaughan, IP and Memmott, J (2015) The forgotten flies: the
importance of non-syrphid Diptera as pollinators. Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 282(1805), 20142934. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.2014.2934 .
Oyanedel R ,Hinsley A ,Dentinger BTM ,Milner-Gulland EJ and Furci G
(2022) A way forward for wild fungi in international sustainability policy.Conservation Letters 15(4), e12882. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12882 .
Page RDM (2016) DNA barcoding and taxonomy: dark taxa and dark texts.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 371
(1702), 20150334. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0334 .
Parsons DJ ,Pelletier TA ,Wieringa JG ,Duckett DJ and Carstens BC (2022)
Sounding the call for a global library of underwater biological sounds.
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 10.https://www.frontiersin.org/article/
10.3389/fevo.2022.810156Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 19
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Pärtel M ,Szava-Kovats R and Zobel M (2011) Dark diversity: shedding light on
absent species. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 26(3), 124 –128. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tree.2010.12.004 .
Pärtel M (2014) Community ecology of absent species: hidden and dark
diversity. Journal of Vegetation Science 25(5), 1154 –1159. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jvs.12169 .
Pimm SL ,Moulton MP ,Justice LJ ,Collar NJ ,Bowman DMJS and Bond WJ
(1994) Bird extinctions in the Central Pacific [and discussion]. Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences 344(1307), 27 –33.
Pimm SL ,Jenkins CN ,Abell R ,Brooks TM ,Gittleman JL ,Joppa LN ,Raven
PH,Roberts CM and Sexton JO (2014) The biodiversity of species and their
rates of extinction, distribution, and protection. Science 344(6187), 1246752.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1246752 .
Plues M (1864) Rambles in search of flowerless plants , 2nd Edn. London: Journal
of Horticulture & Cottage Gardener Office. https://doi.org/10.5962/bhl.
title.5389 .https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/bibliography/5389 (accessed
27 August 2023).
Politzer-Ahles S ,Girolamo T and Ghali S (2020) Preliminary evidence of
linguistic bias in academic reviewing. Journal of English for Academic Pur-
poses 47, 100895. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2020.100895 .
Prescod-Weinstein C (2022) The Disordered Cosmos: A Journey Into Dark
Matter, Spacetime, and Dreams Deferred . New York: Bold Type Books.
Proctor RN (2008) Agnotology: a missing term to describe the cultural pro-
duction of ignorance (and its study). In Proctor RN and Schiebinger L (eds)Agnotology: The Making and Unmaking of Ignorance . Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1 –33.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil: technoscientific futurity and
the pace of care. Social Studies of Science
45(5), 691 –716. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0306312715599851 .
Purvis A (2019a, May 22) How Did IPBES Estimate ‘1 Million Species at Risk of
Extinction ’in #GlobalAssessment Report. https://www.ipbes.net/node/35290
(accessed 29 April 2024).
Purvis A (2019b, May 30) A Million Threatened Species? Thirteen Questions
and Answers ‘1 Million Species at Risk of Extinction ’.https://www.ipbes.net/
node/35313 (accessed 29 April 2024).
Ramsay GM (1986) The taxonomic impediment to conservation. The W ētā9
(2), 60 –62.
Ratnasingham S and Hebert PDN (2007) BOLD: the barcode of life data system
(http://www.barcodinglife.org ).Molecular Ecology Notes 7(3), 355 –364.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-8286.2007.01678.x .
Rayner M and Neilson-Jones W (1944) Problems in Tree Nutrition: an account
of researches concerned primarily with the mycorrhizal habit in relation toforestry and with some biological aspects of soil fertility . London: Faber and
Faber.
Redford KH (2023) Extending conservation to include Earth ’s microbiome.
Conservation Biology 37(3), e14088. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.14088 .
Régnier C ,Achaz G ,Lambert A ,Cowie RH ,Bouchet P and Fontaine B
(2015) Mass extinction in poorly known taxa. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 112(25), 7761 –7766. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1502350112 .
Rehorick DA and Bentz VM (2008) Transformative Phenomenology: Changing
Ourselves, Lifeworlds, and Professional Practice . Maryland: Lexington Books.
Richling I and Bouchet P (2013) Extinct even before scientific recognition: a
remarkable radiation of helicinid snails (Helicinidae) on the Gambier Islands,
French Polynesia. Biodiversity and Conservation 22(11), 2433 –2468. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10531-013-0496-2 .
Richter A ,
Nakamura G ,Agra Iserhard C and da Silva Duarte L (2021) The
hidden side of diversity: effects of imperfect detection on multiple dimensions
of biodiversity. Ecology and Evolution 11(18), 12508 –12519. https://doi.
org/10.1002/ece3.7995 .
Roberts DL ,Taylor L and Joppa LN (2016) Threatened or data deficient:
assessing the conservation status of poorly known species. Diversity and
Distributions 22(5), 558 –565. https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12418 .
Robinson JM ,Redvers N ,Camargo A ,Bosch CA ,Breed MF ,Brenner LA ,
Carney MA ,Chauhan A ,Dasari M ,Dietz LG ,Friedman M ,Grieneisen L ,
Hoisington AJ ,Horve PF ,Hunter A ,Jech S ,Jorgensen A ,Lowry CA ,Man I ,
Mhuireach G ,Navarro-Pérez E ,Ritchie EG ,Stewart JD ,Watkins H ,Wein-
stein P and Ishaq SL (2022) Twenty important research questions in microbialexposure and social equity. MSystems 7(1), e01240 –21.https://doi.org/
10.1128/msystems.01240-21 .
Rodrigues ASL ,Pilgrim JD ,Lamoreux JF ,Hoffmann M and Brooks TM
(2006) The value of the IUCN Red List for conservation. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 21(2), 71 –76.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2005.10.010 .
Ryberg M and Nilsson RH (2018) New light on names and naming of dark taxa.
MycoKeys 30,3 1–39.https://doi.org/10.3897/mycokeys.30.24376 .
Sales NG ,Mariani S ,Salvador GN ,Pessali TC and Carvalho DC (2018)
Hidden diversity hampers conservation efforts in a highly impacted neo-tropical river system. Frontiers in Genetics 9.https://www.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fgene.2018.00271
Sarkar S (2019) What should “biodiversity ”be? In E. Casetta, J. Marques da Silva
and D. Vecchi (eds), From Assessing to Conserving Biodiversity: Conceptualand Practical Challenges ,History, Philosophy and Theory of the Life Sciences,
vol24. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 375 –399.
Scheffers BR ,Joppa LN ,Pimm SL and Laurance WF (2012) What we know
and don ’t know about Earth ’s missing biodiversity. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 27(9), 501 –510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2012.05.008 .
Schmid R (1999) Bamboozled by botany, Beatrix bypasses bigoted biology,
begins babying bountiful bunnies: OR Beatrix Potter [1866 –1943] as a
mycologist: the period before Peter Rabbit and friends. Taxon 48(2),
438–443. https://doi.org/10.2307/1224463 .
Schiebinger LL (2008) West Indian arbortifacients and the making of ignor-
ance. In Proctor R and Schiebinger L (eds), Agnotology: The Making and
Unmaking of Ignorance . Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, 149 –
162.
Sharkey MJ ,Janzen DH ,Hallwachs W ,Chapman EG ,Smith MA ,Dapkey T ,
Brown A ,Ratnasingham S ,Naik S ,Manjunath R ,Perez K
,Milton M ,
Hebert P ,Shaw SR ,Kittel RN ,Solis MA ,Metz MA ,Goldstein PZ ,Brown
JW,Quicke DLJ ,van Achterberg C ,Brown BV and Burns JM (2021)
Minimalist revision and description of 403 new species in 11 subfamilies ofCosta Rican braconid parasitoid wasps, including host records for 219 species.
ZooKeys 1013 ,1–665. https://doi.org/10.3897/zookeys.1013.55600 .
Sheikh SI ,Ward AKG ,Zhang YM ,Davis CK ,Zhang L ,Egan SP and Forbes
AA(2022) Ormyrus labotus (Hymenoptera: Ormyridae): another generalist
that should not be a generalist is not a generalist. Insect Systematics and
Diversity 6(1), 8. https://doi.org/10.1093/isd/ixac001 .
Sheldrake M (2020[2021]) Entangled Life: How Fungi Make Our Worlds,
Change Our Minds, and Shape Our Futures , reprint. London: Vintage.
Shipunov A ,Newcombe G ,Raghavendra AKH and Anderson CL (2008)
Hidden diversity of endophytic fungi in an invasive plant. American Journal
of Botany 95(9), 1096 –1108. https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.0800024 .
Simard S (2021[2022]) Finding the Mother Tree: Uncovering the Wisdom and
Intelligence of the Forest , reprint. London: Penguin.
Simard SW ,Perry DA ,Jones MD ,Myrold DD ,Durall DM and Molina R
(1997) Net transfer of carbon between ectomycorrhizal tree species in thefield. Nature 388(6642), 579 –582. https://doi.org/10.1038/41557 .
Simberloff D (1998) Flagships, umbrellas, and keystones: is single-species
management passé in the landscape era? Biological Conservation 83(3),
247
–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3207(97)00081-5 .
Smith CR ,Roman J and Nation JB (2019) A metapopulation model for whale-
fall specialists: the largest whales are essential to prevent species extinctions.
Journal of Marine Research 77(2), 283 –302. https://doi.org/10.1357/
002224019828474250 .
Smith S and Read D (2007) Mycorrhizal Symbiosis , 3rd Edn. Amsterdam/
Boston, MA: Academic Press.
Smith W ,Solow AR and Preston PE (1996) An estimator of species overlap
using a modified beta-binomial model. Biometrics 52(4), 1472 –1477. https://
doi.org/10.2307/2532861 .
Smithson M (1989) Ignorance and Uncertainty: Emerging Paradigms .
New York: Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-3628-3_7 .
Society for Protection of Underground Networks (SPUN) (2021) Mycorrhizal
Fungi. https://www.spun.earth/networks/mycorrhizal-fungi (accessed 13
August 2023).
Soulé ME (1985) What Is Conservation Biology? BioScience 35(11), 727 –734.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1310054 .
Steadman DW (1995) Prehistoric extinctions of Pacific island birds: biodiver-
sity meets zooarchaeology. Science 267(5201), 1123 –1131.20 Serena Turton-Hughes, George Holmes and Christopher Hassall
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
Stefano M ,Martino A ,Dragan A ,Jacopo C ,Tommaso C ,Pedro C ,Dan C ,
Matteo C ,Furkan D ,Diego F ,VG D ,Alejandro M ,Luca S ,Iñigo R-L ,
Ronaldo S ,David V-R ,Aida V and A, CR (2023) Drivers of species
knowledge across the Tree of Life. ELife 12.https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.88251 .
Stoev P ,Komeri čki A ,Akkari N ,Liu S ,Zhou X ,Weigand A ,Hostens J ,
Hunter C ,Edmunds S ,Porco D ,Zapparoli M ,Georgiev T ,Mietchen D ,
Roberts D ,Faulwetter S ,Smith V and Penev L (2013) Eupolybothrus
cavernicolus Komeri čki & Stoev sp. n. (Chilopoda: Lithobiomorpha: Litho-
biidae): the first eukaryotic species description combining transcriptomic,
DNA barcoding and micro-CT imaging data. Biodiversity Data Journal 1,
e1013. https://doi.org/10.3897/BDJ.1.e1013 .
Stork NE (2018) How many species of insects and other terrestrial arthropods
are there on Earth? Annual Review of Entomology 63,3 1–45.https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-ento-020117-043348 .
Sumida Huaman E (2022) Rikch ’arisun, sayarisun, k ’ancharisun: indigenous
knowledge systems and research for planetary beauty. AlterNative: An Inter-
national Journal of Indigenous Peoples 18(4), 477 –487. https://doi.
org/10.1177/11771801221124571 .
Tedesco PA ,Bigorne, R ,Bogan, AE ,Giam, X ,Jézéquel, C and Hugueny,
B(2014) Estimating how many undescribed species have gone extinct.
Conservation Biology 28(5), 1360 –1370. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.12285 .
ter Steege H ,Prado PI ,Lima RAF de ,Pos E ,de Souza Coelho L ,de Andrade
Lima Filho D ,Salomão RP ,Amaral IL ,de Almeida Matos FD ,Castilho
CV,Phillips OL ,Guevara JE ,de Jesus Veiga Carim M ,Cárdenas López D ,
Magnusson WE ,Wittmann F ,Martins MP ,Sabatier D ,Irume MV ,da
Silva Guimarães JR ,Molino J-F ,Bánki OS ,Piedade MTF ,Pitman NCA ,
Ramos JF ,Monteagudo Mendoza A ,Venticinque EM ,Luize BG ,Núñez
Vargas P ,Silva TSF ,de Leão Novo EMM ,Reis NFC ,Terborgh J ,Manzatto
AG,Casula KR ,Honorio Coronado EN ,Montero JC ,Duque A ,Costa
FRC,Castaño Arboleda N ,Schöngart J ,Zartman CE ,Killeen TJ ,Marimon
BS,Marimon-Junior BH ,Vasquez R ,Mostacedo B ,Demarchi LO ,Feld-
pausch TR ,Engel J ,Petronelli P ,Baraloto C ,Assis RL ,Castellanos H ,
Simon MF ,de Medeiros MB ,Quaresma A ,Laurance SGW ,Rincón LM ,
Andrade A. ,Sousa TR ,Camargo JL ,Schietti J ,Laurance WF ,de Queiroz
HL,Nascimento HEM ,Lopes MA ,de Sousa Farias E ,Magalhães JLL ,
Brienen R ,Aymard C. GA ,Revilla JDC ,Vieira ICG ,Cintra BBL ,Steven-
son PR ,Feitosa YO ,Duivenvoorden JF ,Mogollón HF ,Araujo-Murakami
A,Ferreira LV ,Lozada JR ,Comiskey JA ,de Toledo JJ ,Damasco G ,Dávila
N,Lopes A ,García-Villacorta R ,Draper F ,Vicentini A ,Cornejo Valverde
F,Lloyd J ,Gomes VHF ,Neill D ,Alonso A ,Dallmeier F ,de Souza FC ,
Gribel R ,Arroyo L ,Carvalho FA ,de Aguiar DPP ,do Amaral DD ,Panso-
nato MP ,Feeley KJ ,Berenguer E ,Fine PVA ,Guedes MC ,Barlow J ,
Ferreira J ,Villa B ,Peñuela Mora MC ,Jimenez EM ,Licona JC ,Cerón C ,
Thomas R ,Maas P ,Silveira M ,Henkel TW ,Stropp J ,Paredes MR ,Dexter
KG,Daly D ,Baker TR ,Huamantupa-Chuquimaco I ,Milliken W ,Pen-
nington T ,Tello JS ,Pena JLM ,Peres CA ,Klitgaard B ,Fuentes A ,Silman
MR,Di Fiore A ,von Hildebrand P ,Chave J ,van Andel TR ,Hilário RR ,
Phillips JF ,Rivas-Torres G ,Noronha JC ,Prieto A ,Gonzales T ,de Sá
Carpanedo R ,Gonzales GPG ,Gómez RZ ,de Jesus Rodrigues D ,Zent
EL,Ruschel AR ,Vos VA ,Fonty É ,Junqueira AB ,Doza HPD ,Hoffman B ,
Zent S ,Barbosa EM ,Malhi Y ,de Matos Bonates LC ,de Andrade Miranda
IP,Silva N ,Barbosa FR ,Vela CIA ,Pinto LFM ,Rudas A ,Albuquerque BW ,
Umaña MN ,Carrero Márquez YA ,van der Heijden G ,Young KR ,Tirado
M,Correa DF ,Sierra R ,Costa JBP ,Rocha M ,Vilanova Torre E ,Wang O ,
Oliveira AA ,Kalamandeen M ,Vriesendorp C ,Ramirez-Angulo H ,
Holmgren M ,Nascimento MT ,Galbraith D ,Flores BM ,Scudeller VV ,
Cano A ,Ahuite Reategui MA ,Mesones I ,Baider C ,Mendoza C ,Zagt R ,
Urrego Giraldo LE ,Ferreira C ,Villarroel D ,Linares-Palomino R ,Farfan-
Rios W ,Farfan-Rios W ,Casas LF ,Cárdenas S ,Balslev H ,Torres-Lezama
A,Alexiades MN ,Garcia-Cabrera K ,Valenzuela Gamarra L ,Valderrama
Sandoval EH ,Ramirez Arevalo F ,Hernandez L ,Sampaio AF ,Pansini S ,
Palacios Cuenca W ,de Oliveira EA ,Pauletto D ,Levesley A ,Melgaço K and
Pickavance G (2020) Biased-corrected richness estimates for the Amazoniantree flora. Scientific Reports 10(1), 10130. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
020-66686-3 .
Thacker J (1758) The Art of Cookery: Containing above Six Hundred and Fifty of
the Most Approv ’d Receipts …Also, a Bill of Fare for Every Month in the
Year…. By John Thacker, …, Newcastle-upon-Tyne: I. Thompson and Com-
pany. https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/CW0109066719/ECCO?sid=book
mark-ECCO&xid=4a01010a&pg=80 (accessed 8 August 2023).
Theng M ,Jusoh WFA ,Jain A ,Huertas B ,Tan DJX ,Tan HZ ,Kristensen NP ,
Meier R and Chisholm RA (2020) A comprehensive assessment of diversity
loss in a well-documented tropical insect fauna: almost half of Singapore ’s
butterfly species extirpated in 160 years. Biological Conservation 242, 108401.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.108401 .
Titley MA ,Snaddon JL and Turner EC (2017) Scientific research on animal
biodiversity is systematically biased towards vertebrates and temperate
regions. PLoS One 12(12), e0189577. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0189577 .
Trappe J (2005) A.B. Frank and mycorrhizae: the challenge to evolutionary and
ecologic theory. Mycorrhiza 15, 277 –281. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-
004-0330-5 .
Treurnicht M ,Colville JF ,Joppa LN ,Huyser O and Manning J (2017)
Counting complete? Finalising the plant inventory of a global biodiversity
hotspot. PeerJ 5(e2984), 1 –11.https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.2984 .
Tsing AL (2015) The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of
Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
van Dooren T (2014) Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction .
New York: Columbia University Press.
van Dooren T (2022) In search of lost snails: storying unknown extinctions.
Environmental Humanities 14(1), 89 –109. https://doi.org/10.1215/
22011919-9481451 .
Veresoglou SD ,Halley JM and Rillig MC (2015) Extinction risk of soil biota.
Nature Communications 6(1), 8862. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9862 .
Watling R (2000) Beatrix Potter. Newsletter and Proceedings of the Linnean
Society of London 16(1), 24 –31.
Wheeler QD ,Knapp S ,Stevenson DW ,Stevenson J ,Blum SD ,Boom BM ,
Borisy GG ,Buizer JL ,De Carvalho MR ,Cibrian A ,Donoghue MJ ,Doyle
V,Gerson EM ,Graham CH ,Graves P ,Graves SJ ,Guralnick RP ,Hamilton
AL,Hanken J ,Law W ,Lipscomb DL ,Lovejoy TE ,Miller H ,Miller JS ,
Naeem S ,Novacek MJ ,Page LM ,Platnick NI ,Porter-Morgan H ,Raven
PH,Solis MA ,Valdecasas AG ,Van Der Leeuw S ,Vasco A ,Vermeulen N ,
Vogel J ,Walls RL ,Wilson EO and Woolley JB (2012) Mapping the
biosphere: exploring species to understand the origin, organization and
sustainability of biodiversity. Systematics and Biodiversity 10(1), 1 –20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2012.665095 .
Whittaker RH (1969) New Concepts of Kingdoms of Organisms. Science 163
(3863), 150 –160. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.163.3863.150 .
Wilson JR ,Proche şŞ,Braschler B ,Dixon ES and Richardson DM (2007) The
(bio)diversity of science reflects the interests of society. Frontiers in Ecology
and the Environment 5(8), 409 –414. https://doi.org/10.1890/060077.1 .
Wittgenstein L (1922) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (C. K. Ogden, Trans.),
reprinted eBook, USA: Project Gutenberg.
Wood CM ,Klinck H ,Gustafson M ,Keane JJ ,Sawyer SC ,Gutiérrez RJ and
Peery MZ (2021) Using the ecological significance of animal vocalizations to
improve inference in acoustic monitoring programs. Conservation Biology
35(1), 336 –345. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13516 .
Wyckhuys KAG ,Nguyen H and Fonte SJ (2021) Artefactual depiction of
predator –prey trophic linkages in global soils. Scientific Reports 11(1),
23861. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03234-7 .
Zamani A ,Dal Pos D ,Fric ZF ,Orfinger AB ,Scherz MD ,Barto ňová AS and
Gante HF (2022a) The future of zoological taxonomy is integrative, not
minimalist. Systematics and Biodiversity 20(1), 1 –14. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14772000.2022.2063964 .
Zamani A ,Fric ZF ,Gante HF ,Hopkins T ,Orfinger AB ,Scherz MD ,Barto-
ňová AS and Pos DD (2022b) DNA barcodes on their own are not enough to
describe a species. Systematic Entomology 47, 385 –389 https://doi.org/
10.1111/syen.12538 .Cambridge Prisms: Extinction 21
https://doi.org/10.1017/ext.2024.21  Published online by Cambridge University Press
