© The Author(s) 2025
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
tecnoscienza.unibo.it
T/S
TECNOSCIENZA. Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies  
16(1)   pp. 43-63   ISSN 2038-3460
DOI:  10.6092/issn.2038-3460/18810
Abstract
In Salento, since the bacteria Xylella fastidiosa  outbreak in 2013, the 
frictions between temporalities of care and technoscience exposed the 
issues of the governmental state of emergency imposed since 2013. 
The disaster – a hecatomb of millions of olive trees – set its own tem -
porality, dictated by the rhythm of the bacteria spreading through the 
environment. Drawing from ecological reparations in Salento’s aftermath, 
and from co-evolutionary practices in Sicilian biodiversity, I will outline 
the features of the temporal experience and rhythms of an ecosystem, 
particularly those that can no longer be governed. These ethnographic 
insights contextualize and inquire into Mastery of the non-Mastery, a po -
litical and ethical stance colliding nature and culture: for Michael Taussig, 
MNM is the way to tackle climate change (2020). Wild and feral biolo -
gies in the ecosystem oppose the rationality of modern agriculture, while 
marginalized human-beings, forgotten plants or animals, and discarded 
lands stand out as assemblages , despite the pervasivity of market-econ -
omy and extractivism. If care, ecological reparation and coevolution re -
trace, just like MNM does, methods of production and reproduction of 
human/nature relationship outside the extractivist perspective, I question 
the role of technoscience to help build temporalities of care and ecologi -
cal repair rather than human frames of mastery over nature.
Keywords
ecological reparation; mastery of non-mastery; Xylella fastidiosa; ecologies 
of care; fieldwork; Sicily and Apulia.Corresponding author
Enrico Milazzo
University of Padova, Department 
of Historical and Geographic 
Sciences and the Ancient World
Via del Vescovado 30, 35141, 
Padova, Italy
enrico.milazzo@phd.unipd.it
Royal College of Art, School of 
Architecture
Kensington Gore, South Kensington, 
London SW7 2EU, United Kingdom
enrico.milazzo@rca.ac.uk
Submitted : November 30, 2022
Accepted : August 28, 2024University of PadovaEnrico MilazzoThe Ecological Rhythm of Mastery of Non-Mastery: Disaster, 
Ecological Reparation and Biodiversity from Southern ItalyESSAY
1. Introduction
This paper represents an attempt to position technoscience and its relationship with eco -
logical temporalities based on two ethnographic cases, focused on agricultural, agroecological 
and environmental contemporary matters in the south of Italy. I try to develop a critique of 
the radical human control of nature and its effects, as exemplified by the established methods 
of management of ecological “emergencies”.
I argue that a whole set of bio-security measures and practices are disturbingly familiar with 
those of industrial agriculture.  The underlaying concepts of this critique are what Michael 
Taussig calls “Mastery of the non-mastery” (MNM) and in minor part, following the argumen -
tation as a red-tread, the “matters of care” for how especially Maria Puig Bellacasa depicts it.
The main case discussed is the institutional management of bacteria Xylella fastidiosa  and 
its aftermath in Salento, south of Apulia. At first, I will consider how wildlife, like insects and 
plants, have been under the lenses of Regione Puglia, the Italian Minister of Agriculture and 
European Union, and how these institutions tried to control the bacteria, starting from its 
ecologically-intertwined temporality. Secondly, I trace back the language of rhythmanalisis 
of a few agroecological farmers of Salento, framing their attempts to rebuild a healthy rela -
tionship with the soil: this relation is depicted, by their words, as a temporary and rhythmic 
“attunement ” between the human and non-human.  
I outline a literary review of the critiques toward the policies and the practices recommend -
ed or imposed by a certain technoscientific discourse in Apulia, regarding the outbreak and 
the eradication of bacteria Xylella fastidiosa  since 2012 (Saponari et al. 2013). Concomitant -
ly, a whole ecological reparations movement took place in Salento, attentive and responsive 
not only to the needs and the belongings aroused by the victims of the bacteria, the olive trees, 
but also to all the other components of the ecosystem, expecially the soil (Ciervo 2016). On 
one hand, I will discuss the role of technoscience in the extractivist and productivist approach 
of an agro-industrial entrepreneur. On the other hand, I will demonstrate how essential tech -
noscience is to the ecological reparation of many different agroecological initiatives in Salento. 
The second ethnographic case will inquire into the relationship between technoscience and 
agroecology, following Paola Quatrini and her team’s Project Life Desert-Adapt. In Caltagi -
rone, in the lands of farmer Michele Russo, a whole part of the farm, planted only with Indi -
an figs, went wild. The data gathered on the explosion of biodiversity in 10 years represent the 
reason to think that any strategy or plan to contrast climate change have to hand over a part of 
control to wild and non-mastered non-human relationships.
2. Debates and Research Questions
The paper examines the impact on technoscience and knowledge production when mastery 
of non-mastery (T aussig 2020) and care (Pu ig de la Bellacasa 2017) are taken into account.  
The ethnographic cases are discussed under the hat of relationship between technoscience 
and temporalities, arguing how technoscience can be modeled to be a significant element of 
that ethics that Taussig calls “non-mastery” and how technoscience can participate to matters 
of care. T echnoscience represents the main epistemological and practical device that western 
culture and governments rely on for the management of environment and its troubles (Ed -
wards 2013; Hirsbrunner 2021; Pellizzoni 2015).
With temporalities I refer to:
the human experience of time and the perception of the unfolding of changes (Fabian 2014; 
Bodei 2006; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015; van Aken 2020), as well as to rhythms, understood 44 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 45
as the synchrony or asynchrony of multiple temporalities (Lefebvre 2004; Bonifacio  and 
Vianello 2020 ; Milazzo  and Colella 2021).  (Milazzo and Colella 2022)
My aim is to understand whether and how human and non-human temporalities vary ac -
cording to matters of care and non-compliance with control, and to seek if technoscience might 
be involved in the a-synchronicity I might call ecological failure and global meltdown. There 
is a connection that in this paper might be deemed central between non-mastery and care: in -
terspecies care is also defined by relationships that are not over-determined and hegemonized 
by one of the actors. That’s the measure in which care and non-mastery, inside the ecological 
and feminist approach, I believe should be considered in framing community technoscience.
I take “governance” as that form of policy and decision-making that is based on rules made 
in agreement with international actors, making environmental governance a non-exclusive 
prerogative of the nation state. Moreover, it should be noted that governance also refers to 
those structures and processes permeated by global capitalism, effectively being its own struc -
tural principles. These define environmental problems, even the evident ones, on the basis of 
antagonistic interests and relations of power and domination that, if on the one hand do not 
define the limits of growth at all, on the other hand find in the management of environmental 
problems new fields and terrains for capitalist accumulation (Pellizzoni  et al.  2022). T o this 
historical-materialist reading of environmental governance, one can add the critique of the 
practices of biogovernance, a form of biosecuritarian norms deployed primarily to protect the 
markets of invasive agriculture (Barker and Francis 2021).
The debate I address, is not only related with the current literature on the Xylella  man -
agement, but tries to contribute to the critique that testify the advancement of the eco -
logical thought in social disciplines, especially thanks to the recent publications of co-ed -
ited works by Dimitri Papadopoulos, Maria Puig de la Bellacasa and Natasha Myers from 
one side (2021), and Luigi Pellizzoni and the political ecology network on the other (2022 ; 
2023). These situated research and approaches are here confronted with more philosophical 
and anthropological issues like those of Tim Ingold (2022a) and Elisabeth Povinelli (2016), 
whose production on ecology and science are considered a milestone in contemporary an -
thropology, as well as Michael T aussig (2018 ; 2020), who connects historical-materialism 
perspective with the anthropology of the body and language.
So, my research question is: how relevant is non-control to make time for other temporal -
ities? As Povinelli notes (2016), we need a multitude of temporalities to shake the imaginary. 
This question raises many doubts regarding the epistemological and practical approach of 
technoscience, for it is often considered the indispensable ally of every governmental poli -
cy regarding the management of ecological disruption, including climate change. But what 
would happen if we take into account what Michael T aussig calls Mastery of non-Mastery 
(T aussig 2020)? That is to say, how to do and stay with things without being in control. 
W ould that change our perception of temporalities, even making a new era of constitutively 
different coevolutionary and creation ties begin, to say it with Tim Ingold (2022a)? In this pa -
per I inquire into the relationship between technoscience and non-human temporalities, and 
if and how technoscience will be providing means to cope with the complex and non-produc -
tive temporalities required by ecological repair (Papadopoulos et al. 2022). 
A culture-of-care and an approach as that of agroecology, I will argue in the end, might be able 
to connect the technoscientific resources with that of minor things (Ghelfi and Papadopoulos 
2021), as to let arousing scientific disciplines like microbiology and ecology re-direct narratives 
of climate change, contrast to desertification and policies against biodiversity erosion. 
These ecostories are embedded and linked, for better or worse, with technoscience, and I 
argue in conclusion how we need to sought community technoscience, to reclaim alternative 
technoscientific practices and the right to make diverse ways of cultivating a “practicality ” of 
life within the cycles of the land possible and not persecuted by environmental or biosecurity 
governance (Papadopoulos et al. 2021).
3. Methodologic Approach
The ethnographic field has been conducted since 2018 in Salento, and in Sicily since 2020. 
Many of the concepts and the interviews that lead to this paper have been shared and made 
possible by the joint work of Collettivo Epidemia1. The possibility of sharing knowledge and 
explanations with fellow researchers and friends has been particularly relevant for the field re -
search conducted in Salento, since the discussions were based on notions of phytopathology, 
entomology and other disciplines that neither of us would have dealt with alone successfully. 
The interviews considered here were held between 2019 and 2021 and recorded with the ver -
bal consent of the participants. The ethnography between Sicily and Apulia involved more than 
50 people, among farmers, agronomists and counts an average of two interviews for interlocu -
tor. Anthropology of proximity constitutes the research epistemological framework, for at least 
two reasons. The first questions the distance between researcher and interviewed/observed. A 
relevant issue of the anthropology of distance are the political aspects of co-constructing the 
fieldwork with the interlocutors (Breda 2017; Zanotelli 2017), as an outcome of the attempt to 
reduce hermeneutic distance (Fabian 2014) or epistemological distance (Affergan 1991).
The second reason is whether the anthropology of proximity considers legitimate the “eth -
nography of the neighbour” (Gupta and Ferguson 1997) as a necessary form for the discipline 
to be able to deal with contemporary issues, so it is also an opportunity to reflect on the 
history of anthropological knowledge, tracing its political transformation starting from the 
inadequacy of those theories which, at the origins of the discipline, considered ethnography 
to be meaningful only and exclusively because it was carried out in so-called “exotic” areas and 
inhabited by peoples other than and distant from western culture.
All of the texts cited, whose translation from Italian to English wasn’t available, were translated 
by the author, as well as all of the interviews cited, originally recorded in Italian or local dialects. 
4. Xylella  and the Spittlebug: The Political and Scientific Temporalities
The Salento peninsula is an area at the southeastern tip of Italy, where millions of olive 
trees have been affected by the spread of a quarantine pathogen, Xylella fastidiosa  subsp. Pau -
ca (Saponari et al. 2013). The European Union and the Italian National Research Council 46 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 47
(CNR) in Bari deem Xylella fastidiosa  accountable for the Olive Quick Decline Syndrome 
(OQDS). Almost a year after the bacterium’s detection in Salento, the regional council re -
quested a  “state of emergency ”, so that “extraordinary powers ” could be awarded to the gov -
ernment. The request was supported invoking the bacteria’s “great rapidity and effectiveness 
in spreading” to the trees, “thanks to the vector species Philaenus spumarius L., commonly 
known as ‘spittlebug ’, an indigenous, common, polyphagous and ‘ubiquitous ’ entity”2.
At the beginning of February 2015 the state of emergency was made effective for three 
months and renewed from there until today. Xylella fastidiosa  was, at that point, already pres -
ent in a large part of the region, and the landscape was undergoing relentless transformation: 
historical olive trees orchards, in some cases, quickly depleted into dead trees.
The main concern of the institutions was the hazardous impact of the bacteria on the valuable 
crops in Apulia and the rest of Europe. The emergency paradigm was drawing a specific future 
by taking into account only a designated type of temporalities. As Colella wrote: “Each epistem -
ic culture produces differently not only the horizon within which to place what is necessary to 
know (Knorr-Cetina 1999), but also what becomes necessary to ignore (Böshen et al. 2006 )”3. 
It can be useful to summarize the article I previously published with Colella, where we 
inquire into the wrongdoings of the emergency governments and the mistakes of technosci -
entific experts (Ciervo 2016).  Specifically, we address the temporal processes triggered in the 
scientific official institutes by the finding of Xylella.  The identification by the governmental 
approach of a Xylella  pathosystem was based only on three elements, “diseased plant, bacte -
rium, vector insect”; it constructs and defines the sole the temporalities taken into account. 
Excluding and ignoring every other form of life from the “equation”, the institutions also 
came to refuse their first definition of the crisis, considered a complex of concomitant cause.
On their side, the movements defending the olive trees from the eradications, were chal -
lenging the actions taken by the institutions in order to frame, manage and control the 
emergency. Their counter-narrative was focused on the “actual rhythms” of all the differ -
ent species involved in the ecosystemic depletion that was having place.  The alternative 
researchers and scientists from local competing universities and institutes brought a greater 
number of other species in their observation, studying their relationship with the olive 
trees decline. The activists could easily visualize that at stake there was the ecosystemic 
future of the whole Salento’s environment.
With Colella, we also addressed “the emergency as a way of managing time (Pellizzoni 2020)”4, 
identifying the normative reason for this temporal “dictate ” in the Council Directive 2000/29/
EC5, whose aim is to regulate the presence of quarantine pathogens on European territory. 
Violent and urgent timelines have been directing the actions towards a complex system 
like that of a collapsing environment, simplified and reduced to the pathosystem, made of 
the sole relations between the olive trees, the spittlebug and the bacteria (Bandiera 2020). 
As the activists pointed out for years, the action plan was not to be based on the eradication 
of Xylella, but rather on the timeframes necessary for all life forms in the ecosystem to find 
a new equilibrium6. The main field of confrontation between the institutions/the research -
ers and “Il Popolo degli Ulivi ”7, were the measures prescribed to contrast the diffusion of 
Xylella.  Among the measures, olive tree eradications were seen as policies of land’s death 
and genetic heritage’s loss (Casid 2019). 
Through extensive studies on the timelines of the spittlebug’s reproductive cycles, the 
Italian Civil Protection Department published a “control ” strategy, carried on mainly by 
chemical means, for the entire region (Milazzo  and  Bandiera 2021). The understanding of 
the Philaenus ’s temporality was considered urgent to know8. What stood out to my eyes, as 
the research went forward, was the conviction and pretense of the institution to gain control 
on the forms of life in the landscape, like the “sputacchina”, that at some point was expected 
to be completely under control and defied. 
This unsustainable certainty on the part of the institutions, helped to create a perception 
in the social and environmental movements of the imposition of an ecologically devastated 
future (Davies 2018). The toxicity of which would be derived from the use of chemical drugs 
and herbicides, which refer to : 
a future of pollution, a temporality of devastation and death (Alliegro 2012, Papadopou -
los 2021, Davies 2018, Hoover 2017). The synthetic products functioned as an organizing 
center of temporality: in addition to considering its consequences in the territorial future, 
retrospectively the movements integrated pesticides and chemical herbicides into the aeti -
ology of olive disease  (Collettivo Epidemia 2019; Colella 2019; V acirca  and  Milazzo 2021) . 
(Milazzo and Colella 2022, 106)
The depressing outcome is the contemporary landscape, that has been produced not only 
by Xylella, but also by the attempt to force its exclusion from the ecosystem: the olive trees 
plantations have been either cut up or eradicated, leaving dead lands beneath. Some aban -
doned fields show resurgence, whereas the wild sprouts of the olive trees risk every summer to 
burn for the lack of care of the dried grass.
5. Soil and Climate Change: Ecological Movements Temporalities
From what depicted above, it seems that technoscience did anything to make it worse. It’s not 
exactly like that as I will explain in the last section. Rather, what could have been done differently? 
The bacteria’s temporality becomes more understandable if we consider it and the tempo -
ralities at large as the outcome of interspecies’ co-construction and negotiation. The Xylella ’s 
complexity is, for example, that its temporality can only be understood as intertwined ecosys -
temically with an entity like the “sputacchina”. The failure of the institutions to get ahold of 
this aspect left the movements of farmers and activists alone in trying to repair and attune to 
the non-human rhythms of complex “soil temporalities”.
Activists close to an environmental conception of health connect the toxic history of 
Salento to the present, something that has not been considered by the official institutes of 
research. As Antonio, a traditional olive oil miller, explained, the present crisis is rooted in 
Salento’s “bad past”, when in recent times huge amounts of pesticides were widely used to 
ease the agricultural work, at the expanse of biodiversity and interactions.
As written elsewhere, Antonio exacerbated “the radical simplification” that had largely taken 
hold in Salento, corresponding to the spread of pesticides as a common practice in agricultural 48 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 49
care (T sing et al. 2019; V acirca and Milazzo 2021). One of the main theories circulating among 
the activists was the idea that Xylella  had been so deadly for the olive trees because the roots 
were actually grasped to an already dead and sterile soil. In this perspective, the institutional 
guideline that imposed the use of pesticide to control the bacteria, was jeopardizing the olive 
trees and the whole environment’s capacities to survive the crisis.
Consciousness about soils recently erupted in Salento “thanks ” to the disaster (V acirca and 
Milazzo 2021). The tales from the past started to circulate, about 1960’s kids running after 
cows and horses to collect their droppings, in order to receive praise by their farming parents, 
later merging the precious manure to the stony land, slowly becoming an arable land.
The soil temporality is not just found in the past. On one hand, the past and the soil-mem -
ories have an active role in transforming and re-shaping the present meaning of olive trees; on 
the other, soil temporality also bonds humans and microbiotical life in the future.  Activists 
and microbes are allied in building up fertility and ecosystemic equilibria. This alliance has a 
specific role in depicting the future-scapes of Salento, like other elements that point to the fact 
that soils have been taking a symbolic role in the post-crisis efforts. One of these, is the experi -
mental practices conducted by a farmer-activist of Presicce, Roberto Polo, and micro-biologist 
Giusto Giovannetti (CCR)9, among others, since 2015. Their attempt to save the olive trees 
focused on their microbiome. For that, it was essential to recover and establish the soil’s health 
as the source of the ecosystemic equilibrium, rather than focusing on a single aspect, like the 
killing of the spittlebug or of the bacteria. In their view, a healthy soil would have provided 
the tree with everything needed to resist. The whole status of the tree would have changed for 
the better. A-specific solutions, to be maintained with the hard and slow work on/of the soils, 
fed for many months with the missing fungi and micro-organisms:  the biodiversity of soil’s 
microbiome, they believed, erased by decades of chemical abuses, with time would regenerate.
A similar concept and practice were developed by Cooperativa Karadrà as explained by the 
president Roberta Bruno: 
The average amount of living matter, organic matter, in the soil in southern Salento 
is 1.3%. If there had been a long-term vision, (on the part of the ruling class) the organ -
ic system would be the current system, of all, for a long time. The criterion of pro -
ductivity has been followed and not that of the yield of the land over time … that is why 
I say: what is the point of private property, of being able to decide on lands that should 
be able to produce for millennia? The question arises even more, if there is no long 
term in the projection, you find yourself having to work on an emergency basis … […]  
If you decide that a hectare of land must produce 10 for you, while a hectare of land can 
produce 2 for you, you are doing damage to a collective … and here we come back to the 
discourse on private property, another cornerstone of capitalism and patriarchy. Free -
dom is conceived as that of owning … but freedom is to live free of disease, to think that 
in 20-50-100 years that same area that served me to survive may also serve those who 
follow me. W e work in regenerative agriculture. W e go out and do reclamation. […]  
It is necessary to leave margins to the fields, wild plants grow … we are experimenting, we 
invest annually to improve techniques, to interact with the soil with macerates and materials 
to improve the crop and the yield.  (Aradeo, LE, 10/03/2021)
Cooperativa Karadrà’s experience pushes temporality of soils and of human-soil relations 
to re-establish their synchronicity, outside a paradigm of productivism and extractivism.  Re-
generative agriculture is now a need in Salento, and there is no other option for those who, 
farming without chemicals, have to enrich the soils that have given everything they had. 
Soil-regeneration temporality is particularly relevant for my argument for different reasons: 
first of all, because soil-regenerative practices are the extreme opposite of agro-industry.  Spe-
cifically, agroecological practices with soil are entrusting control to non-human entities, un -
like agro-industry, whose main activity has been, for decades, to wipe out life from soils and 
put the minerals and molecules back in with a wholly human-led process. 
An ethnographic example comes from Gioele, farmer and son-in-law of Roberto Polo, also 
based in Cape Leuca. His ultimate form of militancy for the soils responds to the urge to chip 
the trunks of dry olive trees and leaving it on the ground. This is the only way all of the secular 
energy embedded in the trunks might be given back to the soil, for they might be burnt or worst 
(Lyons 2020)10. Gioele’s practice is another example of how to be in the network of the living, 
where “making time” for the soils means building relationships of care, activating multispecies 
reciprocities between humans, olive trees, insects, soil’s microbes. The temporality that is built 
by all these interdependent forms of life, is one that is negotiated and composed by complex 
and always renewed relationships (Lefebvre 2004 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2015). The meaning of 
Salento’s ecological crisis is embedded in the reciprocity of practices of care, which nonetheless 
are not the outcome of human-led processes. Even if putting the olive trees organic matter back 
in the soils is a human choice made by Gioele, it operates in the absolute dependence of the work 
of an unknown number of microscopic entities, benefitting the biodiversity in its complexity.
I think it’s particularly meaningful that care and attention to soil’s temporality are not only 
able to address and even counter the effect of the Xylella  pathogen, and the related eco-sys -
temic disruption, but also the challenges imposed by global warming. It’s not even essential 
to consider the proliferation of Xylella fastidiosa  as an aspect of climate change – something 
I’d strongly suggest. What is going on in Salento indicates that Bellacasa’s claim “the time to 
care for and better for soils is now”  (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017), is valid to counteract the olive 
trees depletion and against climate change.
This statement by Maria Puig de la Bellacasa shows how important the temporality  of the 
bacteria Xylella fastidiosa  is: to disclose the role of soils and unveil the whole ecosystemic 
course whilst positioning in the present time of plural environmental crisis. Its solution could 
not be nothing else than more-than-human, which does not mean exclusively non-human, as 
humans are still one of the most important part of the “equation”.
In order to be clear: what could have been done differently is on a completely different times -
cape. So, what is the point of criticizing technoscience? W e should not be forced to take side 
between caring relationships and technoscience (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 ; Ghelfi 2015 ; Pap -
adopoulos 2018). We have to upstand outside temporal paradigms as the “emergency” when 
we are trying to cope with climate change and environmental problems, because we need epis -
temic strategies and experimental research trying to compose assemblages, both in knowledge 
production and ecosystemic production (Henning 2015 ; Randazzo and Richter 2021).
The importance of taking time for assemblage and research is a need very well reclaimed by 
organic farming, as Roberta Bruno says:50 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 51
Y ou are investing today and in six months you may have the result. Even in ex -
perimentation and research you have the problem of time. W e are in transition.  
W e should have the honesty to say that we are not able to be productive today, we need to 
be approached by the world of scientific research in the broadest sense, which arrives at new 
equipment, at new patents, but which also arrives at agricultural preparations, at macerates, 
in order to be able to totally replace agro-industry. That is why the worry on our side has 
always been research. Where the fuck is it? I don’t want to react badly when they come to 
me and propose the possible economic correspondence between investment in biodiversity 
and production. (Aradeo, LE, 24/02/2021)
Roberta Bruno is claiming the need and in some ways the right to access research and tech -
noscientific counseling: “minor things”, just like the microorganisms of the soils and margin -
alized biodiversity, would finally see their potential to outsmart agroindustry fulfilled from 
the additional knowledge provided by technoscientific expertise.
6. Coevolution and the Ecosystemic Rhythms: Temporalities of 
Minor Things  
One of the most interesting aspects of the temporalities of the minor things, as soils, bi -
odiversity, or the wild plants, is how unseen and unreplaceable is the work they do. W e also 
should consider that they take not more or less time, but just time, like the search for the 
“salvation olive tre e” shows. 
When the local varieties of olive trees started to deplete, the Ministry and the local entrepre -
neurs, started to worry. G. M. is the most important oil-miller and olive oil producer of Capo 
Leuca, and president of the consortium T erra d’Otranto DOP, whose aim is to publicize the 
local olive oil production. G. M. considered the risk of losing the two historical cultivars , Cellina 
di Nardò and Ogliarola Salentina. Salento’s olive trees plantations could not compete with oth -
er larger-scale economies, so the local entrepreneurs really had to rely on story-telling and dis -
tinctiveness through genetic historical heritage, in order to have a semblance of olive-economy.
Yet, because or with Xylella, even the “Giant of Alliste”, an eight centuries old olive tree 
begins to die. The best solution, for G. M., was “to find another cultivar and autochthonous: 
imagine all the narrative you can build around this cultivar born in Salento!”.  The only and 
poor solution the Regione came up with was to re-plant varieties or hybrids with no historical 
nor narrative value, like Leccino or FS-1711.
G. M. is a different entrepreneur than Bruno from Cooperativa Karadrà. He does not really 
believe in the urgence of organic farming or regenerative agriculture, as compared to con -
ventional farming. He is the kind of agronomist that cut the ties with wild and spontaneous 
plants in the fields, in order to rationalize the farming techniques and maximize the produc -
tion. Yet, when the Xylella crisis destroyed his fields, he had to turn his gaze to the wilderness: 
that’s also where “mastery of non-mastery” gets into the story.
G. M. was looking, like many others, for the “green olive tree in the desert ”. This olive tree 
had to be the outcome of a spontaneous crossbreed, enabled by the wild relationship between 
domesticated and wild olive trees, insects, birds. It also had to have certain characteristics to 
be interesting, like being very productive, not vulnerable by Xylella  or other pathogens, pos -
sibly not requiring too much water and not taking too many years to start producing. 
G. M. mobilized the technoscientific entourage of CNR and Regione Puglia with two 
projects: Xylor and ResiXo12. Both projects aimed to receive photographic reports from cit -
izens of green and productive olive trees, and to collect genetic material of the plants, to be 
PCR-analyzed. The most important information for G. M. was the genomic code: to become 
the “olive tree of salvation ”, the plant had to be a completely new variety, registered by no 
other patent of no other territory in the world.
So what is the idea? A scientific fact, for sure, because it would be the first time that without 
genetic improvement and with random recombination a plant resistant to the bacterium 
is born. That is, with natural genetic improvement, it is in itself the first time that a geno -
type resistant to the Xylella  bacterium is found and productive, and it would be a unicum.  
A scientific fact is also the fact that if I have to make crosses as I am doing, and this inde -
pendently [not with the CNR], between two cultivars for example Leccino and Favolosa, 
two resistant cultivars, the hope is to obtain a super resistant one with better characteristics 
as drupes and oil than the two parental ones. This path can take 20 years. Instead, you search 
for the seedling in the countryside, in the escarpments, in all the uncultivated or abandoned 
land, there are these shrubs that produce, but they are already 15 years old. So, at 15 years old …  
(Gagliano del Capo, LE, 02/03/2021)
So, there is an aspect of temporality and technoscience that the action of wild crossbreed -
ing solved by ecosystemic spontaneous services:
The wild olive is still born from seed, but it is the child of a pollination between wild 
and a cultivar, or between wild. So you have the possibility from a scientific point 
of view to shorten that time needed for genetic improvement by mass selection.  
Nature took care of that over the years when we weren ’t interested, so I ’m going to see the 
fruit of that work of nature today. (Gagliano del Capo, LE, 02/03/2021)
G. M., thanks to something humans oversee, managed to cut the time to find the new 
autochthonous olive tree born in Salento: somebody found, in the only place where it could 
have been found, the olive tree of salvation. On the side of a road, between Presicce and the 
sea, where it would not bother , a wild olive tree has spontaneously grown, to become today the 
new autochthonous variety of Salento, to be reproduced and spread around. 
Is it the kairological event that gives birth to a new co-evolutionary history between olive 
trees and Salento’s people?
Tim Ingold refers in his last book to the Greek word “kairos: the moment that must be 
seized in any process of skilled work, when ‘human action meets a natural process developing 
according to its own rhythm’” (Ingold 2022, 119). He dwells around the fact that any human, 
so to say our G. M., to acquire “fine judgement: of pitch, velocity and direction”, has to make 
certain assumptions and calculations, “calculated as time to target” ( ibid. , 282): 52 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 53
[…] all business is conducted in the plane of the present. It is a world ruled by the computa -
tional logic of the algorithm, which sets out a step-by-step programme for problem solving. 
[…] Maker and materials, going along together, arrive at a solution that emerges only in and 
through their collaboration. Here, attention and response take precedence over computa -
tion and execution. ( ibid. , 282-283)
Attention and response, conducted in the plane of the present, represent the capacity to 
grasp at once “pitch, velocity and direction”. This mode of “attunement ” resembles what 
Henry Lefebrve defines as eurythmia: 
He hears the wind, the rain, storms; but if he considers a stone, a wall, a trunk, he under -
stands their slowness, their interminable rhythm. This object is not inert; time is not set 
aside for the subject. It is only slow in relation to our time, to our body, the measure of 
rhythms. An apparently immobile object, the forest, moves in multiple ways: the combined 
movements of the soil, the earth, the sun. Or the movements of the molecules and atoms 
that compose it (the object, the forest).  (Lefebrve 2004, 20)
In my interpretation, when a human is capable of attuning with the surrounding entities 
and materials in this way, in such moments the foundation of a new coevolutionary tie can 
happen, like a new historical alliance between a variety of olive tree, a territory, and a people. 
Does this mean anything similar for G. M.? Did he experience rythmanalysis or a shared di -
rection, according to the networked connection of the surrounding environment? Does h e 
“question his very modern understanding of speed, and of complexity”, in order to experience 
time as “perceived not chronologically but kairologically: it lies, that is, not in the succession of 
events but in the attunement of attention and response to rhythmic relations” (Ingold 2015, 
89)? The fact that G. M. is buying a patent over this spontaneous olive tree raises many doubts. 
Spontaneous biodiversity showed how rational temporality can be outsmarted by wild re -
lations, and how they are unconceivably precious.  Nonetheless now it risks being re-compre -
hended, following G. M.’s plans, to reconstruct a temporality of single-crop monoculture 
and productivist rhythms. Y et, one might ask why would any technoscience discourse have to 
deal with rhythms and the perception of the environment. Rythmanalysis is actually a “skilled 
revelation of skilled concealment” (T aussig 2020), capable of forecasting by means of prevent -
ing. It works on the long run, on different plans of temporalities, and we have yet to recall that 
events that destroy what we believe durable and given, just like millennial olive trees, actually 
happen. With the global meltdown we are called for re-negotiating coevolutionary ties with 
the etero-specific, as much as we are called to re-build new relations continuously. 
Is rythmanalysis a practice capable of paying attention to those minor things that are 
so dear to the ethic stance Taussig called Mastery of non-Mastery? That is, what capital 
and modern agrarian culture have discarded and marginalized in order to dominate the 
relationship between humans and nature.  The lesser things, such as those techniques and 
forms of life put aside by capitalist productivism, were not interesting because with the 
mastery of modern techniques and the aid of chemistry applied to agriculture, their obser -
vation had in fact lost its importance.
Rythmanalysis and MNM are both crafts  of minor things. During my ethnography in 
Cape Leuca, I saw an intonation and an attunement happen between humans and the sur -
rounding entities by means of photography and painting. An ecosystemic moment was cap -
tured similarly by Jànos Chialà13 (Figure 1), at the end of August 2020. Yet, the flaming olive 
tree recalls the same anthropomorphized form of the olive tree that Marco “T erraiolo ” used in 
his artistic composition five years earlier, when the epidemic was only at its begins ( Figure 2).
Rythmanalysis here merges the perception of the disaster of the environment with its harsh 
materialization. The fire is the result of an inexorable and generalized desiccation, witness to the 
overwhelming impoverishment of ecosystem conditions (Collettivo Epidemia 2020 ) of ecology.
The painting and the picture both reveal a crucified olive tree, an Olive-Christ with red blood 
bleeding: the present and the future are united by the painter’s gestures. It is a domain of lan -
guage, MNM, that alone allowed Marco to foresee the image of the present time and to embody 
it, through the aesthetic and artistic perception of the present, past and future temporalities of 
ecology. Taussig would argue that the painter’s gestures are somehow a kind of “skilled revelation 
of the skilled concealment”. Is he, thanks to his hands and art as Lefevbre suggests, transforming 
beforehand “everything into presences, including the present, grasped and perceived as such; 
integrating these things – […] these trees – in a dramatic becoming, in an ensemble full of mean -
ing, transforming them no longer into diverse things, but into presences”  (Lefebvre 2004, 23) ?
W e don’t observe here a mere overlapping between the picture and the painting, but, in -
stead, we recognize the movement gathered in a simultaneous perception of all the temporal 
difference that has occurred over these five years, and of the realization of a destiny that was 
already perceived and foreseeable as inexorable (Lefebvre 2004; Bonifacio and Vianello 2020). 
Figure 1. Figure 2.
Janòs Chialà ©, 2021. =a crocifissione degli ulivi , T erraiolo, 2015.54 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 55
Sometimes loose coevolutionary ties are still so meaningful that they leave traces on our 
culture. In Salento, agroecological farmers asked themselves at what stage our civilization 
is in its relationship with olive trees. The millenary relationship is knowing, especially in 
Salento, a deep transformation. Symbolically, the grafting of the olive tree with the branch -
es of the “olivastro ” (the wild olive tree found on the side of the road), recalls the kairolog -
ical moment that Saint Paul, the most important Christian Saint in Salento, describes as 
the moment everything changes. In the letters to the Romans, Saint Paul attributes to the 
grafting of the wild olive tree the meaning of a new history for the people of God. Christ 
is, no less, embodied in the wild olive tree of salvation, grafted with a kairological gesture 
into the love of God (Lettieri, forthcoming ). This grafting seizes the moment14 and simul -
taneously attunes history on new temporalities, that of the catastrophic expectation of the 
apocalypse and the messianic return of Christ. 
This gesture also severs the history and the time of Israel from that of Christianity. Y et, 
what is most meaningful of the Olive-Christ, is the election of the minor: the grafting of the 
wild olive tree is actually no more than the rejection of “the powerful, of the elected, of the 
noble, and as such the acceptance into the love of god of the ignorant, the marginalized, the 
pagans, the weak”. Already once, a new salvation coming from the wild, as Saint Paul says, 
founded a new epoch.
7. Mastery of Non-Mastery and the Wilding
At the antipodes of G.  M.’s actions and position, there are Cosimo T erlizzi ’s fields in the 
countryside of Carovigno, in northern Salento. There, inter-species care relationship and the 
decentralization of the human from the ecosystem become the driving force behind the criti -
cism of the agricultural-social history Salento.
Filmmaker-artist Cosimo T erlizzi set up an atelier in the middle of an olive grove. Combin -
ing agronomic, artistic and relational practices, in the Lamia Santolina, the ecosystemic com -
plexity is accompanied and increased. Cosimo, coherent with Roberto Polo’s microorganic 
approach on soils, enhances the biodiversity under the olive trees to refrain the attacks from 
the spittlebug. He started to take care of the life forms in his olive grove, inviting more than 
400 species to join and relocating to the centre of his field, including around 200 officinal 
Mediterranean shrubs that had been forced onto the roadside. “I got the plants either from 
the roadside or from markets. There is this gentleman who sells frayed, ugly plants, they are 
the best there is”. He put what was marginalized back to the center.
Sympathy and compliance with the “wild ” do not come with a drastic refusal of technosci -
ence. Cosimo, as Roberto, decided to avoid the chemicals prescribed by ministerial regula -
tions to destroy the vegetation on which the spittlebug reproduces. Y et, both of them entrust -
ed and experimented the trials coming from microbiological research.  They had to cope with 
microbiology’s “inefficency ”, compared to the official science’s mastery of nature.
Wilderness, micro-organisms and sensoriality seem to share the same marginalized position 
in the productivist system of value: they are ignored things.  Puig de la Bellacasa argues that the 
ignored things are the most important and care-taking forces of reproduction of life15 (Puig de 
la Bellacasa 2017). Biodiversity and soils, are not “in the horizon within which to place what is 
necessary to know (Knorr-Cetina 1999), but also what becomes necessary to ignore (Böshen 
et al. 2006)” (Milazzo and Colella 2022).
One should certainly not make the mistake the spread of biodiversity and soil-fertility as 
simple natural processes, they are anything but easy. Probably that’s why interspecies rela -
tions write their own philosophy of evolution outside extractivism and determine health -
ier environments as wholes. As neglected, they embody today the ethics of the Mastery of 
non-mastery. Just as industrialization and agro-industry, the plan of actions developed against 
Xylella  by the University of Bari and other research institutes had the worst impact to the 
unseen plants and insect “outlaws”.  
Minor things are what constitute the base of the Mastery of non-mastery, and the unseen is 
often called upon by Michael T aussig to depict it, just like in Emily Dickinson’s poem: 
It was a common night,  
Except the dying; this to us  
Made nature different  
W e noticed smallest things,  
—Things overlooked before16
Moving to Sicily and to another case of technoscientific approach to agroecology, Paola 
Quatrini was thinking about “things overlooked before” when she proposed with other col -
leagues the Desert-Adapt project. I met Paola with T ommaso La Mantia and Raphael Bueno 
in the fields in Caltagirone17. They were monitoring an hectar that was let wild.  As Paola 
herself describes the project :
The Life Desert-Adapt has as main objective to experiment with land management that 
somehow reverse trends like desertification, especially in southern Europe. […] The project 
is tested in ten farms partners. These are farms that tell us their problems, their limitations, 
their difficulties. This project brings farmers together, puts together technical researchers so 
this adaptation model is really a farm planning, shared between landowning farmers who 
experience on their own skin, on their land. The project includes 19 partners, part of which 
are technical research and development and parts are companies, farms and municipalities.  
(Building BRIDGES, Suoli, clima, biodiversità: Come adattarsi alla complessità naturale, 
culturale, scientifica࢏  ,8/06/2022)
In this socio-technical environment, they decided substantially to experiment on Michele 
Russo’s  land. “Anything that diversifies a cultivated environment results in better ecosystem 
stability” says T ommaso La Mantia to deepen on the methods they embrace:  
Let’s start at the end: all the different ways of declining agriculture as an alternative to industrial 
agriculture are nothing more than a way of trying to reduce as much as possible the distance 
between the natural and cultivated-man-made environment. […]  all things that are in antith -
esis with conventional agriculture, that what operates is basically a process of simplification 56 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 57
of the ecosystem, to the point of reducing the relationship simply between soil and culture, 
where the soil is seen as a substrate, more or less inert, that you just have to provide it with re -
sources that then have to be transferred to the plant. And everything is a simplification process.  
I always say when the farmer does careful farming, he must be an educated farmer who 
must necessarily interact a lot with the ecosystem, he must know the plants, the diseases, the 
balances, he must know when it is necessary to intervene, always aiming to intervene as little 
as possible.  And when it is not necessary to intervene. On the other hand, the farmer who 
applies industrial agriculture is a farmer who often does things absolutely on a calendar, 
and this was a normal agricultural practice until my agronomic training, even. The practice 
of calendar treatments was the norm. But he is also a farmer who also has to contend with 
increasingly important technological facts. (Palermo, 14/03/2022)
In the experimental fields they measured the impact and the results of the “alternative ” 
way of farming.
If we have to measure, we must necessarily refer to quantitative parameters. W e must be able 
to measure these ecosystem services with certain parameters, and give rewards according to the 
achievement of certain ecosystem services. How many pairs of birds are there in a hectare of maize? 
Zero with chemistry. So, chemically cultivated apple trees zero birds. Now cultivated with an 
integrated fruit-growing system with nest boxes, there are 10 pairs of birds, it is an achieved value.  
Then there ’s the problem that the “torcicolli ” go and block the irrigation pipes, and so 
what? W e ’ll have to find a solution and live with it, because it ’s not really simple, we have 
now increased biodiversity in our countryside because there are pigeons … parrots, except 
that parrots are aliens, but then you have to cover everything because the pigeons eat the 
vegetables. So, this aspect here is also a “romantic ” view, birds have increased, yes it is a 
parameter, I am happy, I am an ornithologist, but what is the reflection on agriculture, they 
often cause or are problems. So yes I have to increase, but then I have to find solutions to 
live with them, and in this sense alternative agriculture to conventional agriculture must 
continually come to terms with new problems and solve them, find ways to live with them. 
(Palermo, 14/03/2022)
The measuring of ecosystemic services happens in order to verify and certify who and 
where something is going toward a richer ecosystemic equilibrium, even in an economically 
productive environment. Because, concludes La Mantia: “Yes, we have to have methods, how 
to say objective, I use this term in inverted commas, scientifically, to be able to say that one 
agricultural system is better than another” .
Yet, on the fields of Michele Russo, there was something else that got the attention of the 
scientific entourage. It is the abandonment of a 30 years old Indian Figs conventional crop, 
for a period of time that can’t be earlier than 15 years, as memory and the spontaneous plants 
tell to Michele. The aim of the observation of the abandoned crop is briefly described by the 
farmer himself, Michele Russo, speaking in the forest fluorescent of incredible diversity of 
plants, smells and colors:
It was a conventional Indian fig orchard, the plants are 32-years-old, the land was perpetu -
ally tilled.The abandonment allowed me to observe what the renaturalisation process of a 
Indian fig grove is. The Indian fig behave as a primary succession plant, I was able to observe 
the other plants what spaces they manage to find, so it was my main observation point. What 
was happening here, we replicated on the other side. Clearly, always bearing in mind pro -
duction, because on this side it is almost zero, or at least the figs are complicated to pick. But 
there are other things, asparagus, mushrooms, here there was a sea of “gambesecche ”, mead -
ows looked white. What I invite you to observe is the speed with which the maquis plants, 
trees and shrubs are growing in a Indian figs orchard. In an orange grove abandoned after 10 
years does not give the same results. The Indian fig for a whole series of concauses, which we 
will summarise as the Indian-fig-effect, allows the plants to do well when they are small, and 
the birds come to sow and they are protected in a suitable microclimate and grow quickly.  
This oak tree that you are touching I don ’t think is more than 8 years old. Because when we 
abandoned it there was nothing. I should show you the pictures because you can ’t believe it.  
(Caltagirone, CA, 02/04/2022)
Wilderness showed a pattern to follow to contrast desertification with the most efficient 
natural method, “with the aim to increasingly reduce every kind of input”. This means to 
let the forces of nature do what they do, with their time, which is the re-naturalization of 
an environment and the building of a more diversified ecosystemic equilibrium, observing 
from a lateral position. Also here, a new variety of peach is born thanks to wild crossbreeding, 
showing to be more resistant to many illnesses of this crop.
One of the most interesting aspects is that this wasn’t even the specific aim of the project. 
Yet, being close to the wild processes showed a new way of proceeding against desertification, 
whereas until now thousands of trees have been planted without care just to die in desertify -
ing land. Now to see that the naturalization coming after a fig orchard is abandoned is so rich 
and spontaneous, gives direction until now unexplored by technoscience or governments, 
something that they will not oversee from now on, since it’s being measured and tested.
I introduced to professor La Mantia the concept of mastery of non-mastery by Michael 
Taussig: “You say we are the controllers, because otherwise it ’s a forest. But there ’s mastery 
and one side and on the other side there ’s non-mastery. Isn ’t there the capacity for mastery 
of non-mastery? Is there the capacity to be in a relationship of non-mastery with something 
and also be OK with it?”
T.: “Yes, but that ’s what in this really organic or sustainable farming actually happens, we 
don ’t have total control of all the biological parameters, but it ’s not completely like that. 
When we talk about a cultivated field, we are talking about a field in which we decide 
everything that happens in there. We can be aware that we want what happens in that field 
to be as close as possible to what happens in a natural environment, but we are the control -
lers. Yet, I don ’t control the biological tiny parameters, insects, parasitoids, I don ’t control 
them I leave them that is to say to free evolution knowing that in the end free evolution  is an 
advantage for me.  (Palermo, 14/03/2022)58 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 59
Technoscience and agroecology in this project merge together against desertification with 
the unexpected help of un-controlled wild relationships. Michele Russo intervened against the 
Ailanto, an alien-invasive species. But at some point, he didn’t cut them anymore, because the 
invasiveness was self-controlled in favor of wider forms of life. Minor things, as La Mantia and 
Emily Dickinson put it, are for T aussig the place for Mastery of non-Mastery. Proximity, as well 
and a somatic attention to the ecosystem wellness and balance, have been fundamental in pro -
ducing a new path in scientific research and farming practices against environmental depletion. 
8. Conclusion
T emporality for agriculture is at the same time about “patience ” and “hurry ”, when is time 
to harvest and the weather is uncertain (T eti 2018). The same has to be valid for technosci -
ence in order to help in :
our journey through the death-space of planetary demise. It makes not for an absence but 
for a new sense of connectedness, not just new connections but a new quality of connect -
edness […]. Confronted by the specter of planetary meltdown, I am aware not just of a 
connection but of a sense of connection attentive to “things overlooked” as a step toward 
MNM (essential, I assume, to helping us out of the present pickle) .
Do the “olive tree of salvation ” born from misery and misjudgment, on the side of the road, 
or even the new variety of peaches and the wild oaks, mushrooms, olives and blackberry that 
now inhabit a previously abandoned land, account for :
the making of mythologies or rather meta-mythologies or post-mythologies bound to W al -
ter Benjamin’s idea of “reactivation of mythic force,” as when he writes, “Capitalism was a 
natural phenomenon with which a new dream-filled sleep came over Europe, and through 
it a reactivation of mythic force.”  (T aussig 2020, 56-57) ?
More than human temporalities call for different co-evolutionary ties: time and new sense 
of connectedness, for Michael Taussig, resonate with mythic force, that of “Benjamin’s idea 
of ‘the dialectical image ’ charged with ‘the time of the now ’, where past and present coalesce 
with the rise and the fall of the sun” (T aussig 2020, 57).
Is this ethnographic parade anything more than my endorsement to what Maria Puig de la Bel-
lacasa unravels for technoscience and care? Relationships of mutual care between soil, humans 
and any living species, might become a viable alternative of reformulation of technoscience. W e 
need to be capable to move away from a productivist perspective, “from tensions in soil science 
around the imperative of progress to conceptions of soil as living, and to related practices of 
engagement with soil as a food web of which humans are part”  (Puig de la Bellacasa 2017, 205) . 
T o live with the body in climate change, to live the proximity with non-human forms of 
life, to look and even search for ignored things is to enhance connectedness that produce 
more-than-human temporalities and more-than-human knowledge.
Notes
1 Collettivo Epidemia was founded in 2018 precisely with the people sharing an ethnographic field or 
journalist investigation in Salento in that period. After that spontaneous experience of research together, 
we became a larger group with diversified interests, but a common editorial project and research approach.
2 Regione Puglia, deliberazione della Giunta Regionale n. 1842 del 5 settembre 2014, “Richiesta 
dichiarazione stato di emergenza fitosanitaria e conseguente emanazione di specifiche norme per la era -
dicazione e il contenimento delle infezioni di Xylella fastidiosa  e adempimenti conseguenti”.
3 Cfr.: Milazzo and Colella (2022). 
4 ibid .
5 2000/29/EC is available at this link: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ ALL/?uri=CEL -
EX:32002L0089 .
6 Cfr.: Milazzo and Colella (2022): 
With the subsequent declaration of a state of emergency in 2015, a rearticulation of tempo -
ralities between technoscience and decision-making of crucial importance takes place. The 
time of political decision-making runs much faster than the time required to reach a tech -
no-scientific consensus (Collins and Evans 2002; 2010). The “pragmatics” of political action 
strategically decides to ignore some aspects to the detriment of others (Mcgoey 2012). In this 
case, it decides to focus on the triad consisting of pathogen, vector and host, leaving out the 
other multi-species relationships, secondary to what was urgent to know at the time. Re -
search on the Xylella fastidiosa  bacterium in Europe is placed within such emergency frames.
7 The authors refer to an organisation of activists called “Il Popolo degli Ulivi”. It is a movement that 
has brought together different associative realities from civic and political activism and environmental -
ism. A galaxy of movements that with some of the exponents of research discussed their vision of the 
pathology (Colella et al. 2019). The Olive Tree People was officially born on 29 April 2015. They don’t 
exhaust the scenario of protesters against the phytosanitary measures, but represent a significative case.
8 The knowledge around the reproductive cycles of the spittlebug was also necessary in order to “op -
timise” the use of pesticides.
9 Centro Culture Sperimentali di Aosta.
10 Unscrupulous and concealed companies grab thousands of olive trees, take them to burn in bio -
mass power plants, leaving nothing but empty holes on the lands. Gioele travels all along south Salento 
to chip the olive trees and regenerate the land, hoping to arrive before fire or power plants’ emissaries.
11 “We will lose that added value as a cultivar because prices will drop. If I don’t have the narrative, 
I won’t be able to get that price, that price differential compared to a Spanish production – because I 
don’t have the territory to compete!”. (Gagliano del Capo, LE, 02/03/2021)
12 http://www.infoxylella.it/xylor/ .
13 The full reportage, “The Ghosts of the Landscape”, is available here: http://www.postphotogra -
phy.eu/portfolio/photos/the-ghosts-of-the-landscape/ .
14 Exactly in the bodily sense Ingold means it: kairos , referring not only to the moment that must 
be seized but also to the attention and responsiveness necessary to be able to do so. It is a gesture that 
is foundational of genetic inheritance, and yet it is nothing less than a technique of the body (Mauss).60 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 61
15 Aesthetically, also the rythmanalytic present body of the Olive-Christ recalls the figure of the out -
law, the marginalized who has nothing to give.
16 Dickinson, Emily (1996) The Last Night That She Lived , in “The Selected Poems of Emily Dickin -
son”, New Y ork, Modern Library, p. 207.
17 They are professors and researchers in microbiology and agroecology at University of Palermo. The 
fields were Michele Russo’s, one of the farmers participating to the Desert-Adapt project.
References
Affergan, Francis (1991) Esotismo ed Alterità , Milano, Ugo Mursia Editore.
Bandiera, Michele (2020) Biosicurezza nella Puglia del disseccamento , in “GEI – Geotema”, Supple -
mento 2020, pp. 97-107.
Barker, Kezia and Francis, Robert A. (eds.) (2021) Routledge Handbook of Biosecurity and Invasive 
Species , London and New Y ork, Routledge .
Bodei, Remo (2006) Piramidi di tempo: Storie e teoria del dejà vu , Bologna, Il Mulino.
Bonifacio, V alentina and Vianello, Rita (2020) Il ritmo dellࣝesperien͛a ࢊieci  casi etnografici per pensare 
i conψitti ambientali , Padova, CLEUP.
Breda, Nadia (2017) La macerazione sul campo e il sapere critico desiderabile , in “Università Critica ”, a 
cura di General Intelect , ottobre, pp. 41-51.
Casid, Jill H. (2019) Necrolandscaping , in Jens Andermann, Lisa Blackmore and Dayron Carrillo Morell 
(eds.), Natura: Environmental Aesthetics After Landscape , Zurich, Think Art Diaphanes.
Ciervo, Margherita (2016) The olive Ȣuicȅ decline syndrome ࢳHW[ ࢴdiΥusion in Apulia Xegion ࢊAn 
apparent contradiction according to the agricultural model , in “Belgeo ”, 4. 
Colella, Christian, Carradore, Roberto and Cerroni, Andrea (2019) Problem Setting and Problem 
Solving in the Case of Olive Quick Decline Syndrome in Apulia, Italy: A Sociological Approach , in 
“Phytopathology ”, 109(2), pp. 187-199.
Collettivo Epidemia (2019) Epidemia 01: Gli Ulivi di Puglia Al Tempo della Xylella , Roma.
Collettivo Epidemia (2020) Epidemia 02: L’urlo dell’Asino  di Michael Taussig e altre storie da Taranto , Roma.
Davies, Thom (2018) Toxic Space and Time: Slow Violence, Necropolitics, and Petrochemical Pollution , 
in “Annals of the American Association of Geographers ”, 108(6), pp. 1537-1553.
Edwards, Paul N. (2013) A V ast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of Global 
W arming , Cambridge (MA), MIT Press.
Fabian, Johannes (2014) Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object , New Y ork, Columbia 
University Press.
Ghelfi, Andrea (2015) The science commons: Network production, measure and organization in technscience  
[PhD Dissertation], Leicester, University of Leicester.
Ghelfi, Andrea and Papadopoulos, Dimitris (2021) Ecological Transition: What It Is and How to Do It: 
Community Technoscience and Green Democracy , in “Tecnoscienza”, 12(2), pp. 13-38.
Gupta, Akhil and Ferguson, James (eds.) (1997) Anthropological Locations: Boundaries and Grounds of 
a Field Science , Berkeley, University of Berkeley Press .
Henning, Brian G. (2015) Riders in the Storm: Ethics in an Age of Climate Change , Winona (MN), 
Anselm Academic .
Hirsbrunner, Simon D. (2021) A New Science for Future: Climate Impact Modeling and the Quest for 
Digital Openness , Bielefeld, transcript V erlag.
Ingold, Tim (2015) The Life of Lines , London and New Y ork, Routledge .
Ingold, Tim (2022a) Evolution without Inheritance: Steps to an Ecology of Learning , in “Current 
Anthropology ”, 63(suppl. 25), pp. S32-S55.
Ingold, Tim ( 2022b ) Imagining for Real: Essays on Creation, Attention and Correspondence , London 
and New Y ork, Routledge.
Lefebvre, Henri (2004) Rhythmanalysis: Space, Time, and Everyday Life , London and New Y ork, Con -
tinuum.
Lettieri, Gaetano ( forthcoming ) Materia mistica: Spirito, corpi, segni nei cristianesimi delle origini , 
Milano, Mondadori.
Lyons, Kristina M. (2020) Vital Decomposition: Soil Pratictioners and Life Politics , Durham (NC), 
Duke University Press. 
Milazzo, Enrico and Bandiera, Michele (2021) Visceral Ecologies in the Borderland: Soils and Care from 
Hlive Trees, ࣝecatomb in [alento , in “SITES: New Series ”, 18(2), pp. 1-25.
Milazzo, Enrico and Colella, Christian  (2022) ࣝ=ࣚemergen͛a la sentivi ovunȢue ࢊࣛTemporalitǍ e onfini 
della Tecnoscien͛a e della ura nellࣝepidemia di xylella fastidiosa in [alento , in “Antropologia”,  9(2), 
pp. 97-121.
Papadopoulos, Dimitris (2018) Experimental Practice: Technoscience, Alterontologies, and More-than-
Social Movements,  Durham (NC), Duke University Press.
Papadopoulos, Dimitris, Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria and Myers, Natasha (eds.) (2021) Reactivating Ele -
ments: Substance, Actuality and Practice from Chemistry to Cosmology , Durham, Duke University Press.
Papadopoulos, Dimitris , Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria and T acchetti, Maddalena (eds.) (2022) Ecological 
Reparation: Xepair, Xemediation and Xesurgence in [ocial and Environmental onψict , Bristol 
(UK), Bristol University Press.
Pellizzoni, Luigi (2015) Ontological Politics in a Disposable W orld: The New Mastery of Nature , Farnham, 
Ashgate .
Pellizzoni, Luigi (2020) The Time of Emergency: On the Governmental Logic of Preparedness , in “Socio -
logia Italiana – AIS Journal of Sociology ”, 16, pp. 39-54.
Pellizzoni, Luigi (2023) avalcare lࣝingovernabileࢊॊCatura, neoliberalismo e nuovi materialismi , Nocera 
Inferiore, Orthotes.
Pellizzoni, Luigi, Leonardi, Emanuele and Asara, Viviana (eds.) (2022) Handbook of Critical Environ -
mental Politics , Cheltenham, Edward Elgar .
Povinelli, Elizabeth A. (2016) Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism , Durham (NC), Duke Uni -
versity Press .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María (2015) Baȅing Time for [oil ࢊTechnoscientific $uturity and the Uace of are , 
in “Social Studies of Science ”, 45(5), pp. 691-716.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María (2017) Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human W orlds , 
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press .
Puig de la Bellacasa, María (2019) Xe࣊animating soils ࢊTransforming human࣊soil aΥections through science, 
culture and community , in “The Sociological Review Monographs ”, 67(2), pp. 391-407.
Randazzo, Elisa and Richter, Hannah (2021) The Politics of the Anthropocene: Temporality, Ecology, and 
Indigeneity , in “International Political Sociology ”, 15, pp. 293-312 .62 Milazzo
Tecnoscienza. 2025. 16(1) 63
Saponari, Maria, Boscia, Donato, Nigro, Franco, Martelli, Giovanni P. (2013) Identification of CA 
sequences related to Xylella fastidiosa  in oleander, almond and olive trees exhibiting leaf scorch symp -
toms in Apulia (southern Italy) , in “Journal of Plant Pathology’, 95(3), pp. 668.
T aussig, Michael (2018) Palma Africana , Chicago, University of Chicago Press .
T aussig, Michael (2020) Mastery of non-Mastery in the age of Global Meltdown , Chicago and London, 
University of Chicago Press .
T eti, Vito (2018) Stone into Bread , Montreal, Guernica .
T sing, Anna L., Mathews, Andrew S. and Bubandt, Nils (2019) Patchy Anthropocene: Landscape struc -
ture, multispecies history, and the retooling of anthropology: An introduction to supplement 20 , in 
“Current Anthropology”, 60(S20), pp. S186-S197.
V acirca, Chiara and Milazzo, Enrico (2021) Living with the Pathogen: Representations, aspirations, and 
practices of are in valueࣝs reorgani͛ation of post࣊disaster [alento , in “Fuori Luogo: Rivista di Socio -
logia del T erritorio, Turismo, T ecnologia”, 9(1), pp. 186-198.
van Aken, Mauro (2020) Campati per aria , Milano, Elèuthera.
Zanotelli, Francesco (2017) ifendere lࣝetnografia Ǩ difendere la societǍ , in “Università Critica ”, a cura 
di General Intelect , ottobre, pp. 135-146.
