Mobilities
ISSN: 1745-0101 (Print) 1745-011X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rmob20
The moral work of timing mobilities: ‘limited
insight’ and truncated worth in municipal traﬃc
management
Susann Wagenknecht
To cite this article: Susann Wagenknecht (2020) The moral work of timing mobilities: ‘limited
insight’ and truncated worth in municipal traﬃc management, Mobilities, 15:5, 694-707, DOI:
10.1080/17450101.2020.1802105
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17450101.2020.1802105
Published online: 04 Sep 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 393
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rmob20
The moral work of timing mobilities: ‘limited insight’ and 
truncated worth in municipal traffic management
Susann Wagenknecht
Institute of Sociology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany
ABSTRACT
Timing urban traffic is moral work. In this paper, I show how the moral work 
that goes into timing traffic lights addresses both industrial, civic, and 
domestic worth in ways that cut generalization short. Relying upon ethno -
graphic fieldwork, this paper focuses on how municipal traffic engineering 
maintains traffic lights and handles complaints about them. Steeped in 
moral ambiguity, the paper argues, municipal traffic engineering resorts 
to singularizing complaints, truncating worth, and working with careful 
dedication from one contestable compromise to the next. With this argu -
ment, the paper contributes to an understanding of the temporal and moral 
orderings at stake in adjusting and justifying urban mobilities.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 8 January 2020  
Accepted 17 July 2020 
KEYWORDS 
Traffic infrastructure; orders 
of worth; valuation; care; 
complaint; public 
administration; traffic lights
Introduction
On a Thursday in December 2015, shortly after 9 o’clock in the morning, municipal traffic engineers and 
technical personnel are having their breakfast break, cramped together on chairs that they carried to 
the office of a veteran colleague. The office windows offer a view upon a town struggling with the 
decline of the German steel industry. As we are sipping coffee, the conversation shifts from the city’s 
budget for bicycle lanes (small) to Dutch traffic infrastructure (progressive). In amused tone, one of the 
municipal employees describes a particularly stunning roundabout that sits – or rather, floats – on top 
a signalized intersection, enabling cyclists and pedestrians to cross the roads without having to stop at 
traffic lights. ‘Hovenring, I think it’s called, you should google it’, he nods to me. The hovenring, 
I understand, is the perfect compromise between efficiency, equality, and safety. He is quick to add, 
however, that the hovenring could never be built in this city; too steep are its hills, too narrow its roads, 
too tight its finances. The Netherlands is where municipal employees like to go for summer holidays; it 
is a dreamy ideal rather than a blueprint (fieldnotes, 10 December 2015).
Still, the powerlessness that transpires in this piece of conversation stands in stark contrast to the 
powerful ways in which municipal traffic engineers in this city, too, are able to shape urban 
mobilities. As I will show, they do so not so much by planning and implementing grand designs 
but by carefully maintaining existing facilities (Mol 2008). Recent research on maintenance and repair 
has foregrounded the sophisticated material efforts that go into the operation of infrastructures, and 
traffic infrastructures in particular (Henke 1999; Graham and Thrift 2007; Harvey and Knox 2012; 
Denis and Pontille 2015; Roche 2017). In this paper, however, I will focus specifically on the time and 
the ‘moral work’ (Blok and Meilvang 2015, 21) that it takes to keep public infrastructures operating – 
and to keep them public: How to ensure urban mobility for everyone when everyone’s mobilities are 
conflicting?
CONTACT Susann Wagenknecht 
 Susann.wagenknecht@tu-dresden.de
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.MOBILITIES                                                    
2020, VOL. 15, NO. 5, 694–707 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17450101.2020.1802105
© 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
Municipal traffic engineers are involved in ongoing struggles about urban ‘mobility justice’ 
(Sheller 2018). To study the moral work of traffic engineers at town hall, I examine how they justify 
and adjust, adapt and fine-tune the city’s traffic lights and their algorithmic timing. Traffic lights are 
the pacemakers that enforce patterns of stop and go. They have long been electrified – what Martin 
Dodge and Rob Kitchin call ‘code/space’ is nothing new to them as their digital algorithms have 
helped continuously to re-create ‘sociospatial relations’ in the urban Global North since at least the 
1960s (Dodge and Kitchin 2005, 172).1 Unambiguously alternating between prohibition and release, 
traffic lights are the epitome of authoritative clarity. But their clear-cut sequences of red and green 
rely upon overlain patterns of valuation and multiple orders of worth (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 
see also Potthast 2017).
Immersed in the nitty-gritty of traffic infrastructure, municipal engineers are challenged to answer 
to demands for justification as they keep traffic running. To do so, they tinker with seconds, fudge 
solutions, and find middle grounds. They care for flow and safety, and are criticized harshly for not 
doing enough to serve citizens at the same time. They trade in visions but know from excruciating 
experiences what Susan L. Star and Karen Ruhleder formulate so succinctly: ‘Infrastructure does not 
grow de novo’ (Star and Ruhleder 1996, 113). Traffic infrastructure is difficult to change yet easy to 
complain about. In handling complaints, I will argue, municipal traffic engineering relies upon 
singularization – truncating complainants’ worth and forging one preliminary traffic solution at 
a time.
Ethnographic work, municipal work
To examine the moral work of municipal traffic engineering, I take my cues from Baszanger and 
Dodier (1997) ‘combinative ethnography’ and weave a tapestry of fieldnotes whose analytic patterns 
are composed of contrast and variation. I draw upon the ethnographic fieldwork2 I have conducted 
with municipal traffic engineers and technical planners working for a German city of about 100,000 
inhabitants – a city just large enough to employ an engineer, Alex,3 dedicated solely to its 150 traffic 
light installations. Between the end of 2015 and summer 2017, I visited the field over 30 times, often 
for a full workday, to shadow Alex and his colleagues at town hall’s Department for Roads and Traffic.
The city’s traffic infrastructure is not what many would wish for. It operates at capacity, with the 
city center’s roads freighted beyond capacity at rush hour. For a German city this size, its (privatized) 
public transport is poor and the network of cycle tracks is underdeveloped. Still, over the course of 
my fieldwork, I have come to appreciate the dedication with which Alex and most of his colleagues 
go about their work. Arriving with both doctoral degree and bike helmet in hands, however, I have 
implicitly assumed the role of a critic (Balmer et al. 2015). The hovenring episode recounted in the 
introduction to this paper hence has to be read through the specific positionality I assumed in the 
field. The hovenring is assumed to cater to my sensibility for the needs of cyclists and pedestrians and 
what they perceived as my attachment to a ‘green’ future (Lafaye and Thévenot 1993). Yet the 
comments that frame the hovenring are meant to justify the status quo, educating me about the 
technical, topographical, and financial requirements for building roundabouts.
During field visits, I focused on the design, installation, and maintenance of traffic lights. In 
engineering theory, traffic lights can be designed by the rule book, strictly following traffic law, 
industry standards and the instructions laid out in the engineering handbooks and national guidelines. 
Relevant for the design of traffic lights are Richtlinien für Lichtsignalanlagen (RiLSA) and Handbuch für 
Bemessung von Straßenverkehrsanlagen (HBS), handbooks that define the formulae by which ‘optimal’ 
traffic solutions can be calculated. Optimality, in turn, is defined as the highest possible level of ‘quality’ 
that roads, crossroads or roundabouts can achieve. It defines the highest quality level (level A) as 
a state in which ‘the individual freedom of mobility of traffic participants is almost not compromised’ 
and ‘traffic flows freely’ (FGSV 2015, 7). The lowest quality level (level F) is defined as a state in which 
‘the individual freedom of mobility of traffic participants is permanently compromised’ and ‘functional 
capability is not given’ (ibid.). The formulae that the HBS offers for the design of traffic lights are MOBILITIES
 695
calculations of maximum throughput per hour. These calculations require precise traffic data, parti -
cularly about the number of motorized vehicles in a direction. Yet in engineering practice, these data 
are hard to come by. In this city, the traffic engineers try to do their best in a poorly datafied and little- 
controlled environment (cf. Struhkamp, Mol, and Swierstra 2009).
To complement deficient traffic data, municipal engineering relies upon personal knowledge and 
complaints. Throughout an ordinary working week, Alex receives about a handful of complaints and 
error-messages from colleagues, bus drivers, citizens, and local politicians. Complaints and error 
reports – by phone, email, or word-of-mouth – are, in fact, judged so important that one municipal 
employee, when I asked about the first traffic computer system that town hall purchased in the early 
1990s, replied to me: ‘At that time, we only got the computer systems because we had to modernize 
several installations. [. . .] That was a package deal. You don’t actually need [the traffic computer]. 
Because when things don’t work, people call at once’ (Olaf, formerly responsible for traffic lights, 
fieldnotes, 17 December 2015).
By now, times have changed and then they haven’t. The traffic computer system, together with 
induction loops, cameras, traffic counts, and traffic simulations provides municipal engineers with 
incomprehensive data. The system is incomplete and error-prone. Traffic counts are very expen -
sive, cover only limited periods in time, and are always a step behind the city’s ever-changing 
traffic patterns. Not only do the flows of vehicles grow and change direction as parts of the city 
center are being fundamentally re-modeled. Political sensibilities seem to be shifting, too, away 
from the paradigm of a car-friendly city towards more (if not enthusiastic) support for cyclists and 
pedestrians. For this reason, Alex and his colleagues continuously tweak the city’s traffic lights. 
Smaller changes in traffic signaling are made single-handedly, and they are often triggered by civic 
complaint. To illustrate this point, let me refer to an anonymous complaint issued in 
December 2015.
For complainants, it is not unusual to use a pseudonym: ‘Well yes there are people who write to us 
anonymously every now and then’, Alex comments, as if hurt by anonymity, which he seems to 
perceive as lack of trust and fair-mindedness. Nonetheless, he carefully reads the email that 
complains about too short a green phase for pedestrians at a specific crossing and threatens to 
bring the issue to the attention of a local television channel – so that, finally, the city would ‘do 
something for pedestrians’, a reproach that Alex completely ignores. He gets up and moves over to 
the adjacent office, the ‘computer room’ where the traffic computer terminal is installed. Since the 
traffic light that the email complains about is located in the city center and connected to the traffic 
computer network, Alex is able to ‘see what the lights are doing’ in real time. Alex opens a window 
that displays the state of different signal groups over time (red, green, yellow, switched off or yellow 
flashlights). The induction loops are gone, so the lights run on a fixed cycle, independent of traffic 
volume. ‘With this installation’, Alex explains, ‘we intentionally made it so that pedestrians have little 
time, so that they cross the street at the beginning of their green phase, before turning cars arrive’. 
He adds: ‘We did that for safety reasons but of course pedestrians feel bossed around’.
On a sheet of paper, Alex jots down the length of green phases for different signal groups. Since 
signal groups in this system are designated differently than in the software that he uses to plan 
algorithmic modifications, he has to get up and gather a black file from the wall closet in his office. He 
translates the designation of signal groups and moves to a different computer to access his planning 
software. After a couple of minutes, he concludes that the green phase for pedestrians ‘really was 
timed very tightly, to minimize pedestrian influx’ and decides to prolong this phase by several seconds. 
To do so, he wheels his chair back to the terminal through which he accesses the traffic computer 
network and implements changes in the traffic light algorithm (fieldnotes, 10 December 2015).
Moral work and time
For municipal traffic engineers, timing urban traffic is moral work. Moral work with and within public 
administration means addressing multiple registers of valuation. As Claudette Lafaye (1990) shows, 696
 S. WAGENKNECHT
municipal employees draw upon diverse measures of value in assessing who is due for promotion, 
commendation or favor. Anders Blok, Marie Meilvang, and Laura Centemeri, in turn, study the ways 
in which civic participation and environmental activism mobilize value on different scales to make 
their voices heard and accounted for by public administrators (Blok and Meilvang 2015; Centemeri 
2015, 2017; Meilvang, Carlsen, and Blok 2018). And Tobias Röhl (2019) examines how citizens invoke 
multiple registers of value when evaluating breakdowns in public infrastructure.
Moral work is the work that it takes to draw and redraw ‘the lines between “personal troubles” and 
“public issues”’ (Blok and Meilvang 2015, 20, citing Mills 1959). Thus understood, moral work is not 
a distinct type of work, not even a distinct type of effort or practice. Rather, moral work concerns 
valuations (Lamont 2012) woven into the very texture of practices, interlacing the day-to-day 
business of municipal traffic engineers. Whether unblocking an intersection, updating traffic light 
facilities, tweaking the algorithm of a signal, or addressing complaints, traffic engineers are working 
with valuations – they are attributing value to people and things.
Valuations attach worth (Lamont 2012). They deem something (or someone) good or bad, normal 
or deviant, legitimate or despicable, appropriate, fitting, worthwhile and worthy. They qualify things 
and people (Thévenot 2002) – and, in doing so, help organize social life: ‘[O]perations of qualification 
[. . .] constitute the basic cognitive operations of social interaction; social coordination requires 
a continuous effort of comparison, agreement on common terms, and identification’ (Boltanski 
and Thévenot 2006, 1).4 In this manner, valuations help expand the scope of coordinative efforts. 
They are a means of scaling, a capacity crucial in dealing with infrastructures (Star 1999).5
Woven into practices, valuations are no stand-alone operations. Rather, they are embedded in moral 
economies; i.e. webs of valuations ‘that stand and function in well-defined relationship to one another’ 
(Daston 2005, 4). As analytic concept, moral economies describe ‘the production, distribution, circulation, 
and use of moral sentiments, emotions and values, and norms and obligations in social space’ (Fassin 
2009, 37). With moral economies sprawling and frayed, worth circulates widely. While worth is invoked in 
the most mundane activities (complaining about traffic jam), it is tied to the noblest and most consistent 
ideas about how to organize social life (such as, e.g. civic equality or industrial efficiency, both of which 
are reflected in notions of ‘good’, smoothly navigable traffic).
In conveying what is good, moral worth is distinct, but entangled with, what is. Worth entertains 
a ‘partial connection’ (Strathern 2004) with reality, animating dreams and action. In modulating the 
tension between what is and what is good, moral work handles ideals and wishful thinking, in pleas, 
demands, orders, praise, as well as in desires, likings, and repugnance. Moral work covers a wide 
spectrum ranging from incidental to fundamental, personal to public, particular to general, ‘good’ as 
convenient to ‘good’ as just. Different notions of what is good, Laurent Thévenot (2007) observes, 
help coordinate arrangements of things and people in different ways, in different ‘regimes of 
engagement’ between which people ‘slip back and forth’ (Thévenot 2007, 420).
Thévenot (2007) distinguishes the regime of familiar engagement from the regime of public 
justification. The regime of familiar engagement ‘maintains a personalized, localized good: feeling at 
ease;’ it is oriented towards a person’s wellbeing and convenience in ‘a milieu shaped by continued 
use’ to which the person entertains personal ‘attachment’ (Thévenot 2007, 416). As I will argue 
below, friendship and care thrive upon this kind of engagement. In contrast, the regime of justifica -
tion is concerned with public legitimacy. The regime of justification configures the dependence of 
a person upon her surroundings as the relation that a person entertains to a public and vis-à-vis 
a common good. What is at stake in the regime of justification is the person’s public status – her 
membership as a (more or less) ‘worthy’ person in a ‘polity’, i.e. a collective of people and things 
organized by publicly contestable appeals to specific measures of (public) value or ‘orders of worth’ 
(Boltanski and Thévenot 2006). Orders of worth are neither undisputed nor easily reconciled with 
one another but if mobilized skilfully, they help ‘communize’ causes. In appealing to orders of worth, 
personal issues can be transformed into public problems – problems, e.g. that a municipal admin -
istration should be committed to address.MOBILITIES
 697
A limited number of orders of worth are available for public justification, two of which take front 
stage in municipal traffic engineering: the civic and the industrial order of worth. A case in point of 
the latter are engineering handbooks. Their formulae for the calculation of ‘optimal’ traffic solutions 
aim to design efficient and controllable traffic flows from scratch, with road safety a precondition. 
Virtually a paradigm of industrial worth, engineering handbooks are all about control and achieve -
ment. They qualify various traffic solutions according to efficiency, reliability, and ‘their capacity to 
[. . .] respond usefully to needs’ (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 205). On this measure of worth, worthy 
is what is functional. The industrial order of worth values instrumentality and thereby, as Boltanski 
and Thévenot point out, risks treating people as things (211). It is oblivious to the past and oriented 
towards the future (208). The civic order of worth, however, attaches value to civic equality and 
impartiality ‘above’ the partial interests of single citizens (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 107 f.). In the 
civic order of worth, ‘the ones who accede to higher states of worth are not human persons but 
rather collective persons’ such as unions, political parties, and interest groups (185). Complainants 
appeal to the civic order of worth when they claim to speak in the name of an ignored group of 
participants in traffic and call upon municipal traffic management to ‘do something for pedestrians’.
Civic and industrial ‘worths’ are ‘the objects of intense compromise efforts’ and they converge, e.g. 
on the notion of public safety (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 325ff.). Remember the hovenring, a traffic 
solution that efficiently engineers civic integrity by separating traffic flows and stacking them – 
motorized vehicles on ground level, cyclists and pedestrians elevated to a first floor roundabout. 
The hovenring minimizes mutual impairment, allows non-motorized traffic to move freely but keeps 
traffic signalling in place for motorized traffic (hourly throughput of which, according to engineering 
models, decreases at unsignalled roundabouts). As the hovenring illustrates, compromise is an 
important element in the moral economy of traffic engineering. But it is not easy to come by. To 
forge compromise, municipal traffic engineering deals in multiple worths at varying scales of general -
izations. It addresses both industrial, civic, and domestic worth in ways that cut generalization short.
People (and things) do not summon the public all the time. As Thévenot (2007) points out, they 
stay private and personal in the regime of familiar engagement. Boltanski (2012) explores the limits 
of publicity and generalization when he enquires into friendship (philia), a regime of mutual 
valuation that cultivates reciprocity and privacy and foregoes public justification. For an analytic 
grip on how valuation precedes justification and extends beyond it, a rich body of research relies 
upon the notion of care. Manoeuvring back and forth between public and private (Damamme and 
Paperman 2009), care attends to the mundane minutiae of everyday lives and the infrastructures 
they require (Denis and Pontille 2015; Kocksch et al. 2018). Care refuses to conceive of value as 
a means of generalization. It is committed not to justice but to justesse, i.e. circumstantial appro -
priateness or fittingness. Its ‘non-normative ethics’ (Puig de la Bellacasa 2012, 211) acknowledge 
moral ambiguity and the open-endedness: ‘“Good and bad” are never settled in the logic of care’ 
(Mol 2008, 87). Instead, ‘[. . .] care seeks to lighten what is heavy, and even if it fails it keeps on trying. 
Such, then, is what failure calls for in an ethics, or should we say an ethos, of care: try again, try 
something a bit different, be attentive’ (Mol, Moser, and Pols 2010, 13).
Care is ‘an ongoing process’ (Mol 2008, 21). As it implies long term, ongoing commitment (Denis 
and Pontille 2015), care is slow and enacts a temporality at odds with a progressive drive for futurity 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2015; Damamme and Paperman 2009). It hence stands to reason that regimes of 
engagement distinguish themselves in their temporality, i.e. in their rhythms of coordination. While 
Boltanski acknowledges that his account of justification remains largely oblivious to questions of 
time (2012, 10), competent actors time their appeals to orders of worth with great skill, and orders of 
worth can be argued to entrain distinct temporalities.6 Moral work is caught up in time, too.
Limited insight
One wall of Alex’s office is entirely covered by a large, fitted closet. It contains workwear for rainy 
days, safety jackets and safety boots, helmets, coffee mugs, various keys and smaller tools, soccer 698
 S. WAGENKNECHT
merchandise, handbooks, instruction manuals, trade journals and, above all, numerous worn black 
files with requests for proposals, orders, contracts, construction plans of traffic lights, documentation 
of their software components, summaries of service operations, electricity billings . . . some of which 
must be more than twenty years old, most of which had been stored away before Alex took over this 
office a couple of years ago. I have never seen him opening the cabinet door in the room’s corner. 
And when he finally does open it, I am stunned. Two yellowed, worn sheets of cheap paper are taped 
to the door’s inside, a dated telephone list and a photocopy with a quote set in Blackletter:
Es ist dem Untertanen untersagt, den Maßstab seiner beschränkten Einsicht an die Handlungen der Obrigkeit 
anzulegen. Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm v. Brandenburg7
Subjects are enjoined from applying the measure of their limited insight to the actions of authorities. Friedrich 
Wilhelm, Elector of Brandenburg. (translated by the author)
When I point at the paper, Alex shrugs: Yes, that’s old’, indicating that one of his predecessors had 
put it up. He rips off the telephone list but the quote remains at its place. My puzzlement turns into 
indignation, then into puzzlement again. Hidden inside a closet, the trench between now and then 
transforms what once must have been a sharp interdiction into an ironic commentary, ripe with dry 
humor and detached matter-of-factness: It’s always been like that, and it’s not like that anymore. But if 
it is a commentary, to whom does it refer? (fieldnotes, 21 April 2016).
The quotation, ascribed to a ‘sovereign’, speaks of ‘subjects’ and ‘authorities’. It invokes 
a hierarchy of subordination that aligns with a hierarchy of knowledge. The privilege of power, 
here, comes with the privilege of ‘insight’. The limitation of insights that subjects suffer is a result of 
their inferior position within the hierarchy of authority. Removed from the authorities, they are 
unable to familiarize themselves with the matters at stake – matters extending far beyond subject’s 
personal concerns. The quotation, hence, is about positionality and its qualification. It recognizes 
subjects’ positionality, if only to dismiss them as unqualified and denounce their critique.
As it invokes hierarchy as a measure for the (dis-)qualification of people, the quotation mobilizes 
what Boltanski and Thévenot (1999, 2006) have characterized as the domestic order of worth. In 
a domestic order of worth, authority reigns – the authority of a father, a king, a patron, or a sovereign 
‘who sacrifices himself for his subjects’ (1999, 370). The domestic order of worth cherishes patern -
alism and conceives of relations in terms of hierarchy and dependency. It views persons as insepar -
able ‘from his/her belonging to a body, a family, a lineage, an estate’ and evaluates them with regard 
to their ‘place in the network of dependencies from which this person draws his own authority’ 
(1999, 370). In the domestic order, people are worthy as part of a hierarchy and they may distinguish 
themselves not by means of competition or esteem, but by ‘the elective choice [of superiors] that 
make someone stand out from the ranks’ (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 165). Subordinates must 
offer their views frankly but avoid opposing their superiors – they deliver input without pushing their 
arguments all too hard. And they stay put. The domestic order of worth is suspicious of mobility; it 
perceives travelers and foreigners, climbers and dropouts as less worthy beings (168).
The domestic order of worth values loyalty, respect, restraint, gratefulness, discretion, clemency, 
and dignity. It locates knowledge in ‘examples, cases, especially anecdotes in which exemplary 
behavior on the part of appreciated persons is identified and offered as a model’ – forms of evidence 
that the domestic order perceives as general but are considered ‘forms of the particular in the 
industrial or civic worlds’ (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 176). As a consequence, the domestic order 
of worth is ‘weakly equipped with instruments for acting from a distance’ – in contrast to the civic 
order of worth, it does not rely upon ‘the objectivity of rules detached from persons’ or ‘mechanisms 
of representation’ (164). In fact, it takes issue with anonymity and standardization, qualities that in 
turn are highly valued in the civic or industrial order of worth, respectively (168, 243).
The quotation then, taped discretely to the backside of a seldom-opened closet door, sensitizes to 
the issues of hierarchy and dependency in the relationships that municipal traffic engineers entertain 
to other people – bosses and colleagues, politicians and citizens. Invoking the domestic order of MOBILITIES
 699
worth, the quotation offers a way of (dis-)qualifying these people as more or less worthy, more or less 
competent, more or less legitimated in offering critique and putting their oar in. The quotation offers 
a way to keep criticism at bay and ironize unwanted involvement. It can be read as a commentary 
upon the mayor whose ‘political’ decisions have to be accepted even when, off the records, they are 
deemed not sensible from a ‘technical’ point of view. It applies, too, to intrusive colleagues and 
annoyed citizens whose complaints are criticized for failing to see the bigger picture or having any 
idea at all how complex the timing of rush hour traffic really is. What is more, the quotation can be 
taken to commend relationships beyond any measure (of ‘insight’): If subjects refrained from 
‘measuring’ the performance of authorities, subjects and authorities might find a way to recognize 
one another differently – recognizing one another in their limited capacities and particular circum -
stances. (What it would mean to do so is a question I explore further below.)
For good reason, however, the quotation remains behind closed doors most of the time. It 
conveys an outlook that does not sit well with today’s visions of civic equality, civic participation, 
civil service, and transparent, effective public management. It is thinking in the closet – not 
a principle that would tacitly underlie everything that traffic engineers do but a sentiment, a motif 
that waits to be mobilized, discretely, in specific situations.
Truncating worth
One morning in April 2016 Alex tells me about a call he received. A citizen complained to him that 
that traffic lights would jam rush hour traffic at a radial road in the suburbs if people requested 
pedestrian crossing several times in a row. The traffic lights in question are a small installation, solely 
built for the purpose of interrupting steady traffic to allow pedestrians to cross the road. ‘Ten 
minutes he said [he was waiting]’, Alex recalls, ‘and [demanded] that pedestrians are to wait’. Alex 
makes a face. He apparently believes ten minutes to be an exaggeration and is not inclined to 
change the algorithm of this installation. We will drive out there anyway after breakfast break.
As we are approaching the traffic lights at about 10 o’clock, the road suddenly jams in front of us. 
Alex is getting a bit nervous: ‘Why are they slowing down so much here?’ As it turns out, a long car 
hauler is slowly turning off the road, maneuvering into a small industrial compound. After the truck 
has left the road, we quickly reach the traffic light in question. We pull in on a sidewalk, get off and 
walk over to the grey box that hosts the operating controls, including a tiny greenish display, and 
paper documentation for the traffic light. ‘With these old installations’, he tells me, ‘we don’t have 
any documentation at the office’. He leafs through the paper, scanning pale print on sheets with 
foxing stains. He then decides to change programs, switching from P2 to P3 for the rush hour. P3 has 
a longer cycle, i.e. the algorithm takes now longer to run through a complete cycle of green phases 
for all directions. This increases the minimum time between pedestrian crossings (and may ease the 
flow of motorized traffic). And he re-programs the traffic lights so that they switch on earlier in the 
morning, also on weekends (which may now stop motorized traffic at times when it hasn’t been 
stopped before). He makes a note of these changes on the stained paper, telling me: ‘[The people of 
this town] would prefer no traffic lights at all, but then everyone wants to have one – preferably 
switched off during nights’. The way in which he says this to me suggests that ‘everyone’ includes the 
caller whose complaint led us out here – and whose complaint he addresses ambivalently, increasing 
the time span between possible pedestrian crossings but also increasing the time span in which 
pedestrian crossings can be requested at all (fieldnotes, 14 April 2016).
Complaints are a form of public critique. They decry injustices (Boltanski 2012). Still, to issue 
complaints perceived legitimate is not straightforward. Complaints must seek to frame the relations 
between complainant, complained and the ‘complained-to’ in general terms. To this end, complaints 
rely upon generalization and ‘desingularization’ (Boltanski 2012, 191ff.), dexterously appealing to 
notions of equivalence that are widely shared. When the caller complained about pedestrian cross -
ings at that radial road, he implied that pedestrians would take more time than they are due. The 
emailer, in turn, that called upon town hall to ‘do something for pedestrians’ suggested that the city 700
 S. WAGENKNECHT
would not treat all participants in traffic equally – a critique that appeals to civic worth, worth 
bestowed equally upon all citizens.
The civic order of worth bases its notion of common good on ‘the authority of a majestic and 
impartial Sovereign placed above private interests’ (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 107 f.). Yet 
sovereignty here is disembodied, created ‘by the convergence of human wills that comes about 
when citizens give up their singularity and distance themselves from their private interests to take 
only the common good into account’ (108). Civic worth is ascribed to the state of being ‘detached 
from the bonds of personal dependence’ (186). In this vein, individual persons are perceived as 
‘slaves of their own particular interests and condemned to powerlessness;’ they become worthy as 
delegates, members, and spokespersons (191) who ‘make themselves the expression of a general 
will’ (187). Collectives, in turn, distinguish themselves as worthy in terms of vigilant control of 
procedure, formality, legality and their ‘tireless struggle’ for a collective cause (190).
Against this backdrop, Alex’s reaction to complaints appears double-edged. On the one hand, he 
does himself refer to groups of people, such as ‘pedestrians’, and speaks in his explanations to me of 
‘everyone’. He cares for the safety of participants in traffic (physical integrity being a constitutional 
entitlement) and is concerned about ‘bossing them around’. He juggles the conflicting needs and 
wishes of ‘pedestrians’ and other groups – i.e. of ‘everyone’, of all participants in traffic – and tries to 
translate their ambiguous will into unambiguous traffic signaling. On the other hand, he shies away 
from grand justifications. He keeps complaints at a personal level and frames complainants as 
individuals, plain and equal. He handles complaints as dialogic, not data-driven. His reaction to 
complaints is about recognition, not efficiency. When he changes the timing of red and green 
phases, he calculates appropriate waiting times – calculations that Alex makes in situ and based on 
his local knowledge. He shrugs off the contradictory character of what ‘everyone’ seems to want and 
dedicates himself to small changes, working from one contestable compromise to the next.
Good complaining means crafting a case of collective concern. Complainants unable to do so are 
easily discredited as grumblers, moaners, or fault-finders that put self-interest before collective good. 
Their complaints are met with indignation and ridicule, deemed undesirable and illegitimate. As 
I have observed, Alex and his colleagues take issue with complainants that claim certain privileges – 
complainants with public standing, local politicians, and colleagues. In particular, complaints and 
suggestions from inside town hall but outside the department are quickly perceived as intrusive, as 
are mandates to investigate specific traffic solutions that are issued by local politicians. Especially 
politicians’ repeated plea for more roundabouts are ill-received by Alex and his colleagues. 
Roundabouts, as Alex has explained to me multiple times, are substantially less efficient than 
signalized crossroads because their capacity for hourly throughput of motorized vehicles is signifi -
cantly lower. So, when Alex and a colleague draft a response to one of the parliamentary groups’ 
suggestion to have a roundabout at a busy intersection in the city center, it is clear that they will 
reject this suggestion. However, they spend several hours analyzing the traffic situation at the 
intersection, looking for ways to improve traffic flow, and carefully draft a detailed reply. Alex 
suggests implementing an algorithm with a longer cycle, switching from 90 to 120 seconds, even 
though this solution ‘would smash our progressive signal’. – ‘No, we don’t do that’, replies his 
colleague. But Alex is still considering the idea: ‘I could check it, but I would need more time’. – ‘Ok, 
but that’, his colleague says, ‘we don’t write into our reply. That’s too silly for me. They make 
a request, and we change that? No, we won’t mention that’. Yet they should, the colleague concedes, 
invest more effort into examining alternative traffic solutions (fieldnotes, date blinded).
On another occasion, Alex struggles to answer an email complaint issued by the owner of an 
advertising agency, a business located in one of the city center’s narrow side streets that opens into 
a main road, a couple of meters ahead of a busy intersection. The intersection has recently been re- 
designed, and it is now rather inconvenient to filter into main road traffic, both for the advertiser and 
employees of the local newspaper whose offices are located in the side street, too. The newspaper, 
Alex tells me, has already taken up the issue and criticized traffic planning: ‘You do get the 
impression’, he comments with subdued indignation, ‘that some are more worth than others . . . MOBILITIES
 701
but I shouldn’t say that’. When Alex finishes his email to the complaining advertiser, he closes on 
a conciliatory note: ‘But we continue to observe the situation’. Nothing will be changed any time 
soon (fieldnotes, 19 May 2016).
Alex seems to resent situations in which ‘some are worth more than others’, an attitude that also 
transpires in the way he handles a complaint by the city’s Department for Economic Promotion a couple 
of weeks later. An employee from the department suggests re-programming traffic lights at an intersec -
tion that connects a business park with a radial road, making it easier for vehicles to exit the business park. 
The installation is old and Alex has no documentation on it. He therefore calls a colleague at the regional 
authorities, inquiring whether the installation could be equipped with traffic sensors: ‘. . . well, in principle 
I just need the information, the traffic lights can do it, or it cannot . . . I’m happy with the information: the 
technology can do, or it cannot . . . our Department for Economic Promotion tries to make its mark, that’s 
my allegation at least’. But as the colleague is unable to provide any details about the installation, they 
both decide to leave its programming as it is (fieldnotes, 2 June 2016).
During the summer, the city has to close parts of its express highway for urgent and long-planned 
maintenance work, a situation that disrupts traffic flows throughout town and demands long 
detours. Since Alex is on parental leave, I am shadowing Michael, team leader of traffic planning 
and stand-in for Alex through his morning on a day in July. Michael is alert and busy. A new phase of 
construction, along with new route deviations for commuter traffic, has caused a major traffic jam 
this morning. Before lunch, he meets his superior, the head of department, to recap all changes in 
traffic lights that have been made to diminish congestion. The head of department appears relatively 
relaxed and satisfied with the changes made, but a pinch of agitation must have remained when she, 
at the very end of their conversation, mentions: ‘Speaking of this construction site, I received an in- 
house smarty-pants suggestion. Excellent. An email. I’m reading it to you . . . “Unfortunately, as 
a commuter I am also affected by the highway closing . . . Basically, the alternative routing works well 
but would it be an idea to close [a specific] highway exit to create space for” . . . Now, I’m writing this guy 
then that my commuting would be affected, if this exit was to be closed’ (fieldnotes, date blinded).
Time and again, subjects try to ‘apply the measure of their limited insight’ to affairs beyond their 
purview. When the complainant speaks ‘as a commuter’ and presents himself as spokesperson for 
collective interests, the head of department refuses him this status. She ‘dis’-qualifies him and 
invalidates his claim for collective worth by characterizing his claim as an arrogation, biased and 
unjust. Because his suggestion, as she so pointedly retorts, would affect her commuting. In this 
manner, she re-frames the question of alternative route deviations as a matter of balancing the 
incompatible needs of individual commuters, a matter that cannot be decided by relying upon the 
‘limited insight’ of individuals outside her department.
Faced with suggestions deemed intrusive, municipal traffic engineers often diagnose a lack of 
expertise: The originators of such suggestions (be they colleagues from other departments, politi -
cians, citizens, or media representatives) would not be familiar with the complexity of the matter. 
That traffic engineers resort to such critique is hardly surprising. Note, however, the subtler critique 
that municipal traffic engineers formulate when they accuse complainants of false spokesmanship: It 
is inappropriate to ‘make its mark’ or imply being ‘more worth than others’ when pushing for 
solutions that benefit some at the expense of others. As Boltanski and Thévenot (2006) argue, 
spokesmanship – i.e. the aggregation of individuals in a body politic that qualifies for ‘more’ worth 
than plain individuals alone – is highly valued in the civic order of worth. The accusation of false 
spokesmanship, thus, applies the measure of civic worth, yet applies it in a way that disqualify claims 
for collective worth at the same time. In his work, Alex and his colleagues endorse the notion that 
managing urban traffic is a matter of doing justice to individual, equal citizens. Civic worth, here is 
cherished but truncated at the same time.
With all of the undesirable complaints presented, municipal traffic engineers react in a way that 
turns privilege into a liability. Neither the civic privilege of democratic representation (elected local 
politicians), of public voice (media), of functional representation (Department for Economic 
Promotion) nor the domestic privilege of proximity (colleague-commuter) are held in high regard. 702
 S. WAGENKNECHT
In contrast, privilege is made the very object of critique. The ethos that transpires here is noble: As no 
one is more important than anyone else, municipal traffic engineers need to defend their profes -
sional sphere of influence, fend off imbalances and parochialism, and remain above the argy-bargy 
of conflicting interests. To this end, they may resort to truncating others’ claims for collective worth. 
Cutting civic worth short, municipal engineers ‘relativize’ and singularize complaints in order to keep 
their scope of action (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 32).8 When they do so, they defend their scope of 
action as the space where the wants and wills of individual citizens are equitably re-conciliated.
Having a ‘different’ relationship
On a Friday in June 2016, early afternoon, I am sitting next to Alex. We hear his colleagues leaving 
their desks for an early start into the weekend. Alex, however, remains seated, almost without 
motion. He is reading a leaflet, sent by a company that is selling push buttons for traffic light 
poles. Pedestrians use push buttons for requesting green light and/or for requesting a sound signal. 
Alex is not particularly interested in latest push button models. What catches his eye instead is a note 
on changing industry standards. From now on, it reads, sound signals must be available to visually 
impaired pedestrians also throughout the night. Alex decides to write an email to some of his 
colleagues, informing them about the new standard and mentioning a notoriously busy intersection 
in the city center – an intersection where sound signals are playing throughout the day but switched 
off at nights, so as not to disturb the sleep of nearby residents. The signals need to be played at high 
volume to be discernible over constant traffic noise. And they are played continuously. Push buttons 
have not been installed because the design of the poles would prevent visually impaired pedestrians 
from reaching pole-mounted push buttons. (Curiously, all poles at this intersection rest in massive 
above-ground concrete blocks. When they were erected more than forty years ago, underground 
engineering must have seemed too expensive an option.)
Would there be a way to keep the sound signals running during nights? The issue keeps bothering 
Alex. Perhaps, he explains to me, the installation of more and better loudspeakers would allow to 
decrease the volume, adding: ‘Because you can’t just say: Blind people only until 9pm’. He continues: 
‘There is always the question: Why do you do that, just for a minority. But especially if one has adjusted 
that on one’s own and one knows that it is also used, then one has a different relationship to it (fieldnotes, 
24 June 2016).
‘Why do you do that, just for a minority?’ The question reminds of a utilitarian calculus. It recalls that 
the benefit of the many may outweigh the benefit of the few – or, in a more conciliatory reading, that the 
benefit of the few possesses less priority, less urgency in times of tight budgets and high workloads for 
municipal employees. However, Alex speaks of a ‘different relationship’ that gains significance on 
a personal, not an abstract plane. Alex accounts for his ‘different’ relationship threefold, with reference 
to personal knowledge (‘when one knows that’), immediate engagement (‘on one’s own’) and immediate 
utility (‘is also used’), from which he apparently derives a sense of satisfaction.
Alex feels forced to acknowledge that this ‘different relationship’ is permanently challenged 
(‘there is always the question’), and still his ‘different’ relationship serves him as a source of 
professional recognition. His work is recognized, he feels, when he is caring for the needs of 
participants in traffic who actually rely upon the changes he makes to the design of traffic lights. 
In fact, it is a relationship of mutual recognition: Alex recognizes their needs; they recognize his work. 
In his perspective, this relationship of mutual recognition contrasts the relationship that traffic 
engineers maintain to ‘majorities’ of participants in traffic. The contrast is particularly pronounced 
when perceived in terms of the practices through which majorities and minorities make themselves 
relevant in municipal traffic engineering. Majorities more readily reveal their worth in traffic data, 
such as, e.g. video counts of vehicles per hour, and intuitive local knowledge about urban traffic 
flows. The minorities that Alex refers to, however, may be mentioned in engineering guidelines and 
industry standards (visually impaired pedestrians certainly are). But they really only take shape and 
acquire worthiness – as minorities on behalf of which Alex takes action – in ‘different’ relationships.MOBILITIES
 703
In framing visually impaired participants in traffic as a ‘minority’, Alex singularizes them. In 
emphasizing his immediate involvement, and the satisfaction he derives from it personally, he 
again engages in a form of relativization – shifting from general to particular (Boltanski and 
Thévenot 2006, 34). His ‘different’, singularized relationship can be characterized as philia 
(Boltanski 2012), i.e. a relationship that relies upon reciprocity yet refrains from calculating equiva -
lence in the generalizing terms of justice. For Boltanski, the epitome of philia is true friendship. For 
the case at hand, I suggest to conceive of it as fondness, i.e. a rewarding attachment that pays back 
those who invest in it. Fondness is always partial. It thrives upon affection, not calculation. In this 
sense then, fondness relates closely to care: Alex uses his scope of action to care for participants in 
traffic of whom he assumes to benefit from, and be appreciative of, the incremental infrastructural 
changes he can effect. When he carefully chooses to focus his sight; however, it is only a thin line that 
distinguishes focused sight from ‘limited insight’.
Conclusion
In this paper, I have examined some of the moral and temporal orderings at stake in maintaining 
public traffic infrastructure. Timing urban mobilities is moral work. It requires evaluation, apprecia -
tion, critical assessment, and blocking-off critique – all valuations that are woven into the very 
texture of municipal engineering practices. These valuations trade worth at varying scales in a moral 
economy that cultivates a heterogeneous set of values, such as, e.g. efficiency, safety, civic equality, 
as well as personal involvement.
Drawing upon an ethnographic study, I have focused on how municipal traffic engineers handle 
civic complaints. With this approach, I have been able to observe how engineers deflate critique and 
truncate complainants’ worth. In singularizing complaints, they keep complainants’ requests within 
narrow bounds. ‘Limited insight’ allows for fudged compromises in an open-ended process of 
tinkering and fine-tuning, and it allows for a troubling kind of care.
In navigating public worth, municipal traffic engineering deals with both the ‘limited’ and the 
immeasurable, the general and the particular, the common and the individual. They do not reject the 
personal for the sake of the public but rather relate them to one another – in an effort of ‘careful’ 
responsibility (cf. Damamme and Paperman 2009, 22). In municipal management, however, care defies 
straightforward appraisal. When municipal traffic engineering singularizes and relativizes complaints, 
civic worth is cut short. In fact, the moral economy of municipal traffic engineers is, crucially, about 
economizing worth – a parsimony that seems to go together well with professional dedication to the 
nitty-gritty, the circumstantial, and the piecemeal. Must such dedication come at the price of careful 
paternalism? Infrastructures are notorious for breeding complacency (Mainwaring, Chang, and 
Anderson 2004). And indeed, an all too complacent conclusion suggests itself: It is precisely this 
kind of dedication, this kind of troubling care that helps modifying lay-outs and tinkering with seconds 
when there is no master plan, no blueprint available to tame conflicting mobilities.
Notes
1. For some history of traffic lights see McShane (1988). While in conventional traffic engineering traffic lights are 
still key for timing urban mobilities, currently emerging ‘smart’ traffic engineering may rely on much more 
sophisticated technologies for ‘rhythm-making’ (Coletta and Kitchin 2017).
2. For traffic infrastructure, esp. roads, as the subject of ethnographic research in the context of Mobility Studies, 
see Dalakoglou and Harvey (2012).
3. Names have been changed and places anonymized as far as possible.
4. To a large extent, this paper lives off the work of Boltanski, Thévenot, and other scholars who have contributed 
to the Sociology of Critique, an approach that has been introduced to the field of Mobility Studies in previous 
research (see, e.g. Rousseau 2012; Albertsen and Diken 2001; Trémon 2018).704
 S. WAGENKNECHT
5. Note that Star (1999) characterizes (spatial) ‘scaling’ as a methodological challenge for ethnographies of 
infrastructure. The point of this paper, however, is to observe the (moral) scaling that is part of maintaining 
public infrastructures. Ethnographers may struggle to scale up and down, but traffic engineers do it all the time.
6. For example, the project economy as an order of worth (Boltanski and Chiapello 2005) distinguishes itself from 
industry as an order of worth in its notion of the ‘right time’ to begin and end collaboration, to quit one project 
and board another. Like worth, time is multiple and it therefore relates to people’s activities in multiple, also 
conflicting ways (Zerubavel 1979; Nowotny 1992): Different timings may ‘entrain’ different activities (Parkes and 
Thrift 1979; Blue 2017); they offer rhythms that are gladly – half-heartedly, reluctantly, indifferently, loathingly – 
followed (or resisted).
7. Friedrich Wilhelm lived from 1620 to 1688. The dictum is famous and keeps resurfacing in popular discourses on 
workplace culture. Whether it is rightfully attributed to Friedrich Wilhelm is a debate beyond the scope of this paper.
8. In fact, Govind Gopakumar (2015) observes how municipal interventions in traffic infrastructure are more easily 
enforced when local politics are suspended.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
The authors received no external funding to conduct this research.
ORCID
Susann Wagenknecht 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0533-9698
References
Albertsen, N., and B. Diken. 2001. “Mobility, Justification, and the City.” Nordisk Arkitekturforskning 14 (1): 12–25.
Balmer, A. S., J. Calvert, C. Marris, S. Molyneux-Hodgson, E. Frow, M. Kearnes, K. Bulpin, P. Schyfter, A. Mackenzie, and 
P. Martin. 2015. “Taking Roles in Interdisciplinary Collaborations: Reflections on Working in Post-ELSI Spaces in the UK 
Synthetic Biology Community.”Science&Technology Studies 28 (3): 3–25.
Baszanger, I., and N. Dodier. 1997. “Ethnography: Relating the Part to the Whole.” In Qualitative Analysis: Issues of Theory 
and Method, edited by D. Silverman, 8–23. London: Sage.
Blok, A., and M. L. Meilvang. 2015. “Picturing Urban Green Attachments: Civic Activists Moving between Familiar and 
Public Engagement in the City.” Sociology 49 (1): 19–37.
Blue, S. 2017. “Institutional Rhythms: Combining Practice Theory and Rhythmanalysis to Conceptualise Processes of 
Institutionalisation.” Time & Society. doi:10.1177/0961463X17702165.
Boltanski, L. 2012. Love and Justice as Competences: Three Essays on the Sociology of Action. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Boltanski, L., and E. Chiapello. 2005. The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
Boltanski, L., and L. Thévenot. 1999. “The Sociology of Critical Capacity.” European Journal of Social Theory 2 (3): 359–377. 
doi:10.1177/136843199002003010.
Boltanski, L., and L. Thévenot. 2006. On Justification: Economies of Worth. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Centemeri, L. 2015. “Reframing Problems of Incommensurability in Environmental Conflicts through Pragmatic 
Sociology: From Value Pluralism to the Plurality of Modes of Engagement with the Environment.” Environmental 
Values 24 (3): 299–320. doi:10.3197/096327114X13947900181158.
Centemeri, L. 2017. “From Public Participation to Place-based Resistance. Environmental Critique and Modes of 
Valuation in the Struggles against the Expansion of the Malpensa Airport.” Historical Social Research/Historische 
Sozialforschung 42 (3): 97–122.
Coletta, C., and R. Kitchin. 2017. “Algorhythmic Governance: Regulating the ‘Heartbeat’ of a City Using the Internet of 
Things.” Big Data & Society 4 (2): 1–16. doi:10.1177/2053951717742418.
Dalakoglou, D., and P. Harvey. 2012. “Roads and Anthropology: Ethnographic Perspectives on Space, Time and (Im) 
mobility.” Mobilities 7 (4): 459–465. doi:10.1080/17450101.2012.718426.
Damamme, A., and P. Paperman. 2009. “Temps du care et organisation sociale du travail en famille.” Temporalités 9. 
doi:10.4000/temporalites.1036.
Daston, L. 2005. “The Moral Economy of Science.” Osiris 10: 2–24. doi:10.1086/368740.
Denis, J., and D. Pontille. 2015. “Material Ordering and the Care of Things.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 40 (3): 
338–367. doi:10.1177/0162243914553129.MOBILITIES
 705
Dodge, M., and R. Kitchin. 2005. “Code and the Transduction of Space.” Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 95 (1): 162–180. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8306.2005.00454.x.
Fassin, D. 2009. “Les économies morales revisitées.“ In Annales.Histoire, Sciences Sociales 64 (6): 1237–1266.
FGSV (Forschungsgesellschaft für Straßen- und Verkehrswesen e.V.). 2015. Handbuch für die Bemessung von 
Straßenverkehrsanlagen. Köln: FGSV-Verlag.
Gopakumar, G. 2015. “Who Will Decongest Bengaluru? Politics, Infrastructures & Scapes.” Mobilities 10 (2): 304–325. 
doi:10.1080/17450101.2013.857944.
Graham, S., and N. Thrift. 2007. “Out of Order: Understanding Repair and Maintenance.” Theory, Culture & Society 24 (3): 
1–25. doi:10.1177/0263276407075954.
Harvey, P., and H. Knox. 2012. “The Enchantments of Infrastructure.” Mobilities 7 (4): 521–536. doi:10.1080/ 
17450101.2012.718935.
Henke, C. R. 1999. “The Mechanics of Workplace Order: Toward a Sociology of Repair.” Berkeley Journal of Sociology 44: 55–81.
Kocksch, L., M. Korn, A. Poller, and S. Wagenknecht. 2018. “Caring for IT Security: Accountabilities, Moralities, and 
Oscillations in IT Security Practices.” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 2 (CSCW): 92.1–92.20. 
doi:10.1145/3274361.
Lafaye, C. 1990. “Situations Tendues Et Sens Ordinaires De La Justice Au Sein D’une Administration Municipal.” Revue 
française de sociologie 31 (2): 199–223. doi:10.2307/3322427.
Lafaye, C., and L. Thévenot. 1993. “Une justification écologique?: Conflits dans l’aménagement de la nature.” Revue 
française de sociologie 34 (4): 495–524. doi:10.2307/3321928.
Lamont, M. 2012. “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation.” Annual Review of Sociology 38: 
201–221. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120022.
Mainwaring, S. D., M. F. Chang, and K. Anderson. 2004. “Infrastructures and Their Discontents: Implications for Ubicomp.” 
In International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 418–432. Berlin: Springer.
McShane, C. 1988. “Urban Pathways: The Street and Highway, 1900–1940.” In Technology and the Rise of the Networked 
City in Europe and America, edited by J. A. Tarr and G. Dupuy, 67–87. Philadelphia PA: Temple University Press.
Meilvang, M. L., H. B. Carlsen, and A. Blok. 2018. “Methods of Engagement: On Civic Participation Formats as 
Composition Devices in Urban Planning.” European Journal of Cultural and Political Sociology 5 (1–2): 12–41. 
doi:10.1080/23254823.2018.1452621.
Mills, C. W. 1959. The Sociological Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mol, A. 2008. The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice. London: Routledge.
Mol, A., I. Moser, and J. Pols. 2010. “Care: Putting Practice into Theory.” In Care in Practice: On Tinkering in Clinics, Homes 
and Farms, edited by A. Mol, I. Moser, and J. Pols, 7–25. Bielefeld: transcript.
Nowotny, H. 1992. “Time and Social Theory: Towards a Social Theory of Time.” Time and Society 1 (3): 421–454. 
doi:10.1177/0961463X92001003006.
Parkes, D., and N. Thrift. 1979. “Time Spacemakers and Entrainment.” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 4 
(3): 353–372. doi:10.2307/622056.
Potthast, J. 2017. “The Sociology of Conventions and Testing.” In Social Theory Now, edited by C. Benzecry, M. Krause, 
and I. A. Reed, 337–360. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2012. “‘Nothing Comes without Its World’: Thinking with Care.” The Sociological Review 60 (2): 
197–216. doi:10.1111/j.1467-954X.2012.02070.x.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care.” Social Studies of 
Science 45 (5): 691–716. doi:10.1177/0306312715599851.
Roche, M. 2017. “Road Maintenance – Patching A Hole in Mobilities-roading Research: A Case Study of the Longbeach 
Road Board, Canterbury, New Zealand 1911–1938.” New Zealand Geographer 37 (2): 119–128. doi:10.1111/nzg.12160.
Röhl, T. 2019. “Making Failure Public: Communicating Breakdowns of Public Infrastructures.” In Infrastructuring Publics, 
edited by M. Korn, W. Reißmann, T. Röhl, and D. Sittler, 207–224. Wiesbaden: Springer VS.
Rousseau, M. 2012. “Public Mobility as the Defining Feature of the French Post-industrial City.” Theory, Culture & Society 
29 (6): 125–145. doi:10.1177/0263276412454922.
Sheller, M. 2018. Mobility Justice: The Politics of Movement in an Age of Extremes. London: Verso.
Star, S. L. 1999. “The Ethnography of Infrastructure.” American Behavioral Scientist 43 (3): 377–391. doi:10.1177/ 
00027649921955326.
Star, S. L. and K. Ruhleder. 1996. “Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information 
Spaces.” Information systems research, 7 (1): 111–134.
trathern, M. 2004. Partial Connections. Updated ed. Oxford: Rowman and Littlefield.
Struhkamp, R., A. Mol, and T. Swierstra. 2009. “Dealing with In/dependence: Doctoring in Physical Rehabilitation 
Practice.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 34 (1): 55–76. doi:10.1177/0162243907312954.
Thévenot, L. 2002. “Which Road to Follow? The Moral Complexity of an ‘Equipped’ Humanity.” In Complexities: Social 
Studies of Knowledge Practices, edited by J. Law and A. Mol:, 53–87. Durham: Duke University Press.
Thévenot, L. 2007. “The Plurality of Cognitive Formats and Engagements. Moving between the Familiar and the Public.” 
European Journal of Social Theory 10 (3): 409–423. doi:10.1177/1368431007080703.706
 S. WAGENKNECHT
Trémon, A.-C. 2018. “Sociodicies of (Im)mobility: Moral Evaluations of Stasis, Departure and Return in an Emigrant Village 
(Shenzhen, China).” Mobilities 13 (1): 157–170. doi:10.1080/17450101.2017.1320134.
Zerubavel, E. 1979. Patterns of Time in Hospital Life: A Sociological Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.MOBILITIES
 707
