Science as Culture
ISSN: 0950-5431 (Print) 1470-1189 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/csac20
The Walking Dead: The Anthropocene as a Ruined
Earth
Nicholas Beuret & Gareth Brown
To cite this article: Nicholas Beuret & Gareth Brown (2017) The Walking Dead:
The Anthropocene as a Ruined Earth, Science as Culture, 26:3, 330-354, DOI:
10.1080/09505431.2016.1257600
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2016.1257600
Published online: 28 Nov 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3836
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=csac20
The Walking Dead : The Anthropocene as
a Ruined Earth
NICHOLAS BEURET∗& GARETH BROWN∗∗
∗Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK,∗∗School of Business,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Much has been made of the claim that humanity has ascended to the status of a terrestrial
force and inaugurated a new geological epoch, the Anthropocene. While attention has
been paid to the contestable nature of the epoch and its disputed histories, insufﬁcient
attention has been paid to the signiﬁcance of the Anthropocene for political praxis.Contrary to much Anthropocenic discourse that articulates a renewed sense of mastery
over nature through assertions of humanity’s complete subsumption of the environment,
recent work in both science and technology studies and human geography suggests analternate reading of the Anthropocene as an epoch without mastery, one where
humanity exists in a permanent state of vulnerability. The political signiﬁcance of this
state of vulnerability is explored through a reading of popular TV show The Walking
Dead , a post-collapse narrative of a world in ruins and overrun by zombies. On a
ruined earth, political praxis is orientated not towards a return of the earth to itsprevious productive state, but rather as an unending labour of survival and salvage.Survival is not a life reduced to bare life, but rather a state of tension between a life
reduced to necessity, and the refusal to separate the question of how to live from the
work of securing life itself. Left unresolved, this tension animates the politics of theAnthropocene, suggesting that in place of the teleology of progress social life is
organised within it through unceasing care and repair time.
K
EYWORDS : Anthropocene, survival, salvage, ruination, bare life, Agamben
1. Introduction
Island nations are subject to the slow violence of rising seas. Drought and savage
weather events drive cycles of migration and violence. Storms and heat wavesScience as Culture , 2017
Vol. 26, No. 3, 330–354, https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2016.1257600
Correspondence Address : Nicholas Beuret, Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster,
LA1 4YQ, UK. Email: n.beuret@lancaster.ac.ukScience as Culture , 2017
Vol. 26, No. 3, 330–354, https://doi.org/10.1080/09505431.2016.1257600
#2016 Process Press
batter Europe and North America. Slowly tales of the Anthropocene as an unend-
ing series of disasters gather pace (Waters et al.,2016). What is articulated in the
idea of the Anthropocene is not a speculative future disaster (Adams et al.,2009)
but a past event. Unlike other ‘images of doom’ (Buell, 1995), the Anthropocene
names something that has already happened that ‘humanity’ must now adapt to
rather than a future disaster that must be prevented. The Anthropocene, considered
as a breakdown in the functioning of the Holocene (Winner, 1986; Star, 1999),
marks a moment where maintenance and repair as practices are transformedfrom a labour of possible restoration (Jackson, 2014) to a ceaseless labour of
salvage. The Holocene has ended and cannot be restored. The biosphere iscaught up in a long thaw that will reshape the context of life for the next10,000 years (Archer, 2009). There is no return to modernity, either as an
epoch, environment or project.
How can we practice politics in the Anthropocene, a space of not only of an
environmental breakdown but a ‘late industrial’ (Fortun, 2014) ecosystemic
state of on-going disaster (Clark, 2014)? The uncertainty of the earth sciences
and the urgency of ecological issues such as climate change compel us to recon-sider what should count as a suitable object of research or political concern
(Latour, 2015). Indeed this is perhaps the very point of the concept of the Anthro-
pocene—to compel a planetary mode of politics adequate to issues such as climate
change (Steffen et al.,2011). The Anthropocene as a concept has brought to light
‘material conditions that not only defy prediction, but reveal the precarious exist-
ence of those beings who are asking questions of it’ (Clark, 2010, p. 21), putting
not only the process of research but the researchers themselves into question.
Since the concept of the Anthropocene was ﬁrst proposed in 2000 it has been
signiﬁcantly developed and informally adopted by geologists and a broad range
of scholars and has sparked much debate as to its import and signiﬁcance (Szers-zynski, 2012 ; Malm and Hornborg, 2014; Castree, 2014a ; Latour, 2015). It also
signals a transformation of these various ﬁelds of study, with boundariesbetween disciplines blurring if not collapsing in many instances. We thereforedeliberately move away from the realm of stable truths in this article and intowhat may at ﬁrst glance look like the opposite, the realm of speculative ﬁction.
A small band of survivors ﬁnd an abandoned prison. They repair the fences,
and set to work tilling the ﬁelds, building communal kitchens and living
quarters. They organise bands to go out looking for food and things tosalvage and bring back, as well as ﬁnd more survivors. Another band of sur-
vivors ﬁnd them, lay siege to their fortiﬁed home, the result being the
destruction of them all.
The scene above is taken from the TV programme The Walking Dead. Based on
the comic book series of the same name by Robert Kirkman, it centres on (former)
deputy sheriff Rick Grimes who wakes from a coma to ﬁnd the world overrun withThe Walking Dead 331
zombies1and in a state of total social collapse. The narrative of the show stutters
and jumps: there is no singular narrative progression from one event to another,
with a clear end or terminus. What we see is the emergence then collapse (both
partial and total) of social forms and bonds as well as modes of government. Stab-ility is only ever temporary, and there is no progression in either social or personal
senses. Social and personal progress is undone continually by inhuman acts of vio-
lence, carried out by zombies.The Walking Dead is an extended meditation on the reconstitution of community
life under conditions of social collapse. Creator Kirkman explicitly suggests as
much when he asks readers to consider how they would survive in a world
without the infrastructure of modern consumer capitalism, and what sort ofpeople they would become when confronted by a daily struggle over the necessi-
ties of life (Kirkman and Moore, 2008). Survival, and not a project of political
renewal, is the objective of The Walking Dead. As such it offers a ﬁctional med-
itation on the political conditions of the Anthropocene as a ruined earth.
The location of The Walking Dead within the southern states of the USA is sug-
gestive of an answer to the (unasked) question ‘ruined for whom?’. Gendering and
racialising the Anthropocene brings forth a series of questions as to the tempor-
ality of this particular ecological catastrophe (Gunaratnam and Clark, 2012;
Crist, 2013; Haraway, 2014; Lewis and Maslin, 2015). As has been noted, the
long dyings and slow violence of environmental injustice have provided the
context for marginal, black and poor lives for decades (Ammons and Roy,
2015). Indeed, whatever ‘start date’ is ofﬁcially chosen for the Anthropocene it
will mark a legacy of expropriation, colonialism and dispossession as well asenvironmental injustice. The earth is already—and has long been—ruined for
many.
The Anthropocene speaks to a speciﬁc ruining however: the ruining of moder-
nity, bound to the centres of capitalist accumulation and the gendered and racia-lised orderings of the modern world-system. As such it speaks to not only the
threat of climate change as that which undoes existing climatic (and with thembiotic) regimes, but to the threats posed by the exhaustion of our current ecologicalregime (Moore, 2015): the loss of the ecological surplus (energy, food, raw
materials) that maintains the global economic system. The exhaustion of theseecological frontiers provides the material grounds for the end of human historyas distinct from natural history (Chakrabarty, 2009), the end of the notion of limit-
less socio-economic growth (Mitchell, 2013), and perhaps to the very notion of
progressive time as a temporality organised around the accumulation of powerand knowledge (Roitman, 2014 ). As Fortun ( 2014) suggests, the disasters of
‘late industrialism’ mark the collapse of the separations that maintain modernity.Within this context our task is not to contribute to the growing body of work criti-quing the concept of the Anthropocene but to begin to map out the contours of pol-
itical life on a ruined earth.332 N. Beuret & G. Brown
Taking up the challenge of the Anthropocene as an expression of the speculative
turn within geology, we turn to the imaginary presented by the ﬁrst ﬁve seasons of
The Walking Dead as expressive of symptoms of the emerging politics of the
Anthropocene. We concentrate on the television series The Walking Dead as a ﬁc-
tional rendition of life on a ruined earth, an imaginary that we see as central to theproject of imagining social change in the Anthropocene. While we draw on the
comics as additional materials, our focus is the speciﬁc imaginary of the TVseries. We suggest that within this narrative political practice in the Anthropocenetakes as its subject not the citizen or worker, but the survivor .
Through an exploration of The Walking Dead as an image of a ruined earth, the
question of how the politics of organising human/more-than-human relations isbrought into sharp relief. We contend that the Anthropocene brings the biospheric
conditions of life to the forefront of political thought. This foregrounding of
‘nature’ does not signify a subsumption of nature into culture, nor does itdenote the ascendency of humanity over nature as a masterful subject (Asafu-
Adjaye et al.,2015). Rather it suggests an unending state of vulnerability in the
world, where political practice is framed as the unceasing labour of survival. Sur-
vival here is a work of care and repair, of maintaining ourselves, our social
relations and our worlds against the socio-ecological unravellings of a period of
complex environmental disaster.
2. The Anthropocene as a Period of Ruin and Disaster
Since ﬁrst proposed by Crutzen et al. in 2000, the concept of the Anthropocene has
been signiﬁcantly developed and expanded upon, most notably by geologist Zala-
siewicz et al.(2008; 2010). The concept designates a shift from the geological
conditions of the past 10–12,000 years known as the Holocene to one irreversibly
marked by human activity. The Anthropocene refers to the geological age deﬁned
by the aggregated species-impact of humanity—the point at which the activities ofthe human species became a crucially signiﬁcant factor in shaping the dynamics of
the Earth. It is argued that the impact of humanity is now so signiﬁcant that it will
be possible to be read in the geological record thousands of years from now.Humanity has altered not only the planet’s ecosystems, atmosphere and surface
appearance, but also it’s chemistry and geology. As such, it has been argued
that the ‘proper’ political response to the Anthropocene is to assume a stewardingrole over the entirety of the earth, extending and consolidating a mastery over
nature without limit (Steffen et al.,2011).
The prospect of human activity triggering irreversible change within the earth’s
atmosphere is the principle driving force behind the adoption of the Anthropocene
as a heuristic device (Clark, 2014). Szerszynski suggests that ‘the truth of the
Anthropocene is less about what humanity is doing, than the traces that humanitywill leave behind’ ( 2012, p. 169). Here we not only see the question of legacy, a
question evocatively explored by Weisman in his best-selling book The WorldThe Walking Dead 333
Without Us (2008), but, we would suggest, the question of our own extinction as a
species.
To focus on our extinction is to re-centre history on humanity and in some
senses void the troubles of the increasing human-non-human entanglements of
the present (Latour, 2004). Clark ( 2014) suggests that there has been an over-
emphasis on the human within the Anthropocene, with a concurrent sideliningof properly geological concerns. Turning to the more-than-human world, Crist(2013) argues that the focus on human mastery as a political response to the
Anthropocene works to erase the threat to the Enlightenment ideal of mastery
over nature that the debasement of humanity into a mere geological force
enacts. She further suggests that we undo the reversal that takes place in Anthro-pocenic thinking in order to lower humanity into the muck of ‘merely-living
life’ ( 2013, p. 131) and foreground the question of limits to human mastery,
focusing on what are a series of unforeseen or undesired side-effects. Recent
work in science and technology studies and infrastructural studies points
towards a similar conclusion (Fortun, 2014; Denis et al .,2015; Howe et al .,
2016). Fortun suggests that it is the failures to maintain industrial infrastructure
that has led to the collapse of modernist separations keeping the ‘sludge’ out of
our lives, noting the role waste plays in producing the ruined biosphere of the
Anthropocene.
Agency here, as something that denotes a speciﬁc characteristic of particular
relations and qualities (Braun and Whatmore, 2010; Castree, 2014b; Haraway,
2014), is framed as a relationship to the on-going disasters of our epoch and thefailures to maintain the socio-technical infrastructures of the Holocene. We cancontrast this approach to a resurgent Prometheanism that sets out to posit the
‘proper’ relationship to the Anthropocene as one of renewed human mastery (or
stewardship) over nature (Steffen et al.,2011; Asafu-Adjaye et al.,2015). This
latter position is, as noted by Crist, predominant within the Anthropocenic dis-
course of earth system scientists who often focus on the need to constitute a
global human agent capable of planetary stewardship (i.e. Steffen et al.,2011).
3. The Walking Dead and Necromancy: On Reading Zombies
We contend that TV shows such as The Walking Dead offer a meditation upon the
idea of foregoing mastery over nature in favour of an alternate political practice. In
particular, we would suggest that the show explores the labour of maintaining a
form of life (Winner, 1986; Papadopoulos, 2010) in a period without security
on what Fortun calls ‘soiled ground’ ( 2014). That is, not only a period without
social or political security, but of a fundamental biological and geological uncer-
tainty (Clark, 2010; 2014). As such the show depicts an alternative to contempor-
ary accounts of the Anthropocene that posit a masterful human species-agency
(Malm and Hornborg, 2014).334 N. Beuret & G. Brown
The primary narration of agency vis-a `-vis disaster is as a response to the break-
down of socio-technical infrastructure. Disaster is theorised to either reveal hidden
social processes (Wynne, 1988) or to weaken their grip (Solnit, 2010) in such a way
as to enable other forms of life to emerge. In both instances what enables agency to
function is the disaster itself. Disaster appears as an opportunity for the work of
renewal or construction. Here we ﬁnd the basic engine of modernist human
history, the mechanism of crisis-renewal (Roitman, 2014). Crisis reveals itself to
be a problem that must be rectiﬁed or corrected for progress to be made. With thebreakdown of the world, space is made for us to set to work to resolve the problems
that brought about the crisis in the ﬁrst place, thus enabling the accumulation of
knowledge and power (Roitman, 2014). Progress ﬁgures here as a kind of continual
work of repair (Jackson, 2014; Denis and Pontille, 2015; Howe et al.,2016).
The Anthropocene as an unending disaster undoes this process of crisis-
renewal. The extinctions are irreversible; the climatic and geo-chemical trans-formations will take thousands of years to undo, if they are undone at all
(Archer, 2009). The disaster is, to all intents and purposes, permanent (at least
as far as humanity is concerned). Repair as a practice of renewal cannot take
place. Within the Anthropocene humanity’s agency is limited to the question of
how to dwell within the ruins of the previous geological epoch. Neither mastery
nor repair-as-renewal frame political agency. Rather, it is the question of survivalthat marks Anthropocenic politics out from the modernist politics of the Holocene.Survival as a situation or mode of politics stands in contrast to calls for a renewed
mastery of nature as espoused though calls for geoengineering (Hamilton, 2014)
or in texts such as the Ecomodernist Manifesto (Asafu-Adjaye et al.,2015).
How does survival trouble modernist distinctions between nature and culture?
Survival speaks to an unsettling of the dyads upon which the discourse of the
mastery of nature rests, particularly the pairing of active/passive as it maps ontoculture/nature (Plumwood, 1993). The vulnerability that calls for practices of
survival and care on a damaged Earth is suggestive of a state of biospheric exhaus-tion. Agamben ( 2002) suggests that a condition of exhaustion enables the rethink-
ing of ethics. Extending this from the moment of exception found in the camp outto encompass the biosphere, we would argue that such a possibility extends to
broader political concerns, insofar as the concept of the political still holds in
such a state.
Such an ethico-political practice would contest not only the active/passive
pairing, but also the notion that mastery (or survival) is ever ﬁnally achieved.Rather, a critical reading of Agamben as set out by Whyte ( 2013) suggests that
survival is always contested within exhausted spaces, and that there is a lived con-
testation of the terms of survival. This is the question posed by Whyte in her
reading of Giorgio Agamben’s Homo Sacer , critically interrogating his notion
of bare life suggesting that rather than a historical tendency towards the complete
realisation of biopolitics, bare life be considered as a continually contested
political terrain. We set out from Whyte’s critical reading in part as anThe Walking Dead 335
acknowledgement of the controversial nature of Agamben’s bare life thesis to
argue that bare survival names bare life as a contested political category.
Such a contestation could be read against the dystopian brutality of The Walking
Dead as an expression of a kind of care-time (de la Bellacasa, 2015). However, we
would posit the politics of survival as found in The Walking Dead as a form of
care, where not only is care ‘never done’ (de la Bellacasa, 2015) vis-a `-vis
human life, but the work of caring for the conditions of life, of the worlds we pre-cariously make and the ecologies we inhabit, is constantly at the forefront ofminds, as opposed to being a ‘naturalised’ backdrop to the ‘proper’ activity of
life (Plumwood, 1993; de la Bellacasa, 2012; 2015).
The survivor, as one who cares (Mol, 2008; de la Bellacasa, 2012; 2015), offers
an alternative approach to acting on the material conditions of life contrary to therenewal of a mastery over nature. With a renewal of mastery over the Earth, the
planet is made once more to sink into the background, remade as an object ofcontrol and manipulation. However, what we ﬁnd with survival and care is a
never-ceasing emphasis on our dependency on the biosphere, and the need to con-
tinually work with its varied capacities and processes.
We are not arguing that The Walking Dead is consciously about the Anthropo-
cene, nor suggesting the zombie itself is the political ﬁgure of the Anthropocene,as interesting as that suggestion is (Lauro and Embry, 2008). Rather we under-
stand the environment of The Walking Dead to be representative of an increasingly
utilised trope in contemporary ﬁction; that of survival in a post-catastrophic world.
Russell ( 2014, p. 83) has noted that the core element of zombie narratives is the
image of a ruined world, the old order overturned only for nothing to be posed
in its place. This contrasts with the presentation of the zombie as either the para-
digmatic ﬁgure of work under neoliberalism (Shaviro, 2002), the ﬁgure of post-
crisis capitalism itself (Harman, 2010; Quiggin, 2012), or as the hordes that
necessitate a racialised security regime (Canavan, 2010). We are interested in
taking up Yuen’s ( 2012) suggestion that the ﬁgure of the zombie provokes us to
ask what remains of political praxis after the world has ended.
We are not interrogating The Walking Dead in search of solutions. We do not
expect to ﬁnd ourselves having to deal with the zombie horde and we do notnecessarily think the actions taken by Rick and his cohorts are the same ones
we would take in their world, let alone the ones we shall take in ours. Insteadwe are interested in the nature of the problematic played out through the creation
and the consumption of these ﬁlms and television programmes. In particular we
are interested in what we can take from ﬁctional narratives of life at the end ofthe world in order to understand our current geological epoch.
4. The Work of Surviving
Throughout The Walking Dead’s ﬁrst ﬁve seasons there are sporadic echoes of the
previous lives of the characters. Occasionally this serves as a dramatic device to336 N. Beuret & G. Brown
build a sense of hope in the viewers only to then dash those hopes shortly after-
wards. It is really only in the ﬁrst episode of the third season that we encounter
the possibility that there will be no going back to life before the collapse.
While the ﬁrst ﬁve seasons are dominated by a seemingly downward spiral intomere survival, there is a reoccurring tension (most strongly articulated in season
six) that survival can assume a less fragile state and can become about making
something more than mere survival, thus preparing the grounds for a return ofsome form of hope, albeit not hope for a better future, but that a particular formof life will be made to endure.
The ﬁrst episode of season three opens with the characters methodically and in
grim silence clearing a house ﬁrst of its undead residents and then of its food, acategory that also includes an unfortunate owl who has taken up residence in an
attic bedroom. They arrange blankets and sleeping bags in one of the rooms
and set about opening tins of dog food. Rick picks up one of the tins, andthrows it away with a look that is clearly intended to show that he is experiencing
a brief revisitation of the question ‘what have we become?’ Before the gang even
have time to pluck their owl, let alone settle in for the night, an approachingzombie horde necessitates a hasty exit, travelling in salvaged vehicles not
towards a ﬁnal destination where a better life might unfold but simply in the direc-
tion in which the characters hope that they might ﬁnd food, shelter and fuel for thenext day or so. The long hair, beards, torn clothes and general indicators of neglecttell us that this process has been repeated again and again since we left them at the
end of season two ( The Walking Dead, Ep. 3.1, 2012).
Survivors exist in a world without frontiers or new territories to expand into. It
is a world saturated with waste and ruins—with objects severed from their pre-vious use values. Abandoned factories, empty buildings, quiet roads. More than
this, social roles no longer hold their value. It is not who we are that forms thebasis of action, but what our bodies can do. In The Walking Dead we encounter
ruination and wastelands. Progressive politics ceases to work in this world asthere is nothing left to transform, overturn or overthrow. There is only the questionof how to survive: will it be mere survival, survival as a bare biological fact, orwill it be with others, collective survival, survival as the making of a life in the
ruins?
At the start of season three it appears as though even collective survival consti-
tutes little more than bare survival with others. In season two we see Rick and hisband join a farming family, creating a collective life, only for this to break down
through acts of human (patriarchal) violence and the arrival of a zombie horde.The unstable settlements of the opening of season three serve to mark how time
works within The Walking Dead . Rather than the time of progress that accumu-
lates and builds (Roitman, 2014), where the life takes place within an abstract
space (Lefebvre, 1991), what we see is time bound to the labour of survival,
what van Dooren ( 2014) calls knots of time, where rather than accumulation we
see a contingent process where settlements and communities are made andThe Walking Dead 337
unmade by both human and inhuman violence. This oscillation between fragile
settlement and the ﬂight into bare survival forms the basis of the ﬁrst ﬁve
seasons, giving way to a more extended meditation on the forms of collective
life in season six, where, following the on-going storyline of the comics, wecan expect further irruptions of human and inhuman violence to undo and threaten
the existences of the nascent human communities.
Reading the Anthropocene through the lens of The Walking Dead suggests that
we live in an on-going complex disaster and that the terrain of struggle is no longer
capitalism per se but the inhumanity of a ruined world, of the un-natural excesses
of nature (Clark, 2010 ). This on-going disaster is signiﬁcantly different to the
anticipated crises of modernity and signals an end without hope of renewal or
repair (Williams, 2011), thus a period where works of maintenance, repair and
care must be reconceived. We propose that this tension between bare survivaland making a life, as an irresolvable tension, characterises politics in the Anthro-pocene. The question of survival as a condition of late modernity has been raised
by a number of authors. Abeles ( 2010) has suggested that survival constitutes the
basic condition of political life after the decline of the welfare state. This sugges-
tion resonates with those of a number of other theorists who have suggested var-
iously that we now dwell within an everyday atmosphere of fear (Massumi, 1993;
Virilio, 2012), risk (Beck, 1992) or ‘after the future’ (Berardi, 2011). Abeles—like
Franco Berardi—argues that the decline of the welfare state and current stuttering
of neoliberal capitalism eviscerate the very notion of progress and thus the future.
The Anthropocene ﬁgures a break with existing narrations of survival however,
insofar as it suggests an ecological and not economic end to the future. As thename for an on-going ecological disaster that has already arrived, it is not some-
thing than can be repaired or transformed, only endured.
A sequence in the tenth episode of season ﬁve of The Walking Dead represents
another point in the ongoing story where we see this seeming interminabilityplayed out. Here the situation is somewhat more dire due to an absence of residen-
tial or commercial sites from which to salvage and an absence of rain creating aserious risk of death from thirst. By this point in the story though, the reversalwherein these nomadic periods have become normality and the periods of tempor-
ary settlement have become exceptional is a well-established one. A group conver-
sation takes place almost entirely through looks, gestures and brief verbalexchanges (‘Don’t think, just eat’) as the gang make their way slowly along a
narrow road, occasionally veering off to investigate carrion or look for water.
This eventually crystalises into more substantial reﬂection on the protagonists’condition when they take shelter in a barn.
Rick [referring to those survivors
who have not yet reached adulthood]:Growing up’s getting used to the world. This iseasier for them
Michonne: This isn’t the world ...This isn’t it.
Glen: It might be338 N. Beuret & G. Brown
Michonne: That’s giving up
Rick: It’s reality until we see otherwise. This is what we
have to live with
(The Walking Dead , Ep. 5.10, 2015 )
Central to the ﬁgure of the survivor as a political agent is how time—and the
future—is inhabited. In contrast to the ﬁgure of the revolutionary worker, the sur-
vivor does not overcome capitalism and begin history in a work of crisis-resol-
ution (Roitman, 2014), but instead dwells within a collapsing world. Where the
worker was an agent that sought to resolve the ‘ﬁnal’ crisis of capitalism
through a dialectical movement of internal overcoming, the survivor exists
within a fracturing of modernity’s history. Time is no longer linear but fragmen-ted, partial, bound to the life of the survivor. It is no longer abstract, but bound to
speciﬁc activities and localities. That is to say, the survivor is not going anywhere.
Nor does the survivor have a purpose beyond living unlike the revolutionaryworker, be it bare life or collective life. What we see in The Walking Dead is a
grappling with purposeful time without the discipline of the clock, without the
24/7 of work-time. What we see is the stumbling out of old work habits and rou-
tines into the tempos of reproductive labours shorn of their ‘productive’counterparts.
InThe Walking Dead we see speciﬁc tempos attached to the meeting of basic
needs. There are speciﬁc tempos attached to the social life of the protagonistsand the various other survivors that are encountered. All of these tempos are inter-
spersed with inhuman zombie eruptions and novel events that set new courses and
narratives in train. There is no over-riding time however. Time becomes a terrainwithin which to stumble and struggle. But importantly the struggle is not against
anyone but our own habits; that is, with the habits of life before the catastrophe.
Survival is an unending process of adaption to the world and the transformation ofthe self into one who can survive. Our own processes of becoming or unbecomingset the rhythm—as Rick says time and time again, ‘we’ve all done things’, and it is
those ‘things’ that set the pace of life within the zombie-scape.
In the wastelands and ruins of The Walking Dead , time-discipline has broken
down. Instead what emerges is a harsh kind of care-time (de la Bellacasa,2015),
2that is focused on the maintenance of bodies and social relations that
does not hold to a singular tempo. Care-time is focused on ‘living in the present
in order to make it work well’ (de la Bellacasa, 2015). But not well—in The
Walking Dead the focus is on desperately make it work at all. Or better still, it
is repair time, time focused on ‘things’ and their maintenance in a world that isalways-already falling apart (Jackson, 2014; Howe et al.,2016). The difference
is perhaps that within the Anthropocene the ‘ordering work’ of maintenance
and repair (Denis and Pontille, 2015) gives way to a disorderly and disordering
practice of salvage, where ruins must be further broken down if they are to be
made useful once more. Here then, to dwell in a world that is always-alreadyThe Walking Dead 339
falling apart is, to take up Jackson’s phrasing, to undertake ‘broken world think-
ing’ ( 2014, p. 222). To practice broken world thinking means to consider yourself
as existing in the aftermath ( 2014, p. 237). That is, it is to posit that the disaster has
already occurred and that we now dwell within it, a thesis Williams ( 2011)
amongst others proposes as the basis for political practice today.
5. Fear the Living ...
Introducing the ﬁrst paperback edition of the comic book version of The Walking
Dead , Kirkman sets out that the comic is not a work of horror but is about ‘watch-
ing Rick survive’ (Kirkman & Moore, 2008). Survival in The Walking Dead is
about dwelling in a ruined world littered with the dead who have become an
atmosphere of inhuman violence, menacing and without end. Life within the
ruins exists in a state of tension between two tendencies within survivalism:
that of bare survival, the focused activities of merely ﬁghting to survive, andthat of making a life, of refusing to be reduced to bare survival and instead invest-ing in a form of life that is at odds with the notion of unrelenting civil war that
characterises bare survival (Tiqqun, 2010). It is this tension that we see played
out without teleology in The Walking Dead. Here we turn to the pivotal events
of season three of the TV series to draw out this tension and its signiﬁcance.
During season three Rick and the band of survivors ﬁnd an apparently aban-
doned prison, and decide to hide out there as it is easily defended once the existing
zombie population is destroyed ( The Walking Dead, Ep. 3.1, 2012). Inside the
prison they encounter a small band of convicts with whom they try to negotiatea space-sharing arrangement, by putting the two groups into separate prisonblocks. The deal brokered is that Rick and his group will help the convicts cleara wing of the prison that they will then live in, leaving another already cleared
wing for Rick and his group. However, while clearing the new wing, the apparent
leader of the convict group twice attempts to kill Rick, with Rick dispatching himto a grizzly end instead. One of the other convicts runs off to be chased by Rick,
who locks him outside amidst a group of zombies (we do not see him die, but hear
sounds of screaming and ﬁghting from behind a closed door).
The episode continues, moving to a scene with the two remaining convicts, one
where Rick and his group are poised to kill them, but decide to let them live in thenewly cleared wing. Here we see the ﬁrst act of the tension, where Rick oscillatesbetween brutally slaying those people who appear as a threat to his group, and
embracing a broader notion of life that is open to chance human encounters and
new social bonds, a process often mediated through how the community of survi-vors is deﬁned (‘us’ or ‘we’) ( The Walking Dead, Ep. 3.2, 2012). These moments
ofThe Walking Dead are always overshadowed by an atmosphere of fear born of a
vulnerability of existing outside of a state of law. Will the group be betrayed? Arelives of those who are known to be ‘trustworthy’ being put at risk by the unknown(living) bodies? The opening up of the community of survivors suggests the need340 N. Beuret & G. Brown
to trouble—but not eradicate—the necessarily violent work of making a world ﬁt
for some lives but not others (van Dooren, 2014). This moment in season three is
put to the test in the next episode where the convict we thought dead, ravaged byzombies when locked outside after ﬂeeing, returns to kill Rick. In the resultingcarnage, Rick’s pregnant wife Lori dies during childbirth. Rick is distraught,
and descends into madness ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 3.16, 2012).
This moment of consequence—to kill or not to kill—plays out across the season
via an extended encounter with a ‘gated community’ ruled by a sadistic individual
known as ‘The Governor’. In the gated community we see a series of attempts to
live life with others, letting go of the horror outside the community’s walls (even if
those attempts do include scenes of barbarity and zombie blood-sports). It is a con-trast to the prison, which is still the scene of a life in the making, one that while
safe is nothing more than a space for bare survival. Ultimately the season ends,
after a series of raids, kidnappings and reprisals, in The Governor launching anassault on the prison, intending on killing Rick and his group and taking their
place inside the safety of the prison walls. The assault fails and The Governor
is forced to chase after his ‘troops’ as they ﬂee. Once he manages to arrest theirﬂight, he turns on his own people, killing most of them before departing with a
handful of others into the ruined world ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 3.16, 2012).
This interplay between survival and life takes place throughout the show on a
series of ever-more detailed levels.
In one of the season ﬁnale’s ﬁnal scenes, Rick’s son Carl (who is 13 years old)
shoots a boy not much older than himself, who was one of The Governors troops.The boy had surrendered, but Carl told his father that he shot the surrendering boybecause ‘he couldn’t take the chance’, telling his father that many of the group’s
members who had recently died, including his mother (Rick’s wife Lori), had died
because Rick failed to kill those responsible when he had the chance—that is, hewas not brutal enough. As the show progresses we see Carl become ever-more har-
dened to the violence of survival, at one point graphically explaining to a surviv-
ing priest in season four exactly how to make sure you kill a zombie with amachete, a process that elicits deep concern from several of the characters includ-ing Rick ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 3.16, 2012). This transformation, like that of his
father, is not an even process implying a telos to survival. Carl—like Rick—swings between modes of survival, at turns focused on the brutality of life inthe world of the walking dead, and at others on making more out of his life
than mere survival. From parenthood and childhood through to love affairs, frater-
nal relations to friendship, the process of survival undoes them all, leaving them asa series of unresolved tensions—does one ﬁght to survive, no matter what the cost,
or is there something more to hold to, something more to live for?
Like other seasons, season three is a long exercise in brutality—in pitting the
desires for community, either in a prison or in the gated community ruled by TheGovernor, against the savagery of a life outside the commune. The season concludes
with Rick and his group victorious, but only at a high cost. The ending sees theThe Walking Dead 341
remaining gated community survivors being bussed into the prison, to live in a now
expanded community, in a moment that is expanded in the fourth season where we
ﬁnd a thriving community, replete with self-managed social roles, communal kitch-
ens, makeshift schools and a farm. The prison community is ever-growing, as Rickand his band of survivors bring in more people that they ﬁnd outside the walls. Rick
has transformed himself—he has taken leave of the savagery of bare life and taken
up farming ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 4.1, 2013 ).
But again the season swings between savagery and community, as The Governor
returns with another band of survivors and a tank, to once again try to take the prison
and enact revenge. Rick pleads with The Governor at the fence, saying that they
could leave all that had happened in the past, and that they could live in theprison together. But The Governor has no faith in communal bonds—he declares
Rick a liar for uttering such a thing: there is only violence and savagery, and the
kind of form of life Rick is proposing is, to The Governor, nothing but a liemasking the brutality of survival. There is a battle, the prison walls are torn
down, The Governor dies, zombies invade the once-refuge, and the survivors are
scattered. In a sense the story goes nowhere: there is, in the end, nowhere for it togo. There is only the pulsating narrative between bare survival and making a life,
and the struggle to inhabit the process of living ( The Walking Dead, Ep. 4.8, 2013 ).
6. Bare Survival
Much has already been written on the signiﬁcance of zombie narratives vis-a `-vis
economic crisis: from crisis of capitalism (Harman, 2010) to those of the working
class (Shaviro, 2002). There are also numerous accounts of the effects of late mod-
ernity as zombifying (Paik, 2012) or even of the zombie as a Bartelby-esque ﬁgure
of revolt (Lauro and Embry, 2008). Here we want to suggest that a more provo-
cative reading is one that takes the end of the world more seriously. After all,
few economic crises actually end the world. There are however actual scientiﬁc
narratives that describe the end of the world, beginning right now, or if notright now then within a few short years. And as we have noted above what
deﬁnes the Anthropocene is its status as a factual description of an ending that
has already arrived and manifests as an on-going disaster for us as a species.Indeed, as Hamilton has forcefully argued the Anthropocene could signal the
end of the human species ( 2010 ):
even with the most optimistic set of assumptions ...we have no chance of
preventing emissions rising well above a number of critical tipping points
that will spark uncontrollable climate change. The Earth’s climate wouldenter a chaotic era lasting thousands of years before natural processes even-
tually establish some sort of equilibrium. Whether human beings would still
be a force on the planet, or even survive, is a moot point. One thing seemscertain: there will be far fewer of us. (Hamilton, 2010, pp. 21–22)342 N. Beuret & G. Brown
The picture Hamilton paints here is one of a ruined world where humans ﬁght to
survive. If anything The Walking Dead paints a rosier picture of the future, where
the only thing to be survived are zombies and brutal humans and not chaotic andmonstrous weather, the inability to grow crops, rising seas and depleted resources.Reading The Walking Dead through this ecological lens suggests that the question
of how we survive is central. As Paik notes, the principle ethical dilemma of The
Walking Dead, and thus for the praxis of survival, is ‘how far one is willing to goin order to preserve one’s own life or the lives of those whom one loves’ ( 2012,
p. 4). It is this ethical dilemma that animates the narrative oscillation in the
Walking Dead between bare survival and making a life, but as an ethical
dilemma it is grounded in necessity and not choice. Or rather, the choice isoften posed as one over what constitutes necessity, thus making survival a con-
tested state of life.
This dilemma could be said to speak to the tension surrounding the utilisation of‘humanity’ as a universal agent within Anthropocenic discourse (Crist, 2013;
Haraway, 2014; Todd, 2015). In both instances there is a common root to the criti-
cisms: that of the historical construction of the universal subject ‘humanity’. In aneffort to address this through the concept of the Anthropocene, Lewis and Maslin
(2015) have suggested dating the Anthropocene from 1610, or the period of socio-
demographic collapse in the Americas that followed from Spanish and Portuguese
conquests. We would agree with the necessary entangling of legacies of violenceand dispossession in any accounting for the emergence of the current geological
epoch. But while noting this we also would suggest that the Anthropocene poten-
tially marks a novel geo-historical terrain that must be addressed ethico-politicallyin its own right as the grounds of politics. That is, the planetary exhaustion of innu-
merable resources, the potentially catastrophic stress being placed on a number of
biospheric processes, the ruination of late industrial infrastructure and the fact ofclimate change all suggest that the Anthropocenic earth as the terrain with and on
which politics is to be made is fundamentally different to that of the Holocene.
Furthermore, if as Mitchell ( 2013 ) suggests the notion of progress itself is an arte-
fact of a particular conﬂuence of human social organisation and energy resources,this would suggest that progress must either be radically reimagined for an earth
no longer capable of sustaining boundless accumulation or give way to another
political project that articulates an alternative approach to time and the more-than-human world.
Put simply, survival as a form of life brings out the ever-present tension
between bare survival and making a life. While this tension is realised as a differ-entiated horizon insofar as the question of survival is organised through distinct
colonial, racial, gendered and (crucially) geographical differences, differences
that are radically compounded by the ecological unravelling that characterisesthe Anthropocene (Parenti, 2011), we contend that it is nonetheless a common
horizon. Or, given the Anthropocene dates a past event, a common ground. WeThe Walking Dead 343
can explore the tensions that inhere in survival as a differentiated common ground
by turning to Whyte’s critical reading of Agamben’s notion of bare life.
As Whyte ( 2013) outlines, bare life is a description of a life that has been
excised from the protection of the law or community and exposed to sovereignpower and the threat of death. Bare life, for Agamben, is not only a matter of
exposure and expulsion. The mechanics of bare life function to divide political
life from natural life (Whyte, 2013, p. 21)—natural life here meaning the basic
animality of life, its biological functioning, in contrast to the social forms thathuman life takes. Agamben ( 2003) does not set out to naturalise such a distinction,
only to suggest that this fabricated division is fundamental to European politicalthought. Agamben ( 1998, p. 11) claims that the originary distinction between
life and politics taints all European political traditions, rendering them all proble-
matic as means of liberation. This is because the expansion of the dominion of
politics over life—the emergence and unfolding of biopolitics—eventually evac-uates politics of substance (Agamben, 2003).
As life is progressively subjected to political practice, all of life becomes managed
by the logic of politics, calculable and thus stripped bare of anything particular aboutit. The mere fact of living, and the necessities that govern that fact, become the basis of
politics and thus politics becomes biopolitics. Agamben’s thought here is deeply
indebted to Aristotle, in particular his distinction between life itself and the goodlife. Aristotle distinguishes between the biological necessities of life, necessitiesthat push people to band together for the sake of biological life, and the good life
which is a cultivation of social, ethical, artistic and political forms that can only
take place once the bare necessities of life have been secured. Freedom, Aristotlebelieved, can only be secured once people are free from the work of survival.
Whyte’s reading troubles this distinction, or at least suggests how there is no
one moment survival as bare life is overcome. Rather there is a constant move-ment or contestation around making a life that threatens the reduction of life to
bare survival. Such a reading echoes suggestions that modernist forms of life
are threatened with extinction within the Anthropocene (Hamilton, 2010).
Reading such suggestions critically, we could posit that the erosion of social,environmental and infrastructural security (Dalby, 2009; Fortun, 2014; Howe
et al .,2016) produces an unstable ground of social life, threatening speciﬁc
forms of life with extinction (van Dooren, 2014).
Returning to The Walking Dead what we see are lives that have been plunged
back into the daily work of survival, the freedoms of civilised life lying in ruins.Read alongside Chakrabarty’s ( 2009) historical theorisation that the Anthropo-
cene marks the end of modernist conceptions of freedom, survival, not boundless
progress, becomes the ground of human sociality. All of life thus appears as bare
life. And yet this is not what we ﬁnd detailed in The Walking Dead. Instead what
we see is a process of survival that continually poses the question ‘what is necess-
ary to live?’ At points in the narrative, merely living is not enough—people are344 N. Beuret & G. Brown
willing to die for community, for friends and lovers, for transitory pleasures and
for points of principle.
This question of survival vs. life is posed explicitly towards the middle of
season ﬁve of the TV programme. During a brief moment of respite, Rick tellsthe story of his grandfather who survived the Second World War by thinking of
himself as already dead, only returning to life after the war had ended. Rick
says that is how their group will survive—by imagining themselves to be ‘thewalking dead’. This is contested, both immediately and later on in the programmeby several of the characters. One character, Daryl, reacts in horror, saying that ‘we
ain’t them, ...we ain’t them’. The idea that survival is a kind of living death ﬁlls
Daryl with dread. A number say that survival is not enough, and that the world is
never going to recover. Speaking speciﬁcally against notions that some place clear
of zombies exists, or that a cure for the catastrophe will be found, another charac-
ter Glenn argues that the ruined world ﬁlled with zombies is how the future willlook forever, that there is no hope of return to the past. Without the hope of
return or renewal, to live as though one were dead would be to give up all hope
of making a life ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 5.10, 2015).
Contra Agamben, what is suggested by The Walking Dead is that survival is
always a struggle over what will constitute a necessity, and that life cannot everbe freed from such a labour. This corresponds with Whyte’s ( 2013, p. 42)
reading against Agamben, where she poses a historical sense of the politicisationof life. Whyte suggests that at each moment we are confronted with the need
to survive a question is posed: is merely surviving enough reason to live (2013,
p. 42). That is, what should we consider to be the foundations of our survival,what will we count as necessities, and what forms of life we will endure. Will
survival be mere survival, the reduction of politics to bare life, or will it be a
new formulation, a refusal to separate how we live from what we need to live
(Whyte, 2013, p. 42).
InThe Walking Dead, this tension is never completely resolved. What we
witness is a never-ceasing movement between the bare fact of survival—ﬁndingfood, healing wounds, killing zombies, etc.—and those moment of having alife—love, social ritual, communal and fraternal bonds, etc. What we see in The
Walking Dead is a continual work of trying to ﬁnd the space that can be cleared
just enough to make a life and not merely ﬁght to survive. At while there aremoments of hope to be found in the narrative, what we see more often than not
is the failure to make a life, perhaps best captured by the un-civilising of Rick,
who becomes increasingly savage and violent as the series progress, his hopesfor a life having been continually dashed and frustrated.
7. To be for some Forms of Life ...
As both the show and comics continue, we see ever-more collective iterations of
this tension between bare survival and making a life, as both progress intoThe Walking Dead 345
narrations of a permanent state of civil war between (precariously) settled commu-
nities. In season six the TV show takes up the Alexandria plot line from the comics
where Rick and his gang join a fortiﬁed township. After a series of conﬂicts with
the township residents (and a series of deaths and violent clashes), Rick and hisgang embrace the township community. This takes place for Rick after an attack
by human marauders (called ‘wolves’) is beaten back and a zombie horde that
has breached the walls of Alexandria is cleared out. The actions of the residentsof Alexandria, who take up arms and destroy those bodies that threaten the commu-nity, are understood by Rick as a demonstration that they have ‘what it takes’ to
survive. Because they will ﬁght and kill, Rick understands them to be able to be
incorporated into his collective social body. They are now ‘us’.
In his embrace of a broader polity, Rick does not resolve the tension between
bare survival and making a life. Rather he is making the capacity for violencecentral to the project of making a life. Without violence, without the ability andcapacity to make a space within which to live, there can be no form of life
beyond bare survival.
The world of The Walking Dead is one we have suggested mirrors the ruined
earth of the Anthropocene. In both it could be suggested that there is anabsence of un-occupied space, an absence that manifests as an exhaustion of fron-
tiers. The creation or reproduction of any given form of life requires puttinganother form of life (human or more-than-human) into question. This is not justto say that to be for some forms of life is to necessarily be against others
(Winner, 1986; van Dooren, 2014). The conﬂict between forms of life are inten-
siﬁed on a ruined earth insofar as the very possibility of accommodating conﬂict-
ing or contradictory forms of life is undermined in a period without either progress
or frontiers (Chakrabarty, 2009; Mitchell, 2013; Moore, 2015). In The Walking
Dead we see conﬂicts over both the space in which to live and the resources
necessary to live. Similarly, what we are already seeing in the Anthropocene isan era of environmentally driven conﬂicts and the preparations of environmental
states of emergency (Parenti, 2011; Klare, 2012). More to the point, the capacity to
sustain some forms of life, particularly those consumer lifestyles of the globalNorth, are only possible through the destruction of other spaces of human and
more-than-human life.
The Walking Dead presents us with an image of life amidst on-going eco-infra-
structural disaster—things have not been maintained, infrastructure is breakingdown, and an inhuman catastrophe walks the earth consuming the unwary. The
Anthropocene is as much an expression of ruined socio-technical infrastructureand its concomitant accidents in the global North as it is an expression of the
impact of human socio-economic activity. The disasters of late industrialism
present as complex disasters that must be endured but threaten to never beresolved. Taking care of socio-technical infrastructure in such an epoch is as
much a work of salvage as it is of repair and maintenance. Salvage, as the lack
of ecological surplus and of frontier space combine with the on-going disasters346 N. Beuret & G. Brown
of the Anthropocene to produce a soiled earth that functionally undermines any
capacity to lay a stable foundation for the steady re-accumulation of wealth or
mastery over nature (Clark, 2010; 2014; Moore, 2015).
8. Salvage
It is often the visions of looting and salvage that form the secret joy of zombie
ﬁlms, from the characters of Dawn of the Dead (1978) freely looting a shopping
mall to the idea that everything is now up for grabs, and that you can take whatever
you can claim. In The Walking Dead this joyous vision of salvage quickly gives
way to a slow work of salvage that has more in common with the reproductivetime of care work (de la Bellacasa, 2015) than it does to the destruction of prop-
erty-values found in other apocalyptic visions of the future.
Starting from within a period of breakdown and collapse without renewal, the
continual and necessary work of repair appears as a labour of salvage, as a work ofinvention within the ruins (Jackson, 2014 ). This is the second way the ﬁgure of the
survivor differs from that of other modernist political agents. Where the classical
vision of the worker, for example, is of one who produces value, the survivor pro-
duces nothing. The survivor salvages.
Salvage presupposes (and follows from) breakage. It is to take something that
has lost its value and ﬁnd a way to make it work again. In the world of The
Walking Dead, everything has broken down, and everything must be sal-vaged—from cars, to guns, to social roles and relations, to dreams and ideas of
what constitutes community and living. This is salvage in its most total and expan-
sive mode—in a utopian mode (Williams, 2011, p. 42). See for example the trans-
formation of the rooms, artefacts and exercise yards of the prison in season threeinto the tools, equipment and land necessary for low-key farming and treatment of
the sick. Perhaps even more poignantly the reappropriation of the pipes of a church
organ for the purposes of building defensive structures in the early part of seasonﬁve ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 5.5, 2014).
InThe Walking Dead , capitalism as a social form has come to an end. The
excesses of plague-nature have undone it. We could suggest that the Anthropoceneinvokes a future end of capitalism through a similar process of excessive nature—
storms, ﬂoods, sea-rises, etc. Or also by absences—no people, no workers, no clear
ground in The Walking Dead ; no oil, no soil, no room to expand in the Anthropo-
cene. In both scenarios that which is terminated by disaster is capitalism.
This is a point that has been long made by many environmental and political
thinkers, such as Heinberg ( 2007), Foster et al.(2010), Klein ( 2014) and Moore
(2015). And despite the diversity of arguments presented by even this small
sample of commentators, they all agree on two points. The ﬁrst is that the cause
of environmental crises is capitalism as an socio-economic system, and the
second is that the endless growth required by capitalism in order to ﬂourish notonly cannot proceed indeﬁnitely, but is in fact now at an end.The Walking Dead 347
If we put political analysis and commentary to one side, we ﬁnd much the same
argument being increasingly made by the scientiﬁc community. From editorials in
the usually staid journal Nature calling for direct action by scientists (Grantham,
2012, p. 303), to serious sessions at major international conferences, such as that
of the American Geophysical Union, where one such session was entitled ‘Is Earth
F∗∗ked? Dynamical Futility of Global Environmental Management and Possibili-
ties for Sustainability via Direct Action Activism’ (Mingle, 2012), to the work of
Anderson ( 2012; 2013) from the Tyndall climate change research centre, there is
an increasing call from within the scientiﬁc community to recognise the unviabil-ity of our current economic system.
InThe Walking Dead , exchange has broken down and new uses must be found
for old things. Labour is focused not on productivity but reproduction, and repro-duction is not reducible to utility. As Jackson argues, when repair and not pro-
duction becomes central to our understanding, economics becomes a matter ofsustainability and not growth. Extending this beyond a moment of breakdown
that promises a return to functionality, salvage is more of a question of making
things work long enough to enable a form of life to endure. In The Walking
Dead we are presented with a partial or stalled trajectory however. The struggle
to salvage enough, to fabricate the space to live forms the central narrative ofThe Walking Dead. To be free of desperate survival, to escape from a pitifullife eating pet food, as we ﬁnd the characters at the start of season three, even ifall that can be found to build that freedom is a re-purposed prison, this is the
tension around making a life in the ruins of the world that The Walking Dead
explores ( The Walking Dead , Ep. 3.1, 2012). The struggle is to deepen the work
of salvage and turn it into a process of invention, invention being that pointwhere repair becomes something more, a process of ‘making new’ (Jackson,
2014).
9. Conclusion
The Anthropocene is an epoch marked by a pervasive ecological vulnerability, one
that takes place at a planetary scale and produced by the progressive exhaustion of
the environmental grounds of human social life. This is not to suggest, however,
that there is a singular human subject that stands apart or indeed over a unitary‘nature’. The articulation of the concept of the Anthropocene would appear to
be a political attempt by earth scientists to bring a global political subject into
being (Bonneuil and Fressoz, 2016 ), one capable of tackling ‘global’ issues
such as climate change and biodiversity loss. Such an articulation wouldobscure the long history of not only environmental injustices and ecological vio-
lence (Bonneuil and Fressoz, 2016), but the disaggregated character of humanity
itself (Malm and Hornborg, 2014), insofar as there is no singular ‘human’ subject.
Nonetheless, the naming of the Anthropocene does mark a series of biospheric and348 N. Beuret & G. Brown
geo-chemical transformations to the planet, changes that suggest a fundamental
(uneven) transformation of the grounds of human life.
Contrary to attempts to renew a sense of human mastery over the earth and to
subsume nature in its entirety under the rubric of human action (Crist, 2013), the
Anthropocene signals the deepening of the uncertainties produced by the earth
sciences (Stengers, 2000). Indeed, the geological science that underpins the
naming of the Anthropocene undoes previous notions of terrestrial stability
(Clark, 2014 ), and in doing so collapses human into non-human time (Chakra-
barty, 2009). Moreover, such an unsettling brings the more-than-human world
out from the background of social life, not as an object of concern but as alocus of unpredicatable actions and events (Clark, 2014). The combination of fore-
grounding the varied agencies of the biosphere and the production of a profound
state of uncertainty and vulnerability vis-a `-vis human life turns politics to ques-
tions of care, repair and reproduction (Jackson, 2014; de la Bellacasa, 2015).
Or, returning to our focus on a ruined earth, to questions of survival and salvage.
We set out to explore the plausibilities of political life in the Anthropocene as an
exhausted material ground of politics through a reading of The Walking Dead as
an image of a ruined earth, paying particular attention to how the image of a ruinedworld brings the practices of organising human and more-than-human relations
into sharp relief. The visual narrative of The Walking Dead sets out three questions
relevant to the concept of the Anthropocene.
It presents viewers with an image of the lived environment as inhuman and
unsettling. Infrastructure fails, social life revolves around everyday tasks andlife is subject to unpredictable and frequent inhuman violence that erupts out ofthe refusal of the dead to die. It is not only an unpredictable world, but one that
exceeds control. Rather than mastery their environments, the protagonists of
The Walking Dead ﬁght to endure within it.
The problem of endurance is a question of the character of survival. Survival is
not constituted as a past event that has been overcome in order to pursue more‘properly human’ tasks, in the Aristotelian sense. Nor is survival a condition tobe overcome; it is the character of life itself. It is a form of life in tension,where struggle is constituted as an every-present conﬂict to make a life and
refuse the reduction of survival to bare life. Survival in this register is an acknowl-
edgement that the inhuman and more-than-human will never return to the back-ground, will never become something to be assumed or denied (Plumwood,
1993). As such, survival is an act of unceasing reproduction—of care, mainten-
ance and repair. The time of survival is not that of modernist notions of progress.It is not a singular historical continuum framing the accumulation of wealth,
power and knowledge, but rather a complex ecology of tempos, where time is
bound to speciﬁc practices, events and places. It is a kind of care-time entangledwith ruined environments and infrastructures, where the narrative focus is not on
making things better but making things work.The Walking Dead 349
The need to focus on survival and making things work is suggestive of the
inability to ﬁnally resolve the tension between bare life and making a life
within survival. And as explored in the trajectories of the characters in The
Walking Dead it is also suggestive of the inability to put violence into the past
of social life. At no point does the violence foundational to forming socialorders, from the ﬁctional creations of community in The Walking Dead to the his-
torical violences that mark the European legacies of colonialism and fossil fuel
capitalism, ever cease. At no point does it become a matter that can be incorpor-ated into a history of founding or forgotten within an origin story. Rather the ques-
tion of violence—how violent to be, what violence is justiﬁed and what to care for
or abandon—is continually posed.
Exploring the question of violence and the practice of survival through the
attempts to constitute community in The Walking Dead , we have suggested that
the work of the survivor in the Anthropocene be considered as a labour ofsalvage. As a particular mode of the practices of care and repair, salvage is
grounded in what can be done with what remains. It is a practice that is limited
to making do, to improvisation rather than invention.
As such, salvage sets out the limits of the politics of survival. Salvage starts with
the world as it is found: it works with the ruins of the Anthropocene, the toxicdrifts and broken infrastructures. The existing inequities of material wealth anddistribution, the ruins of the present world, form the differentiated grounds of sur-vival. In The Walking Dead this plays out between small bands of human survi-
vors. In the real world we can see this difference geographically striatedbetween those still-wealthy cities of the global North and the slums and informalsettlements of the global South. In The Walking Dead the conﬂict over the material
resources needed to make a life takes place in small armed conﬂicts, ambushes andfraught negotiations undertaken face to face. In the real world it is a matter ofdrone strikes, boarder police and military occupations (Parenti, 2011).
This formulation indicates the limit of the survivor as political ﬁgure. While
within the histories of working class struggles, it was always the agency of theworker that was ﬁgured to be capitalism’s catastrophe (the real state of emer-gency), in catastrophic fantasies like The Walking Dead , the survivor changes
nothing. It is catastrophe itself—the zombie plague—that appears as the historicalagent. This is the signiﬁcance of vulnerability. With the return of the inhuman as aforce that shapes human social life, struggle ceases to be one for progression and
instead one over the character of survival. But will survival be mere survival, the
reduction of politics to bare life, or will it be a new formulation, a refusal to sep-arate how we live from what we need to live (Whyte, 2013, p. 42). In The Walking
Dead , this tension is never completely resolved. Rather it, and not progress
becomes the horizon towards which the political is played out. The questionraised for we who dwell within the Anthropocene is thus what kind of survival
do we want, and how are we to inhabit our differentiated vulnerabilities.350 N. Beuret & G. Brown
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our fellow Historical Materialism panellists on the ques-
tion of surviving the Anthropocene (2014) as well as the anonymous reviewers
who offered valuable criticisms that helped us to strengthen this paper. Nicholas
Beuret would like to thank the Fisher Center, Hobart and William Smith Collegeswhose support enabled the further development of the material within this paper.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes
1Of course, in line with genre conventions, the ‘walkers’ in Kirkman’s work are never referred to
as ‘zombies’.
2Not that care-time in the work of de la Bellacasa necessarily takes up the implied positivityuncritically. Indeed, the preferred device for exploring the interrelation of care-time and soilis the practice of cultivating rot—composting.
References
Ables, M. ( 2010 )The Politics of Survival (London: Duke University Press).
Adams, V., Murphy, M. and Clarke, A. E. ( 2009 ) Anticipation: Technoscience, life, affect, tempor-
ality, Subjectivity, 28(1), pp. 246–265.
Agamben, G. ( 1998 )Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life (Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press).
Agamben, G. ( 2002 )Remnants of Auschwitz: The Witness and the Archive (New York: Zone Books).
Agamben, G. ( 2003 )The Open: Man and Animal (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press).
Ammons, E. and Roy, M. (Eds) (2015 )Sharing the Earth: An International Environmental Justice
Reader (Athens: University of Georgia Press).
Anderson, K. ( 2012 )Climate Change Going Beyond Dangerous – Brutal Numbers and Tenuous
Hope . Development Dialogue September 2012 (What Next Volume III – Climate, Development
and Equity), pp. 16–40.
Anderson, K. ( 2013 ) Avoiding dangerous climate change demands de-growth strategies from weal-
thier nations. Available at http://kevinanderson.info/blog/avoiding-dangerous-climate-change-
demands-de-growth-strategies-from-wealthier-nations/ .
Archer, D. ( 2009 )The Long Thaw: How Humans are Changing the Next 100,000 Years of the
Earth’s Climate (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Asafu-Adjaye, J., Blomqvist, L., Brand, S., Brook, B. W., DeFries, R., Ellis, E., Foreman, C., Keith,
D., Lewis, M., Lynas, M and Nordhaus, T. (2015 ).An Ecomodernist Manifesto. Available at
http://www.ecomodernism.org/manifesto .
Beck, U. ( 1992 )Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity (London: Sage).
de la Bellacasa, Maria Puig. (2012 ) ‘Nothing comes without its world’: Thinking with care, The
Sociological Review , 60(2), pp. 197–216.
de la Bellacasa, Maria Puig. (2015 ) Making time for soil: Technoscientiﬁc futurity and the pace of
care, Social Studies of Science , 45(5), pp. 691–716.
Berardi, F. ( 2011 )After the Future (Oakland: AK Press).The Walking Dead 351
Bonneuil, C. and Fressoz, J.-B. (2016 )The Shock of the Anthropocene: The Earth, History and Us
(London: Verso).
Braun, B. and Whatmore, S. J. (Eds) (2010 )Political Matter: Technoscience, Democracy, and
Public Life (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Buell, L. ( 1995 )The Environmental Imagination: Thoreau, Nature Writing and the Formation of
American Culture (London: Harvard University Press).
Canavan, G. ( 2010 ) We are the walking dead: Race, time, and survival in Zombie narrative, Extra-
polation , 51(3), pp. 431–453.
Castree, N. ( 2014a ) Geography and the Anthropocene II: Current contributions, Geography
Compass , 8(7), pp. 450–463.
Castree, N. ( 2014b )Making Sense of Nature: Representation, Politics and Democracy (New York:
Routledge).
Chakrabarty, D. ( 2009 ) The climate of history: Four theses, Critical Inquiry , 35(2), pp. 197–222.
Clark, N. ( 2010 )Inhuman Nature: Sociable Life on a Dynamic Planet (London: Sage).
Clark, N. ( 2014 ) Geo-politics and the disaster of the Anthropocene, The Sociological Review ,
62(Issue Supplement S1), pp. 19–37.
Crist, E. ( 2013 ) On the poverty of our nomenclature, Environmental Humanities, 3, pp. 129–147.
Dalby, S. ( 2009 )Security and Environmental Change (Cambridge: Polity).
Denis, J. and Pontille, D. (2015 ) Material ordering and the care of things, Science, Technology, &
Human Values, 40(3), pp. 338–367.
Denis, J., Mongili, A. and Pontille, D. (2015 ) Maintenance & repair in science and technology
studies, TECNOSCIENZA: Italian Journal of Science & Technology Studies , 6(2), 5–15.
van Dooren, T. ( 2014 )Flight Ways: Life and Loss at the Edge of Extinction (New York: Columbia
University Press).
Fortun, K. ( 2014 ) From Latour to late industrialism, Hau: Journal of Ethnographic Theory , 4(1), pp.
309–329.
Foster, J. B., Clark, B. and York, R. (2010 )The Ecological Rift (New York: Monthly Review Press).
Grantham, J. ( 2012 ) Be persuasive. Be brave. Be arrested (if necessary), Nature , 491(7424), pp. 303.
Gunaratnam, Y. and Clark, N. (2012 ) Pre-race post-race: Climate change and planetary humanism,
Darkmatter , 9(1).
Hamilton, C. ( 2010 )Requiem for a Species: Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change
(Sydney: Allen & Unwin).
Hamilton, C. ( 2014 )Earthmasters: The Dawn of the Age of Climate Engineering (Cornwell: Yale
University Press).
Haraway, D. J. ( 2014 ) Anthropocene, capitalocene, chthulucene: Staying with the trouble, paper pre-
sented at the conference Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet , 8-10 May, Santa Cruz, USA.
Harman, C. ( 2010 )Zombie Capitalism: Global Crisis and the Relevance of Marx (Chicago, IL: Hay-
market Books).
Heinberg, R. ( 2007 )Peak Everything. Waking up in a Century of Decline in Earth’s Resources
(Forest Row: Clairview Books).
Howe, C., Lockrem, J., Appel, H., Hackett, E., Boyer, D., Hall, R., Schneider-Mayerson, M., Pope,
A., Gupta, A., Rodwell, E., Ballestero, A., Durbin, T., el-Dahdah, F., Long, E. and Mody, C.
(2016 ) Paradoxical infrastructures: Ruins, retroﬁt, and risk, Science, Technology, & Human
Values , 41(3), pp. 1–19.
Jackson, S. J. ( 2014 ) Rethinking repair, in: T. Gillespie, P. Boczkowski and K. Foot (Eds) Media
Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materiality and Society, pp. 221–239 (Cambridge:MIT Press).
Kirkman, R. and Moore, T. ( 2008 )The Walking Dead Volume 1: Days Gone By (Berkeley, CA:
Image).352 N. Beuret & G. Brown
Klare, M. ( 2012 )The Race for What’s Left: The Global Scramble for the World’s Last Resources
(New York: Metropolitan Books).
Klein, N. ( 2014 )This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs the Climate (New York: Simon &
Schuster).
Latour, B. ( 2004 )Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press).
Latour, B. ( 2015 ) Telling friends from foes in the time of the Anthropocene, in: C. Hamilton, C. Bon-
neuil and F. Gemenne (Eds) The Anthropocene and the Global Environment Crisis – Rethinking
Modernity in a New Epoch , pp. 145–155 (London: Routledge).
Lauro, S. J. and Embry, K. (2008 ) A zombie manifesto: The nonhuman condition in the era of
advanced capitalism, Boundary 2 , 35(1), pp. 85–108.
Lefebvre, H. ( 1991 )The Production of Space (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing).
Lewis, S. L. and Maslin, M. A. (2015 ) Deﬁning the Anthropocene, Nature , 519(7542), pp. 171–180.
Malm, A. and Hornborg, A. (2014 ) The geology of mankind? A critique of the Anthropocene nar-
rative, The Anthropocene Review , 1(1), pp. 62–69.
Massumi, B. (ed.) ( 1993 )The Politics of Everyday Fear (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota).
Mingle, J. ( 2012 ) Scientists ask blunt question on everyone’s mind, Slate Magazine .
Mitchell, T. ( 2013 )Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil (London: Verso).
Mol, A. ( 2008 )The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice (New York:
Routledge).
Moore, J. ( 2015 )Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital (London:
Verso).
Paik, P. ( 2012 ) The gnostic zombie and the state of nature: On Robert Kirkman’s The Walking Dead .
Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1912203 .
Papadopoulos, D. (2010 ) Insurgent posthumanism, Ephemera: Theory & Organisation in Politics ,
10(2), pp. 134–151.
Parenti, C. ( 2011 )Tropic of Chaos. Climate Change and the New Geography of Violence
(New York: Nation Books).
Plumwood, V. ( 1993 )Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (London: Routledge).
Quiggin, J. ( 2012 )Zombie Economics: How Dead Ideas Still Walk among Us (Princeton, NJ: Prin-
ceton
University Press).
Roitman, J. ( 2014 )Anti-Crisis (London: Duke University Press).
Russell, J. ( 2014 )Book of the Dead: The Complete History of Zombie Movies (London: Titan
Books).
Shaviro, S. ( 2002 ) Capitalist monsters, Historical Materialism , 10(4), pp. 281–290.
Solnit, R. ( 2010 )A Paradise Built in Hell. The Extraordinary Communities that Arise in Disaster
(New York: Pengiun Books).
Star, S. L. ( 1999 ) The ethnography of infrastructure, American Behavioural Scientist , 43(3), pp.
377–391.
Steffen, W., Persson, A ˚., Deutsch, L., Zalasiewicz, J., Williams, M., Richardson, K., Crumley, C.,
Crutzen, P., Folke, C., Gordon, L., Molina, M., Ramanathan, V., Rockstro ¨m, J., Scheffer, M.,
Schellnhuber, H. J. and Svedin, U. (2011 ) The anthropocene: From global change to planetary
stewardship, Ambio , 40(7), pp. 739–761.
Stengers, I. ( 2000 )The Invention of Modern Science (London: University of Minnesota Press).
Szerszynski, B. ( 2012 ) The end of the end of nature: the Anthropocene and the fate of the human, The
Oxford Literary Review , 34(2), pp. 165–184.
Thrift, N. (2010) Halos: Making more room in the world for new political orders, in: B. Braun and S.
J. Whatmore (Eds) Political Matter: Technoscience, Democracy, and Public Life, pp. 139–176
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Tiqqun. 2010 .Introduction to Civil War (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e)).The Walking Dead 353
Todd, Z. ( 2015 ) Indigenizing the Anthropocene, in: H. Davis and E. Turpin (Eds) Art in the Anthro-
pocene: Encounters Among Aesthetics, Politics, Environments and Epistemologies , pp. 241–
254 (London: Open Humanities Press).
Virilio, P. ( 2012 )The Adminstration of Fear (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e)).
Waters, C. N, Zalasiewicz, J., Summerhayes, C., Barnosky, A. D., Poirier, C., Gałuszka, A., Cear-
reta, A., Edgeworth, M., Ellis, E. C. and Ellis, M. (2016 ) The Anthropocene is functionally and
stratigraphically distinct from the Holocene, Science , 351(6269), pp. 137–153.
Weisman, A. ( 2008 )The World Without Us (Croydon: Virgin Books).
Whyte, J. ( 2013 )Castastrophe and Redemption: The Political Thought of Giorgio Agamben
(New York: State University of New York Press).
Williams, E. C. ( 2011 ).Combined and Uneven Apocalypse (Winchester: Zero Books).
Winner, L. ( 1986 )The Whale and the Reactor (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
Wynne, B. ( 1988 ) Unruly technology: Practical rules, impractical discourses and public understand-
ing’, Social Studies of Science , 18(1), pp. 147–167.
Yuen, W. (ed.) ( 2012 ) The walking dead and philosophy: Zombie apocalypse now (Chicago, IL:
Open Court).
Zalasiewicz, J., Williams, M., Smith, A., Barry, T. L., Coe, A. L., Bown, P. R., Brenchley, P., Can-
trill, D., Gale, A., Gibbard, P., Gregory, F. J. (2008 ) Are we now living in the Anthropocene?,
GSA Today , 18(2), pp. 4.
Zalasiewicz, J., Williams, M., Steffen, W. and Crutzen, P. ( 2010 ) The new world of the Anthropo-
cene, Environment, Science & Technology Viewpoint , 44, pp. 2228–2231.
Dawn of the Dead . 1978. [Film] George A. Romero. dir. USA: Laurel Group
The Walking Dead , Episode 3.1, Seed . 2012. AMC. 14 October. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 3.2, Sick. 2012. AMC. 21 October. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 3.16, Welcome to the Tombs . 2012. AMC. 31 March. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 4.1, 30 Days Without and Accident . 2013. AMC. 13 October. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 4.8, Too Far Gone . 2013. AMC. 1 December. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 5.5, Self Help. 2014. AMC. 9 November. 22.00
The Walking Dead , Episode 5.10, Them. 2015. AMC. 15 February. 22.00354 N. Beuret & G. Brown
