Third Text
ISSN: 0952-8822 (Print) 1475-5297 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ctte20
The Wretched Earth
Botanical Conﬂicts and Artistic InterventionsIntroduction
Ros Gray & Shela Sheikh
To cite this article: Ros Gray & Shela Sheikh (2018) The Wretched Earth, Third Text, 32:2-3,
163-175, DOI: 10.1080/09528822.2018.1483881
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09528822.2018.1483881
Published online: 25 Sep 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 16032
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ctte20
The Wretched Earth
Botanical Conﬂ icts and Artistic Interventions
Introduction
Ros Gray and Shela Sheikh
We begin with the recognition that the Earth is wretched. This is not a
metaphor. It is literally our ground. The Earth is wretched because its
soil–that thin layer of earth at the surface of the planet upon which we
depend for life –is contaminated, eroded, drained, burnt, exploded,
ﬂooded and impoverished on a worldwide scale. Our title evokes Frantz
Fanon ’s seminal book The Wretched of the Earth (1961), which called
upon the wretched of the earth ( les damnés de la terre ) to rise up
against imperialism in all its forms and create a new world that would
depart from the hypocrisies and violence of European humanism. As Jen-
nifer Wenzel and other scholars of postcolonial environmental humanities
have pointed out, despite his profound anthropocentricism and utilitarian-ism with regard to the natural world, Fanon ’s work is crucial for recognis-
ing that, as he states, the land is ‘the most essential value ’:‘European
opulence …has been nourished with the blood of slaves and it comes
directly from the soil and from the subsoil of that under-developed
world. ’
1That fundamental insight forms part of a long line of anti-
imperialist critique that includes Justus von Liebig, the nineteenth-
century German soil scientist and ‘father of the fertilizer industry ’,
whose work greatly inﬂ uenced Marx ’s writing on soil and ecology and
who identi ﬁed British agriculture and imperialism as a policy of robbing
the nutrients and resources of the soil of other countries.2
This special issue presents new research on, and in some cases gener-
ated through, contemporary art practices that both explore and intervenein the cultures, politics and systems of representation, as well as theirattendant desires and violences, generated through human interactionwith the soil. Our proposition is that, in order to do full justice toThird Text , 2018
Vol. 32, Nos. 2– 3, 163 –175, https://doi.org/10.1080/09528822.2018.1483881
© 2018 Third Text1 Frantz Fanon, The
Wretched of the Earth ,
Constance Farrington,
trans, Grove Press,New York, 1968, p 96, pp101–102, cited in Jennifer
Wenzel, ‘Reading Fanon
Reading Nature ’, in Anna
Bernard, Ziad Elmarsafy,and Stuart Murray, eds,What Postcolonial TheoryDoesn ’t Say , Routledge,
London, 2015, p 188. With
thanks to Rob Nixon for
pointing us to thisreference. See also ElizabethDeLoughrey and GeorgeHandley, ‘Introduction:
Toward an Aesthetics of theEarth ’, in Elizabeth
DeLoughrey and GeorgeHandley, eds, Postcolonial
Ecologies: Literatures ofthe Environment , Oxford
University Press, Oxford,2011, pp 3 –39, at p 3. In
addition to Wenzel ’s,
DeLoughrey and Handley’ s
reading of Fanon, notablestudies within a growingﬁeld that we might
designate as ‘postcolonial
environmental humanities ’
include: Rob Nixon,‘Environmentalism and
Fanon ’s diagnosis of ‘the wretched ofthe earth ’, we must understand more
deeply the extent to which this is due to the fact that the earth itself is
wretched, and that part of this condition has been the destruction of ‘eco-
logical ’relations with the earth. The phrase ‘the wretched earth ’signals
our ongoing engagement with anti-colonial and anti-imperialist writers
such as Fanon, but also the need to go beyond their recon ﬁgured human-
ism to think about the multiple human and nonhuman cohabitations thatconstitute the soil and, more broadly, our more-than-human commons.
3
In terms of its etymology and legal structures, colonialism, from the
Roman Empire onwards, has been inextricably bound with practices ofcultivation, both culturally and agri-culturally.
4Colonialism has always
entailed the cultivation of lands as well as that of bodies and minds,through the imposition of a dominant (colonial, neo-colonial, modernistand now neoliberal) form of culture –one that was, and continues to
be, deemed to be superior, more rational and enlightened, of higher
value and that is opposed to the ‘nature ’it seeks to construct and
harness. As such, to use the words of the postcolonial literary scholar
Pablo Mukherjee, ‘colonialisms and imperialisms, old and new ’must be
understood ‘as a state of permanent war on the global environment’
5–
including on the soil, both as a planetary entity and, in the words ofMaría Puig de la Bellacasa, as the ‘infrastructure of life ’.
6Colonialism,
thus, must be understood as an ‘offense against the earth ’7–be this in
its historical form or the contemporary realities of settler-colonialism,neo-colonial extractive capitalism (ie, corporate colonialism) and practicesof so-called development, as well as military ‘scorched earth ’policies (the
destruction of the environment and infrastructure of a military ‘enemy ’).
8
In the present day, the expansion of intensive agriculture and extractiveindustries, not to mention the continued remodelling of environments in
the name of development and sustainability, continues the violation of
the earth apace. As Kristina Lyons suggests, the Earth ’s soil has been
‘host to all terrestrial experiments and tragedies ’, and as such is not only
the sustainer of life, but both ‘grave ’and‘trash dump ’.
9
Yet more than simply an offence against the earth, the con ﬂicts sig-
nalled by our title are often enacted through the earth or natural environ-
ment. Landscapes and vegetation are not simply the backdrop against
which violence and dispossession unfold, but are mobilised as the very
medium of violence, whether this be through the above-mentionedscorched earth tactics, or through the role of planting and environmentalremodelling –including the enclosure of territory in the name of environ-
mental conservation –in land grabbing and dispossession.
10As such, in
order to fully grasp the violence of colonialism upon its subjects –those
who have historically been deemed ‘less-than-human ’or‘not-quite-
human ’and denied access to ‘human rights ’–it is necessary to also
address the violence carried out upon the landscape and environment;11
not to mention the structural violence (more often than not racialised)that limits access to resources and underlies a disproportionate exposureto toxicity on the part of certain, ‘sacriﬁceable ’populations.
12
Further, the ‘botanical con ﬂicts’of our title also includes what Gayatri
Chakravorty Spivak calls ‘epistemic violence ’(often amounting to what
Boaventura de Sousa Santos terms ‘epistemicide ’)13enacted through the
imposition of colonial systems of categorising forms of life, notably bota-nical taxonomy. Key here is the space of the garden, in multiple ways.164
Postcolonialism ’, in Ania
Loomba et al, Postcolonial
Studies and Beyond , Duke
University Press, Durham,
North Carolina, 2005, pp233–251; Elizabeth
DeLoughrey, Jill Didur,Anthony Carrigan, eds,Global Ecologies and theEnvironmentalHumanities: PostcolonialApproaches , Routledge,
London, 2015; UpamanyuPablo Mukherjee,Postcolonial Environments:Nature, Culture and the
Contemporary Indian
Novel in English , Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke,2010; T J Demos,Decolonizing Nature:Contemporary Art and thePolitics of Ecology ,
Sternberg, Berlin, 2016.
2 See John Bellamy Foster,
Marx ’s Ecology:
Materialism and Nature ,
Monthly Review Press,New York, 2000, especiallyp 164
3 In this vein, our re-reading
of Fanon, via Wenzel and
others, is to be aligned with
Rob Nixon and NaomiKlein ’s re-visiting of Edward
Said who, in Klein ’s words,
‘was no tree-hugger.
Descended from traders,artisans and professionals,he once described himself as“an extreme case of an
urban Palestinian whoserelationship to the land isbasically metaphorical ”’.
Naomi Klein, ‘Let Them
Drown: The Violence of
Othering in a Warming
World ’,London Review of
Books , vol 38, no 11, 2 June
2016, http://www.lrb.co.uk/
v38/n11/naomi-klein/let-them-drown ,a c c e s s e d1 7
May 2018. See also RobNixon, Slow Violence and
the Environmentalism of thePoor , Harvard University
Press, Cambridge,Massachusetts, London,2011.
4 Robert Young, for instance,
tells us in his entry on
colonia andimperium in
Barbara Cassin ’s
Dictionary of
Untranslatables that the
Latin term colonia –from
colere ,‘to cultivate ’or
‘inhabit ’–draws upon the
Gardens in the Western imagination often have utopian, pre-lapsarian
associations, but are in fact riven with ambivalences that stem from ques-
tions concerning who is displaced in order to demarcate their bound-
aries, and whose labour is exploited to maintain them as sites ofnourishment and enjoyment. Let us recall here the original title ofFanon’ s book, L e sd a m n é sd el at e r r e , often translated as the ‘wretched ’
of the earth but more accurately translated as ‘damned ’,f r o m damna ,
which refers to harm, hurt or injury. As Lewis Gordon points out,evoking the biblical references in Fanon ’s text, the damned are those
who fall below humanity, who are sent below ground into whatGordon names ‘the hellish zone of nonbeing’ .
14(The etymology of
‘damné’ is also mediated by the Hebrew adamah ,f r o m ‘dem,v i at h e
Kamitian/Egyptian Atum ,w h i c hm e a n s ‘man and clay or ground ’.)15
As such, the colonised subjects remain cast out of the Euro-Christiangarden of earthly delights, even if it is precisely through their knowledge
and labour that the actual garden that feeds and sustains this symbolic
garden –notably, the plantation system –is cultivated.
16In the introduc-
tion to Sowing Empire: Landscape and Colonization , Jill Casid refers to
Freud ’s allusion to Adam and Eve ’s expulsion from the garden of para-
dise as ‘aﬁrst diaspora, the expulsion from paradise, envisioned as a
garden, into a world of agricultural toil ’.17
The inauguration of botany as a scienti ﬁc discipline, which in time
came to be premised upon Carl Linnaeus ’s binomial system for classify-
ing and hierarchising forms of life,18took place as a consequence of the
exploratory voyages of the European colonial project and the consolida-
tion of the plantation system. In the e ighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
plantocracy shaped the emergence of scienti ﬁcj u s t i ﬁcations for colonial
racism. Botanical taxonomy, as Londa Schiebinger writes, can be under-
stood as ‘the base for all economics ’, and was vital for state purposes,
since exact knowledge of nature was key to amassing national wealth,
and hence power. As such, botanists were ‘agents of empire’ ,a n d
systems of nomenclature and taxonomy ‘tools of empire ’.19Botanical
nomenclature, based in Latin, allowed a particular plant to be distin-guished from all other plants over large units of space and time.
20‘Bota-
nical con ﬂicts’can here be understood through the epistemological
hierarchies underpinning botanical taxonomy, insofar as imperialscience sought to render scienti ﬁc principles as universal and objective,
in doing so suppressing the ‘Babel ’of local naming practices and
abstracting plant life from its local ecology; as such erasing what Schie-binger names the ‘biogeography ’of plants.
21By and large, imperial
science (what we might call a ‘monoculture of knowledge ’) excluded
other, ‘minor ’histories and systems of knowledge ( ‘ecologies of knowl-
edges ’),22as well as modes of being-in-the-world that are not premised
upon the value, pro ﬁtability and usefulness of plants that underpins
the vampiric logic of capitalism to wards nature. From the perspective
of today ’s planetary crises, these other systems might allow us to catch
glimpses of what Puig de la Bellacasa names ‘alternative, liveable
relationalities ’that can ‘hopefully [contribute] to other possible worlds
in the making ’.23
In the context of imperial botany the space of the garden was vital,
with the forerunners of the modern scienti ﬁc botanic garden, which
were established in sixteenth-century Italy, combining ‘the scienti ﬁc165
meaning of colonus as
farmer and designated a
settlement or farm estate,often granted to veteransoldiers in conqueredterritories. Robert Young,‘Colonia ’, in Barbara
Cassin, ed, Dictionary of
Untranslatables: APhilosophical Lexicon ,
Emily Apter, Jacques Lezraand Michael Wood, transand eds, Steven Rendallet al, trans, PrincetonUniversity Press, Princeton,New Jersey, 2013, pp
1056 –1058, at p 1056.
5 Upamanyu Pablo
Mukherjee, Postcolonial
Environments: Nature,
Culture and theContemporary IndianNovel in English , Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke,2010, p 68
6 See María Puig de la
Bellacasa, ‘Encountering
Bioinfrastructure:
Ecological Struggles and the
Sciences of Soil ’,Social
Epistemology: A Journal ofKnowledge, Culture andPolicy , vol 28, issue 1:
Absences, 2014, pp 26 –40,
at p 27
7 DeLoughrey and Handley,
‘Introduction: Toward an
Aesthetics of the Earth ’,o p
cit, p 5
8 A notable example of
‘scorched earth ’tactics is
the US ’s use of the herbicide
and defoliant Agent Orange
as part of its warfare
strategies to destroy thefoliage and thus exposeenemy combatants duringthe Vietnam War.
9 Kristina Lyons, ‘The Poetics
of Soil Health’ , 16 March
2016, http://blog.castac.
org/2016/03/poetics-of-soil-health/ , accessed 17
May 2018
10 Regarding the conjunction
between conservation andimperialism, see RichardGrove, Green Imperialism:
Colonial Expansion,Tropical Island Edens andthe Origins ofEnvironmentalism, 1600 –
1860 , Cambridge
University Press,Cambridge, 1995. See also
ideal of comprehending universal nature ’with religious motivations for
recreating the garden of Eden by ‘gathering together all the creations scat-
tered at the fall of man ’.24As such, the botanical garden can be under-
stood as a laboratory of empire, as can tropical island colonies (also
incubators for the revival of European Edenic discourse) and the spaceof the plantation more broadly.
25
Moreover, the construction of the category of the ‘damnés ’of the earth
needs to be read in the context of this wholesale classi ﬁcation of forms of
life enacted by imperial science. Notable botanists such as Linnaeus, as
well as Hans Sloane and Joseph Banks, were in ﬂuential in the development
of scienti ﬁc racism, as well as the endorsement of slavery and colonisation
of foreign territories.26Colonial natural science, in particular Linnaean
taxonomy, was central in the construction of race and sexuality, insofar
as each became elevated as a fundamental marker of difference. Linnaeusﬁrst classi ﬁed human beings according to a racial taxonomy divided into
four categories, determined by geography –homo sapiens americanus,
europaeus, asiatiticus and africanus –as well as two further categories:
‘wild man ’and ‘man-made ’monsters.
27From thereon, hierarchies of
race came to bear upon forms of knowledge across ﬁelds such as
economy, politics and philosophy that were central to upholding capitalistrelations of exchange and the justi ﬁcation of colonial expansion.
28
This then was a crucial moment in the globalisation of measurement
and quanti ﬁcation as the primary techniques for taxonomising and classi-
fying life, an effect of which was the production of what Mary Louise Prattnames a ‘planetary consciousness’ .
29Crucial here was the space of the
European colonial plantation, through which a landscape model of scal-ability was enacted that provided the model for smooth expansion.
30
The scalability of the plantation system, which ‘banishes meaningful
diversity ’,31can be seen as the basis of what Donna Haraway names the
‘Plantationocene ’, which continues today ‘with ever-greater ferocity in
globalized factory meat production, monocrop agribusiness, andimmense substitutions of crops like palm oil for multispecies forests andtheir products that sustain humans and critters alike ’.
32In her interrog-
ation of the term ‘Anthropocene ’, Anna Tsing draws our attention to
the threat posed by the ecological simpli ﬁcations produced by various
forms of ‘plantation ’to the liveability of the planet. ‘Earth stalked by
Man ’is the ﬁgure that in her thought condenses this Enlightenment
project of modernisation.33
While Fanon was no environmentalist, he recognised that what was at
stake in decolonisation was sovereignty over natural resources; deprivedof that, and the infrastructures that economic power enables, the colonised
are kept in conditions of wretchedness.
34In retrospect, the promise of
decolonisation was betrayed by numerous factors, many of which were
predicted by Fanon at the time of writing The Wretched of the Earth .
We can add to his insights the embracing of the US-led Green Revolutionby newly independent nations, which, through the global export of high-yielding crop varieties, sought to increase productivity on a global scale,but which in fact has been shown to have reduced agricultural biodiversity
and poisoned the earth through the widespread use of pesticides.
35
(In reality, the seeming benevolence and developmental impulse of this
‘revolution ’, exported from the then termed First World to what was
the then acceptably termed Third World, is revealed to have been166
Rob Nixon, Slow Violence
and the Environmentalism
of the Poor , op cit,
especially pp 175 –198; and
Grace A Musila, A Death
Retold in Truth andRumour: Kenya, Britainand the Julie Ward Murder ,
James Currey,Woodbridge, Surrey andRochester, New York,2015. See also Fazal Sheikhand Eyal Weizman, The
Conﬂ ict Shoreline:
Colonialism as ClimateChange in the Negev
Desert , Steidl, Göttingen
and New York, 2015.
11 Regarding the ‘less-than-
human ’and‘not-quite-
human ’, see Alexander G
Weheliye, Habeas Viscus:
Racializing Assemblages,
Biopolitics, and BlackFeminist Theories of theHuman , Duke University
Press, Durham, 2014.
12 See Naomi Klein, ‘Let Them
Drown ’, op cit. The water
crisis in Flint, USA, is anotable example here.
13 See Gayatri Chakravorty
Spivak, ‘Can the Subaltern
Speak? ’, in Cary Nelson
and Lawrence Grossberg,eds,Marxism and the
Interpretation of Culture ,
University of Illinois Press,Urbana, Illinois, 1988, pp271–313; and Boaventura
de Sousa Santos,Epistemologies of theSouth: Justice AgainstEpistemicide , Paradigm
Publishers, Boulder,Colorado, 2014
14 Lewis R Gordon, ‘Through
the Hellish Zone ofNonbeing: ThinkingThrough Fanon, Disaster,and the Damned Earth ’,
Human Architecture:Journal of the Sociology ofSelf-Knowledge , V, special
double issue, summer 2007,pp 5–12, at p 9
15 Ibid, p 9. See also Cihan
Aksan, ‘Lewis R Gordon:
Revisiting Frantz Fanon ’s
The Damned of the Earth ’,
State of Nature , 22 April
2018, https://
stateofnatureblog.com/lewis-gordon-revisiting-frantz-fanons-damned-earth/ , accessed 20 May
carried out in order to stall communist ascendency, and with the economic
beneﬁts of capitalist countries in the West in mind.)36This is not to say
that technological development is to be rejected out of hand (postcolonialscience and technology studies and feminist theorisations of science, for astart, have argued the case for access and representation as necessary tothe decolonisation of science and technology), but rather that the pastdecades have demonstrated that we need to move beyond the utilitarian-ism of Fanon ’s approach, which limits the usefulness of his writing for
engaging with present-day environmental crises.
Given this state of devastation and the wretchedness of the E/earth in
all its multiple forms, what would it mean to address the planetary fromthe ground up? According to Puig de la Bellacasa, soil is the infrastructureof life itself, and like other forms of infrastructure, it perhaps only becomesmore broadly visible when it starts to break down.
37This is certainly the
point we have reached across much of the Earth as we transgress the ‘pla-
netary boundaries ’within which life is sustainable.38Soil is the stuff of life,
and it is made up of our residues –it transforms them into humus, and our
connection to that fragile layer of the planet on which human life dependsis acknowledged in the fact that our species name, human, is derived fromhumus. Puig de la Bellacasa argues that we need a shift in perspective thatmakes the soil visible in all its liveliness, peopled by all kinds of beings –
earthworms, fungi, nematodes and microbes –that sustain its health.
She points out that making the ‘invisible workers of the soil ’visible is
not a neutral affair: ‘Words matter: thinking of worms as managers repro-
duces the hierarchies of capitalist productionist culture. ’
39Understanding
earth as a living organic web of being that involves many creatures includ-ing humans involves a breaking with human exceptionalism throughchanges in practices as well as a shift away from the language of manage-
ment and services in relation to the soil. From this perspective soil is a ‘pla-
netary word ’.
40This ‘planetarity ’is not based on the abstractions of
Western universalism and the globalising territorialisations of corporate
capitalism, but rather on a sense of inter-dependence and connectednessthat insists upon the radical alterity of indigenous ways of life and othermarginalised worlds-in-the-making.
Such a planetary perspective on the scale of environmental damage is
essential to understand the plight of today ’s‘wretched of the earth ’: the
populations most affected by forms of environmental degradation and dis-possession that have impacted an estimated three-quarters of the terres-trial surface of the Earth. A recent UN-backed report by theIntergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and EcosystemServices (IPBES) published in 2018 conﬁ rmed land degradation to be a
pervasive systemic phenomenon that is occurring in all parts of the terres-trial world and takes many forms. However, the authors of the reportargued that there was a widespread lack of awareness of the scale andextent of the problem.
41The expansion of crop and grazing land, unsus-
tainable agricultural and forestry practices, climate change, urban expan-sion, infrastructural development and the extractive industries are driversof land degradation that now negatively affects the well-being of at least
3.2 billion people and is pushing the planet towards the sixth mass
species extinction.
42The IPBES report notes that national and inter-
national policy and governance responses tend to be fragmented andfocused on mitigating damage already caused. Such approaches tend to167
2018; and Kojo Koram,
‘“Satan is Black ”–Frantz
Fanon ’s Juridico-Theology
of Racialisation and
Damnation ’,Law, Culture
and the Humanities , 2017,
pp 1–20.
16 This ‘inclusive exclusion ’
echoes the ‘obscene
inclusion ’described by
Nicholas de Genova withregard to the UK illegalisedlabour force. Nicholas deGenova, ‘Spectacles of
Migrant “Illegality ”: the
Scene of Exclusion, theObscene of Inclusion ’,
Ethnic and Racial Studies,vol 36, no 7, 2013, pp1180 –1198.
17 Jill Casid, Sowing Empire:
Landscape andColonization , University of
Minnesota Press,Minneapolis, 2005, p xii
18 Linnaeus ’s binomial system
was later developed into aninternational code
regulating the naming of
plants. See Jason T WIrving, ‘Botanical Gardens,
Colonial Histories, andBioprospecting: Namingand Classifying the Plants ofthe World ’, in Shela Sheikh
and Uriel Orlow, eds, Uriel
Orlow: TheatrumBotanicum , Sternberg Press,
Berlin, 2018, pp 73 –80.
19 Londa Schiebinger, Plants
and Empire: ColonialBioprospecting in theAtlantic World , Harvard
University Press,Cambridge, Massachusetts,2007, p 5, p 11
20 This universalisation of
Latin can be understoodthrough what JacquesDerrida names‘globalatinization ’. Jacques
Derrida, ‘Faith and
Knowledge: The TwoSources of “Religion ”at the
Limits of Reason Alone ’,
Samuel Weber, trans, in GilAnidjar, ed, Acts of
Religion , Routledge,
New York and London,2002, pp 40 –101.
21 Schiebinger, Plants and
Empire , op cit, p 20. Insofar
as the idea was to produce aschema that would renderforeign forms of life
obscure underlying causes, including the worldviews and policies that
uphold them, and marginalise indigenous and local bodies of knowledge
that have developed over time within given ecosystems offering alternative
visions of how humans might co-exist with other species and, in the wordsof the eco-feminist and environmental activist Vandana Shiva, become‘coproducers with nature ’.
43
‘The Wretched Earth: Botanical Con ﬂicts and Artistic Interventions ’
seeks to bring into dialogue anti-imperialist critique and artistic researchthat focuses on the multiple human and nonhuman cohabitations that
constitute the soil, and the various forms of life and culture that they
sustain in the face of ongoing threats to land sovereignty, food securityand environmental degradation, as well as the erosion of cultures andvalue systems that are intimately intertwined with particular ecosystems.The phrase ‘botanical con ﬂicts’was initially used in the title of the
research workshop ‘Botanical Con ﬂicts: Colonialism, Photography and
the Politics of Planting ’, which was organised by Ros Gray, Shela
Sheikh and the artist Corinne Silva at Goldsmiths, University of Londonin 2015.
44Approaches gathered here are various, and although Third
Text has a long tradition of providing a platform for artists to shape
debates on contemporary art and visual culture, this issue has, perhapsmore than most, numerous artists writing about their own research gen-erated as part of practices that involve cultivation or the production of
food and other plant-based goods as an intervention into different
ﬁelds, including urban community gardens, farms, and scienti ﬁc and agri-
cultural institutions. These interdisciplinary sites, which bring togethermethodologies from contemporary art, expert and citizen-science, agricul-ture and other ﬁelds, emerge as testing grounds for experiments aimed at
improving ‘planetary health ’through artistic interventions and critical
inquiry into the independence of humans, infrastructures and naturalsystems.
45
In the current proliferation of discussions surrounding the Anthropo-
cene (or what Nicholas Mirzoeff has named ‘the white-supremacy-
scene ’),46many have critiqued both the anthropocentrism of mainstream
environmentalist and social justice movements and questioned whoexactly it is that the ‘human ’of the ‘Anthropos ’or‘human-induced
climate change ’refers to.
47As scholars such as Zoe Todd have made
clear, it is not humans per se that have exerted such a destructive forceon the E/earth, but only some forms of sociality; just as it is not humansper se who bear the brunt of this or of Anthropocentric climate change.
48
Such an argument is forcefully made by Françoise Vergès, who critiquesthe illusion created in Dipesh Chakrabarty ’ss e m i n a l ‘The Climate of
History: Four Theses ’(2009) of an organic and undifferentiated universal
humanity.
49Referencing what Jason Moore has named the Capitalocene,
Vergès instead chooses the term ‘racial Capitalocene ’to capture the roots
of the Anthropocene in colonialism and capitalism, and the racialising pro-cesses therein, as described above with regard to colonial science and theplantation system.
50Such a line of enquiry acknowledges the eco-racism
at play in both the naturalisation of race and the sacri ﬁcial, racialised popu-
lations that are exposed to environmental violence –what Naomi Klein has
termed ‘the violence of othering in a warming world ’.51
The articles contained in this issue centre the fact that, as Vergès
argues, peoples of the South and minorities are not just ‘the prime168
comprehensible ﬁrst and
foremost to Europeans, we
might liken this practice ofnaming and controllingotherness to Edward Said ’s
Orientalism.
22 The notion of a
‘monoculture of knowledge ’
versus an ‘ecology of
knowledge ’can be found in
the work of Portuguesesociologist and proponent of‘epistemologies of the South ’
Boaventura de Sousa Santos.
See, for instance, Boaventura
de Sousa Santos, JoãoArriscado Nunes and MariaPaula Meneses,‘Introduction: Opening Up
the Canon of Knowledgeand Recognition ofDifference ’, in Santos, ed,
Another Knowledge isPossible: Beyond NorthernEpistemologies ,V e r s o ,
London, 2008, xix– lxii.
23 María Puig de la Bellacasa,
‘Making Time for Soil:
Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity
and the Pace of Care ’,
Social Studies of Science ,
vol 45, no 5, 2015, pp 691 –
716, at p 692
24 Richard Harry Drayton,
Nature ’s Government:
Science, Imperial Britain,and the ‘Improvement ’of
the World , Yale University
Press, New Haven,Connecticut, 2000, pp 4 –6,
cited in Irving, ‘Botanical
Gardens, ColonialHistories, and
Bioprospecting’ , op cit, p 75
25 Regarding tropical island
colonies as laboratories of
empire, see DeLoughrey andHandley, ‘Introduction:
Toward an Aesthetics of theEarth ’, op cit, p 12.
26 See Irving, ‘Botanical
Gardens, ColonialHistories, andBioprospecting’ , op cit, p 79
27 Brenna Bhandar, ‘Title by
Registration: InstitutingModern Property Law andCreating Racial Value in the
Settler Colony ’,Journal of
Law and Society , vol 42, no
2, June 2015, pp 253 –282,
at p 276. See also Brenna
Bhandar, The Colonial
Lives of Property: LawLand and Racial Regimes
victims’ of the ecological disasters caused by ongoing corporate colonial-
ism. Rather, they have developed crucial analyses and resources to chal-
lenge environmental racism and ‘build counter-powers ’.52Across all the
articles in this special issue, minor histories (subaltern or otherwise) are
unearthed in order that the lessons of past struggles are not left buriedor silenced, and that they might be learned from –and updated where
necessary –in order to tackle the Earth ’s present wretchedness.
53The
earth provides a powerful metaphor in articulating the need to constructnew planetary alternatives based on actual practices of soil care. As
Vandana Shiva points out, ‘soil is a metaphor of decentralized and deep
democracy …Consumer democracy is a pseudo-democracy associated
with economic dictatorship; it desertiﬁ es the soil of real democracy. Auth-
entic democracy, like plants, grows from the ground up. It is fertilized by
people ’s participation.’
54There is an urgent need for transition to equi-
table democracies sustained by modes of production in which humans
are‘coproducers with nature ’; as Shiva stresses: ‘There is no alternative
to fertile soil to sustain life, including human life, on earth. ’55In the
articles that follow, this ‘coproduction ’takes varying forms, for instance
through discussions of ‘more-than-human’ or‘multispecies ’socialities
and ‘worldmaking ’practices, and the possible recon ﬁguration of legal,
ontological, cosmological and perspectival frameworks so as to include
what Marisol de la Cadena names ‘earth-beings ’as actors in political
assemblies.56Here, both the earth and its inhabitants might be considered
not simply wretched, but also as a source of testimony to past traumas,and possible repair and regeneration.
Nomusa Makhubu ’s article ‘The Poetics of Entanglement in Zina Saro-
Wiwa ’s Food Interventions ’makes a study of Saro-Wiwa ’s artistic
responses to the ecological devastation caused by corporate oil extraction
in the Niger Delta that threatens the survival of the Ogoni people.
Makhubu argues that works such as Saro-Wiwa ’s video installation
Karikpo Pipeline (2015) draw on the cosmology of the Ogoni people
and resonate with the poetry and political activism of the artist’ s father,
the writer, television producer and journalist Ken Saro-Wiwa. Ken Saro-Wiwa founded the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People(MOSOP) to organise a nonviolent campaign against the ‘ecological gen-
ocide ’caused by international corporations including Royal Dutch
Shell.
57In 1995 he and eight others were executed by the regime of
General Sani Abacha who, in collusion with Shell, framed the Ogoninine for crimes that they did not commit.
58Zina Saro-Wiwa’ s food inter-
ventions involve the preparation of elaborate banquets featuring as ingre-dients the ﬂora and fauna of the Niger Delta, replacing the black oil that is
implicated within the destitution of the land and its people with nutritiouslocally-produced palm oil. Makhubu argues that food interventions suchasThe Mangrove Banquet that took place at the Blaffer Art Museum in
2015 evoke cultural and spiritual entanglements with the land that maybe damaged by multiple forms of trauma, loss and displacement. Saro-Wiwa ’s mode of ‘telling new stories about Africa ’through cuisine chal-
lenges the limiting but still pervasive stereotype of the continent as the
site of perpetual war and famine, while also critiquing conditions of
impoverishment caused by the insatiable greed of monopoly capitalism(what Jean-François Bayart calls ‘the politics of the belly ’).
59As such,
the work focuses on the survival of cultural richness in the face of adver-169
of Ownership , Duke
University Press, Durham,
North Carolina, 2018.
28 Bhandar, ‘Title by
Registration ’, op cit, p 37
29 Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial
Eyes: Travel Writing andTransculturation ,
Routledge, London, 1992,pp 15 –37
30 As Anna Tsing writes,
‘progress …has often been
deﬁned by its ability to
make projects expand
without changing their
framing assumptions. Thisquality is “scalability ”’.
Scalability provided self-contained, interchangeableproject elements as follows:‘exterminate local people
and plants; prepare now-empty, unclaimed land; andbring in exotic and isolatedlabor and crops forproduction ’. Anna Tsing,
The Mushroom at the Endof the World: On the
Possibility of Life in
Capitalist Ruins , Princeton
University Press, Princetonand Oxford, 2015, pp 38 –
39. See also Anna Tsing,‘Earth Stalked by Man ’,
The Cambridge Journal ofAnthropology , vol 34, no 1,
spring 2016, pp 2 –16.
31 Tsing, The Mushroom at
the End of the World ,o p
cit, p 38
32 Donna Haraway,
‘Anthropocene,
Capitolocene,
Plantationocene,
Chthulucene: Making Kin ’,
Environmental Humanities ,
vol 6, 2015, pp 159 –165,
note 5, p 162
33 Tsing argues that the
plantation functions as aﬁgure of the ecological
simpli ﬁcations ‘in which
living things aretransformed into resources–future assets –by
removing them from theirlife-worlds. Plantations aremachines of replication,
ecologies devoted to the
replication of the same’ .
The plantation system isenergised by a tendency toproliferate, and its powerlies in its scalability, whichhas allowed plantations of
sity, constituting a series of experimentations with emancipatory decolo-
nial aesthetics that create new possibilities for subverting the colonialist
power relations that dominate food production and consumption, even
while the artistic practice remains implicated within neocolonial structuresof the art –oil economy.
In an article entitled ‘Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁcF u t u r i t ya n d
the Pace of Care’ , Puig de la Bellacasa addresses modes of soil care such as
permaculture that are obscured by hegemonic timescales of technoscienti ﬁc
futurity and innovation. Rather than consider soil simply as a receptacle for
the cultivation of crops –in other words, a site of productivity or ﬁnancial
return –Puig de la Bellacasa asks us to engage with soil as a living, interde-
pendent community and with forms of soil ecology that feature alternative
human –soil relations and what she calls a ‘care time ’.
60Shela Sheikh ’s
article, ‘Planting Seeds/The Fires of War: The Geopolitics of Seed Saving
in Jumana Manna’ sWild Relatives ’addresses such a proposition indirectly,
taking a historical step back to the US-sponsored Green Revolution, whichsought to increase productivity according to a techno-capitalist conceptionof progress. However, as Sheikh argues, such a conception of futurity andinnovation pigeon-holes ‘traditional’ practices of both cultivation and con-
servation –practices that resonate with the ‘care time ’described above –
in a‘frozen ’, unchanging state, thus enacting forms of ‘imperialist nostalgia ’
and‘environmental Orientalism ’.
Sheikh offers a reading of Jumana Manna ’sWild Relatives , a feature-
length ﬁlm that traces the journey of seeds from Syria between the Global
Seed Vault at Svalbard and a branch of the International Center for Agri-cultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA) in the Bekaa Valley inLebanon. In 2015, as the ﬁlm recounts, ICARDA requested a withdrawal
of seeds held at Svalbard that were duplicates of local varieties stored in
ICARDA ’s Aleppo branch that were under threat from the ongoing civil
war in Syria. Following the annual life cycle of the seed, Wild Relatives
documents the retrieval of duplicate seeds from their frozen state in Sval-
bard and their transportation to the ﬁelds, laboratory and gene bank in the
Bekaa Valley, where they are reawakening through cultivation. As Sheikhdemonstrates, the ﬁlm addresses the con ﬂict between local cultivation
practices that have nurtured varieties suited to particular local climates
and conditions and the legacies of the Green Revolution, widely
adopted by postcolonial states seeking to push forward a developmentalistagenda. Wild Relatives brings into relation two geographically remote,
semi-arid landscapes that each house institutions concerned with the pres-ervation of biodiversity in the face of conﬂ ict and natural disasters. Sheikh
evokes the logic of the pharmakon –which functions indeterminately as
both poison and cure –to argue that while forms of cryopreservation
are often employed at institutions such as Svalbard with good intentions,the privileges they afford to agribusiness reveal a concerning neocolonial-ism, echoing the ambivalent role of humanitarian intervention in globalconﬂicts. Alongside the seed, Wild Relatives focuses on various human
protagonists, from Syrian refugees living in the Bekaa Valley, to farmerswho can no longer make a living from the cultivation of crops, to scien-
tists, and even a priest. This ‘chorus of stakeholders’ , in Sheikh ’s phrase,
expounds varying approaches to seed stewardship, offering an alternative
to the ‘techno-capitalist wizardry ’of cryopreservation as a kind of ﬁlmic
counter-magic (one that embraces the magic that capitalism seeks to sup-170
various kinds to become
ubiquitous, even while their
spread remains ‘patchy ’and
incomplete. Tsing, ‘Earth
Stalked by Man ’, op cit, p 4.
34 Wenzel, ‘Reading Fanon,
Reading Nature ’, op cit,
p 187
35 See Vandana Shiva, ‘The
G r e e nR e v o l u t i o ni nt h ePunjab ’,The Ecologist ,v o l
21, no 2, March –April 1991
36 See Jack Ralph
Kloppenburg, Jr, First the
Seed: The PoliticalEconomy of PlantBiotechnology, 1492 –
2000 , 2nd edition, Series:
Science and Technology inSociety, University ofWisconsin Press, Madison,Wisconsin, 2004
37 Puig de la Bellacasa,
‘Encountering
Bioinfrastructure ’, op cit,
pp 26 –40, p 36
38 Of the nine planetary
boundaries identi ﬁed by
Rockström et al withinwhich we need to remain inorder to sustain life withinthe Earth System, thoserelating to loss of geneticdiversity and biochemicalﬂows (phosphorous and
nitrogen) have already beentransgressed to dangerouslevels. Johan Rockström,et al, ‘Planetary Boundaries:
Exploring the SafeOperating Space forHumanity ’,Ecology and
Society , vol 14, no 2, 2009,
available at www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss2/art32 , accessed
17 May 2018. See ‘Figures
and Data for the UpdatedPlanetary Boundaries ’,
2015, Stockholm ResilienceCentre, http://www.
stockholmresilience.org/research/planetary-boundaries/planetary-boundaries-data.html ,
accessed 17 May 2018.
39 Puig de la Bellacasa,
‘Encountering
Bioinfrastructure ’, op cit,
p3 5
40 Ibid, p 36
41 R Scholes, L Montanarella,
A Brainich, et al, eds,
‘Summary for Policymakers
press), manifested through the celebration of reciprocal, co-evolutionary
human –plant relationships.
Hannah Meszaros Martin ’s contribution, ‘“Defoliating the World ”:
Ecocide, Visual Evidence and “Earthly Memory ”’, emerges from her ﬁeld-
work in Columbia into the state-sanctioned eradication of the coca plantand the often-overlooked environmental aspect of warfare and its legalcategories. Where modernity had relegated nature to a passive object tobe crafted, controlled and capitalised upon as opposed to the agencygranted human culture, here Martin points to a troubling shift: in the
rhetoric of the state (as part of the US-led War on Drugs), the coca
plant is granted personhood not as the bearer of rights (as in the recog-nition of the rights of nature that is growing worldwide, notably initiatedin Bolivia and Ecuador) but as ontologically guilty –even prior to its
contact with human beings and its processing into its alkaloid derivative,cocaine –therefore warranting its outlawing and eradication. Moreover,
through the eradication programmes whereby the plant is aerially fumi-gated with the herbicide glyphosate, a process of co-criminalisationoccurs between the natural ecosystem in which the plant grows and thecultural practices that surround it; with this, violations of human and non-human rights are entangled.
Martin assembles aspects of her practice-led research project, informed
by her involvement with the Forensic Architecture group, in which she
examines the War on Drugs as an ecocidal war that can be traced back
through imperial warfare. As with the US-led Green Revolution thatsought to temper leftist movements of the then Third World indirectlythrough agricultural policy, the ‘ecocidal ’history that Martins traces is
linked to the Cold War imaginary of a particular kind of ‘enemy ’: not nar-
cotics as such but rather the political groups associated with them. Where
the broader framing of this issue calls for a shift in perspective in order to
make visible the liveliness and wretchedness of the soil, Martin organisesher article through various frames and scales of representation and per-spective, including that of the plant itself. This is done in order to challenge‘state-seeing ’, and to critique existing forms of visualisation and eviden-
tiary practices, instead suggesting more hybrid forms departing from themodernist imaginary, that might better grasp the diffused nature of
environmental violence. Finally, Martin turns to the memory of the
earth itself (including its multispecies ecology), suggesting that existingcategories of violence need to include the exhaustion and rupture of thesoil, and that this ‘earthly memory ’might be mobilised in the context of
environmental truth and reconciliation and broader practices of ‘repair ’.
Filipa César ’s article, ‘Meteorisations: Reading Amílcar Cabral ’sA g r -
onomy of Liberation ’, re-visits Amílcar Cabral ’s early writings on agron-
omy, arguing that his soil science is not dissociable from his better-knownrole as an anti-colonial activist and theorist of revolution in Guinea-Bissau. César draws on research situated within an artistic practice thatincludes ﬁlm-making, archival activism through the digitalisation of mili-
tantﬁlms made during the armed struggle against Portuguese colonial rule
in Guinea-Bissau and in the years immediately following independence in
1973, and collaboration with Guinean ﬁlm-makers such as Sana na
N’Hada and Flora Gomes, among others. Reading Cabral ’s much
under-studied Estudos Agrários , César demonstrates how as a doctoral
student Cabral developed an understanding of soil as a dynamic, living171
of the Thematic Assessment
Report on Land
Degradation andRestoration of theIntergovernmental Science-Policy Platform onBiodiversity and EcosystemServices ’, IPBES 18 –24
March 2018, IPBESSecretariat, Bonn,Germany, pp 3 –4. See
https://www.ipbes.net/sites/default/ ﬁles/downloads/
ipbes-6-15-add-5_spm_ldr_advance.pdf , accessed 17
May 2018
42 Ibid, p 10
43 Vandana Shiva, Soil Not
Oil: Environmental Justice
in an Age of Climate Crisis ,
South End Press, Brooklynand Boston, Massachusetts,2008, p 6
44 We would like to thank
Silva for the term ‘botanical
conﬂicts’. Through her
photographic practice, Silvahas examined suburbangardens and nature reservesin Israel –Palestine as sites
where the use of planting as
a weapon of settler
occupation is particularly inevidence. See Corinne Silva,Garden State , Ffotogallery
and Mosaic Rooms, 2016.The Botanical Con ﬂicts
workshop (21 May 2015)included a number ofspeakers whose writing isincluded in this issue andwho sought to explore therelation between plantingand colonialism, includingwarfare, land-grab, the
expropriation of natural
resources and indigenousknowledges, and theepistemic violence ofcolonial botanicaltaxonomy. Speakers wereShela Sheikh, Ros Gray,Corinne Silva, SigridHolmwood, RosarioMontero and HannahMeszaros Martin. Thepresent special issue hasbeen germinating over along period of time and inseveral countries; hence
there are too many people to
acknowledge here. In thecontext of Goldsmiths, wewould like to thank KodwoEshun, Susan Schuppli andEyal Weizman for theirencouragement and input.
historical body produced through the process of meteorisation of rock
that built on the ﬁeld of soil science that had emerged since the nineteenth
century, particularly through the work of such ﬁgures as Justus von
Liebig, Ferdinand von Richthofen and Vasily Dokuchaev. Later, as a colo-nial state agronomist working in Portuguese Guine and Angola, he ident-iﬁed acute problems of soil erosion and analysed their causes in
agricultural practices in use within the colonial plantation system. Césarargues that the scienti ﬁc data Cabral produced during his work as an agro-
nomist for the colonial regime enriched his theoretical arguments, in
which he denounced the injustices perpetrated on African land. Moreover,
the situated knowledge of Guinea-Bissau ’s land and peoples that he com-
piled became vital for his strategies of warfare and to his plans for deco-lonisation after independence. Crucially for the latter, the article drawsattention to the farm that Cabral established in Pessubé in 1953 as an‘experimental laboratory ’, which was intended to change farming prac-
tices with the aim of emancipating people and repairing the land. Theﬁlms that César has been involved in digitalising as part of the Living
Archive project at the Arsenal in Berlin testify to an effort that continuedafter Cabral’ s assassination to harness cinema to a project of revolution-
ary nation-building, with ﬁlms made in Creole to facilitate the exchange
of agricultural knowledge and interaction between different ethnicgroups in Guinea-Bissau.
While César ’s article points to a moment when the revolutionary nation-
state could be conceived proleptically as an emancipatory frame for thedecolonisation of agriculture and for the safeguarding of indigenous sover-eignty, modern nation-states have more frequently promoted ‘scalable ’
models of agricultural production that banish biodiversity in the name ofmodernisation and involve ever more sophisticated technologies of surveil-
lance and control of human and nonhuman bodies. Moreover, the nation-
state is the site of what we can call ‘botanical nationalism ’: the creation of
imaginaries of belonging tied to ‘native ’ﬂora and fauna, ‘authentic ’land-
scapes and the rhetoric of ‘blood and soil ’,
61as well as the xenophobic poli-
cing of borders against ‘invasive species ’and the exclusionary politics of
right-wing, nativist environmentalism.62
Richard William Hill ’s article ‘Borderless Histories: The Botanical Art
of Maria Thereza Alves ’examines how Maria Thereza Alves’ s artworks
over some two decades have explored the way in which the colonial his-tories of migration, exploitation and exchange can be observed in plants‘growing wild, so to speak, in the national landscapes of European
nation states ’. Hill argues that Alves ’s artistic practice, which combines
methods of natural sciences, documentary, historical revision, ﬁctive re-
imaginings and social and political critique, transgresses boundaries thatarise at the intersection between botany and colonial ideology, so as tounpick the emotive narratives woven through plant symbolism that areput to the service of upholding national, religious and cultural identitiesgrounded in exclusion. Hill analyses a wide range of the artist ’s botanical
art that seeks to ‘liberate a discourse of migration from colonial and
nationalist narratives’ , often through an exploration of the strange senti-
mental attachments and surreal signi ﬁcations that landscape and ﬂora
generate through transplantation and displacement. The unintendedhuman distribution of seeds is a theme that has grounded some ofAlves’ s best-known projects, including the many iterations of Seeds of172
45 For an exemplary curatorial
practice that elaborates
these ideas, see NicolaTriscott, ‘Art and
Intervention in theStewardship of thePlanetary Commons:Towards a CuratorialModel of Co-Inquiry ’,
doctoral thesis, Universityof Westminster, 2017.
46 Nicholas Mirzoeff, ‘It’s Not
the Anthropocene, It ’s The
White Supremacy Scene; or,
The Geological Color Line’ ,
in Richard Grusin, ed, After
Extinction , University of
Minnesota Press,
Minneapolis, 2016, pp123–151
47 See Anna Tsing, ‘Earth
Stalked by Man ’, op cit; and
T J Demos, Against the
Anthropocene: VisualCulture and theEnvironment Today ,
Sternberg Press, Berlin,2017.
48 Zoe Todd, ‘An Indigenous
Feminist ’s Take on the
Ontological Turn:“Ontology ”is Just Another
Word for Colonialism ’,2 4
October 2014, https://
zoeandthecity.wordpress.com/2014/10/24/an-indigenous-feminists-take-on-the-ontological-turn-ontology-is-just-another-word-for-colonialism/ ,
accessed 17 May 2018; ZoeTodd, ‘Indigenizing the
Anthropocene ’, in Heather
Davis and Etienne Turpin,eds,Art in the
Anthropocene: EncountersAmong Aesthetics, Politics,Environments andEpistemologies , Open
Humanities Press, London,2015, pp 241 –254
49 Françoise Vergès, ‘Racial
Capitalocene: Is theAnthropocene Racial?’ ,
Verso Blog, 30 August2017, https://www.
versobooks.com/blogs/
3376-racial-capitalocene ,
accessed 16 May 2018
50 See Jason Moore,
Anthropocene or
Capitalocene?: Nature,History, and the Crisis ofCapitalism , PM Press,
Oakland, 2016
Change (1999 –ongoing), which investigates ballast ﬂora in European
ports. Drawing on the participation of botanists, amateur gardeners and
the enthusiasm of local communities, Alves ’s ballast seed gardens
involve an aesthetic experience that also includes botanical education
and social and political history. As Hill points out, the illicit and accidentalmigrations of plants have long been an overlooked feature of local land-scapes, and Alves’ s work is timely in drawing attention to them at a
moment of ecological crisis that is accelerating movements of migrationworldwide. As Hill remarks: ‘There is a powerful tension in her practice
between our sense that we are seeing documentation of the factual andobvious, evidence that is often right before us, and our recognition thatwe had nevertheless been unable to see it without the artist ’s assistance. ’
Khadija von Zinnenburg Carroll ’s article ‘NonWest by North: Mar-
ianne North and William Colenso ’s Responses to Plantlife and the Classi-
ﬁcation of Economic Botany ’explores the con ﬂicts between central
patriarchies and peripheral establishments of natural science, andbetween indigenous and colonial botany and its artistic representations.Von Zinnenburg Carroll begins by setting out the role that artists haveplayed in the transfer and shaping of botanical knowledge, revisiting thelife and work of the botanical artist Marianne North (1830 –1890) to
show the hierarchies and blindspots at play within the tradition of imper-ial botany both at home and abroad in its side-lining and appropriation
not only of indigenous knowledge of the vegetal world, but also of the
knowledge and skill of women such as North. She argues that North ’s
paintings present plants in ways that go beyond the theories of her morerecognised peers such as Charles Darwin and Thomas Malthus. Von Zin-nenburg Carroll ’s historical reading, inﬂ ected by her practice as both artist
and curator, brings North ’s reading of Darwin ’s theories of con ﬂict
between species into conversation with the contemporary ‘plant turn ’in
philosophy, critical theory and contemporary artistic debates as well asActor Network Theory. She argues that, through North ’s portraits and
observations, plants can be understood themselves not simply as objectsof knowledge but as ‘expert practitioners, living active rather than
immobile lives’ .
Bringing North ’s non-hierarchical ideas into conversation with con-
temporary re-readings of Darwin, Von Zinnenburg Carroll argues thatNorth was ahead of her time in understanding plants as part of an affec-tively charged, multisensory partnership with other living beings such ashumans and insects that counters the superiority of the human speciesoften attributed to Darwin’ s theories. Rather than mere illustrator subser-
vient to the ‘expertise ’of the scientist, the female botanical artist here
actively shapes knowledge of the vegetal world. Furthermore, Von Zin-nenburg Carroll revisits the work of William Colenso (1811 –1899),
another amateur botanist who argued against the exclusion of the localMa ̄ori names for plants in systems of botanical classi ﬁcation, and was
also side-lined by the establishment. Reading the botanical archiveagainst the grain, Von Zinnenburg Carroll sets out to enliven the signi ﬁ-
cance –historical and contemporary –of both North and Colenso ’s
mis-recognition.
In
her article ‘The Order of Potatoes: On Purity and Variation in Plant
Breeding ’, artist Åsa Sonjasdotter develops two narrative strands that
intersect within her ongoing project ‘The Order of Potatoes ’, which com-173
51 Klein, ‘Let Them Drown ’,
op cit
52 Vergès, ‘Racial
Capitalocene ’, op cit
53 Contemporary examples of
agriculture as a site of
resistance include efforts informing cooperatives tocreate healthy ruralcommunities in theSouthern States as analternative to peoples ofcolour migrating to urbancentres in the North; see
Monica M White, Freedom
Farmers: Agricultural
Resistance and the BlackFreedom Movement ,
University of NorthCarolina Press, NorthCarolina, 2018. Forhistorical examples, seeEdouard Glissant ’s reading
of the creole garden inEdouard Glissant: OneWorld in Relation(Manthia Diawara, video,50 minutes, 2010); andCasid, Sowing Empire ,o p
cit, especially the chapter‘Countercolonial
Landscapes ’, pp 191 –241.
See also LondaSchiebinger ’s study of slave
women ’s use of
abortifacients to induceabortion and henceinterrupt the reproductivelabour demanded of them.Schiebinger, Plants and
Empire , op cit. For an
analysis of the invisiblework of reproduction
performed by African
women during the slavetrade (as yet not suf ﬁciently
acknowledged in counter-histories of slavery), seeFrançoise Vergès, Le ventre
des femmes: Capitalisme,racialization, féminisme ,
Albin Michel, Paris, 2017,forthcoming as Women and
Their Wombs: Capitalism,Racialization, Feminism ,
Duke University Press,Durham, 2018.
54 Shiva, Soil Not Oil, op cit, p
7. See also Couze Venn,After Capital , published in
association with Theory,
Culture & Society , SAGE,
2018.
55 Shiva, Soil Not Oil , ibid,
p6
bines potato breeding and artistic research at the Prinzessinnengärten in
Berlin and other sites and spaces of exhibition.63Her title refers to
Michel Foucault ’s book The Order of Things (1966), which considers
the epistemological shift with regard to living organisms that occurredwith the consolidation of Linneaus’ s system of botanical categorisation.
64
Sonjasdotter ’s narrative On Linearity and Purity describes the attempt to
produce genetic purity and linearity for the purposes of commercial potatogrowing in Sweden, a project that has involved the appropriation offarmers ’knowledge of potato breeding by scienti ﬁc and corporate organ-
isations. The potato is a crop originating from Peru that, as it has migratedacross the Atlantic, has played a crucial role in feeding the poor, and, asSonjasdotter describes, the pursuit of genetic purity ‘marked the beginning
of a new order in the farm ﬁelds’based on standardisation of plant life.
The resulting loss of biodiversity in commercial crops is maintained bythe legal restrictions enforced by inter-governmental bodies such as the
European Union, so that the ‘liveliness of the human-plant dialogue ’has
been widely replaced by industrialised, monocultural farming landscapes.
Her other strand of narrative, On SpaceTime and Hybridity , takes a more
circuitous route through the names, stories, smells and tastes of a numberof farmer-bred varieties, unstable hybrid forms cultivated by Sonjasdotterand other activist cultivators in de ﬁance of commercial legal restrictions so
as to maintain biodiversity. Drawing on the materialist philosophy of
Karen Barad, Sonjasdotter argues that the form of these potatoes can be
understood as the result of many years of intra-species collaborationbetween plants and humans, and that while the knowledge of how tobreed potatoes is no longer widespread, its secrets are lodged within thepotato itself, manifested in terms of shape, texture, colour, taste and smell.
Sigrid Holmwood ’s article ‘Cultivating Colour: Making Mayan Blue
from Woad ’reveals an artistic practice that brings together two ﬁgures
–the European peasant and the indigenous Amerindian –whose displace-
ment has historically been central to the genocidal consolidation of patri-archal capitalist colonialism and its erasure of local and indigenoustechniques and knowledge. As Holmwood relates, paintings of peasantsas either picturesque or unruly and grotesque became highly soughtafter when the commercial art market emerged at the same time as the
ﬁrst stock exchange in Northern Europe. This moment in the development
of modern capitalism was made possible through the enclosures, the
massive seizure and privatisation of common land over a number of cen-turies that displaced rural communities and transformed peasants intowage labourers. In her art practice, Holmwood uses re-enactment and cul-tivation of a pigment garden to conjure the ﬁgure of ‘the peasant who
paints ’(as opposed to the peasant who is painted), and who indeed
makes her own pigment through the cultivation and processing ofplants. Her article traces the colonial routes of woad and indigo to eluci-date the exploitation of plant and human life that developed through bio-colonialism and the plantation system, and that reduced non-Europeans toabstract labour, and plant life to standing resources. Her research, in thecourse of which the peasant-painter departs from the garden and enters
the laboratory, has retrieved an indigenous method of Mesoamerican
pigment-making that was ‘lost’, or perhaps intentionally hidden, in the
wake of Spanish colonialism in South America. In the present-daycontext of rampant privatisation of scienti ﬁc knowledge and natural174
56 Marisol de la Cadena,
‘Indigenous Cosmopolitics
in the Andes: Conceptual
Reﬂections Beyond
“Politics ”’,Cultural
Anthropology , vol 25, no 2,
2010, pp 334 –370
57 Ken Saro-Wiwa, Genocide
in Nigeria: The OgoniTragedy , Saros
International, PortHarcourt, Nigeria, 2000
58 In 2009 Shell agreed to pay
$15.5m (£9.6 million) insettlement of a legal action
that accused the
multinational corporationof colluding with theNigerian government in theexecution of Ken Saro-Wiwa, Saturday Dobee,Nordu Eawo, DanielGbooko, Paul Levera, FelixNuate, Baribor Bera,Barinem Kiobel and JohnKpuine. Shell was alsoaccused of a series of otheralleged human rightsviolations, including
working with the army to
bring about killings andtorture of Ogoni protesters.The company was allegedto have provided theNigerian army withvehicles, patrol boats andammunition, and to havehelped plan raids and terrorcampaigns against villages;see‘Shell Pays Out $15.5m
over Saro-Wiwa Killing, EdPilkington, 9 June 2009;https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/08/
nigeria-usa , accessed 17
May 2018.
59 Jean-François Bayart, The
State in Africa: The Politics
of the Belly , Longman,
1993
60‘Care time ’reveals a
diversity of more-than-human interdependenttemporalities that canchallenge dominant notionsof technoscienti ﬁc
innovation that are basedon linear temporalities of
so-called progress. Puig de
la Bellacasa, ‘Making Time
for Soil ’, op cit, p 692.
61 Notable artistic exploration
of the creation ofnationalist imaginariesthrough planting andlandscaping are Corinne
resources, she proposes the gesture of sharing this reconstructed
indigenous method as a form of commoning.
The special issue concludes with Jennifer Gabrys ’s‘Sensing Lichens:
From Ecological Microcosms to Environmental Subjects ’, which aligns
the garden with the laboratory and, moreover, a laboratory for speculat-ive, more-than-human collaboration. Gabrys offers a reading of the‘Ozone Bioindicator Garden Project ’, an initiative from the US National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) that studies plants ’signs
of injury due to air pollution. Drawing on her ‘citizen sensing ’work,
Gabrys focuses on lichens, which resemble a plant and yet complicateclassi ﬁcation of organisms and taxonomic orders, and which colonise
rock and soil and stabilise ground layers along with other vegetal organ-isms. As a particularly sensitive ‘bioindicator ’that signals air and soil pol-
lution in a more qualitative manner than technical instruments, lichens, inboth Gabrys ’s creative practice and critical contextualisation, open up
possibilities for alternative modes of engaging in environmental politicsthat take into account the perspective of nonhuman organisms. HereGabrys’ s work makes an original contribution to critiques of represen-
tational modes of politics that are prevalent to both postcolonial andenvironmental humanities, above all where the subaltern (also understoodas nature) is concerned. Instead, Gabrys ’s reading of bioindication focuses
on the expressive quality of nonhuman life, moving beyond the mere meta-
phor of plants as silent witnesses to environmental events and the violation
of earth and atmosphere by humans. Furthermore, bioindication from thelichen ’s point of view complicates the premise of Western science insofar
as‘meaning ’arises through multiple organisms ’sense-making operations
and demonstrates how ‘nature ’is not a stable referent but rather closer to
a‘multinaturalism ’in which organisms might be approached as having
perspectives as persons. By turning to gardening practices, both at streetlevel and at the limits of the planetary, Gabrys poses the question ofhow a heightened attentiveness to nonhuman modes of sensing andrelationality, as well as more-than-human collaboration, might open upthe possibility of more ecological, speculative modes of encounter andworldmaking.175
Silva ’sGarden State (2016)
and Uriel Orlow ’s
Theatrum Botanicum
(2015 –2018).
62 See Jean Fisher,
‘Migration ’s Silent
Witnesses: Maria TherezaAlves ’Seeds of Change ’,
http://www.jean ﬁsher.com/
migrations-silence-witnesses-maria-thereza-
alves-seeds-change/ ,
accessed 18 May 2018.
Regarding ‘right-wing
environmentalism ’, see
‘Lies of the Land: Against
and Beyond PaulKingsnorth ’s Völkisch
Environmentalism ’, Out of
the Woods, libcom.orgBlog, 31 March 2017,https://libcom.org/blog/lies-land-against-beyond-paul-kingsnorth ’s-völkisch-
environmentalism-
31032017 , accessed 18
May 2018.
63 See http://www.
potatoperspective.org/ ,
accessed 17 May 2018
64 Michel Foucault, The
Order of Things: An
Archaeology of the HumanSciences [1966], Routledge,
London and New York,2001
