The Ruined Seascapes
of the Wasteocene
On the Lives of Fishers and Gravid Fish
in Coastal Ecuador
MICHAEL A. VINA
Center of History, University of Lisbon, Portugal
Abstract Along the south-central coast of Ecuador, the shifting seascape and broader economic
processes bind inhabitants with the unique sociomaterial qualities of ﬁsh and their commodi ﬁed
products, such as ﬁshmeal. Based on ethnographic ﬁeldwork, this article argues that the vitality
contained within ﬁsh eggs is not located within the ﬁsh itself but rather within the relationship
between ﬁsh bodies and the speci ﬁc human knowledges that coproduce the subjective life of
ﬁsh and its commodi ﬁed forms. By examining the concealment of ﬁsh from industrial boats
toﬁshers ’households as a form of “marginal gain, ”this work connects hope and anxiety with
ﬁshers ’notions of decline and indeterminacy. Fishers ’reappropriation of ﬁsh forms a cri-
tique of ﬁshmeal economies through shifting environmental histories of the sea that are sensed
through nonhuman bodies and experienced simultaneously as bene ﬁcial and detrimental.
Rather than viewing these human and nonhuman con ﬁgurations as another example of
human hubris in the Anthropocene, this article proposes that such relations are better
understood within the Wasteocene, a logic that exposes the ways that human and nonhu-
man bodies are rendered physically and conceptually wasted through ﬁshers and corporate
instances of caring and killing.
Keywords multispecies studies, ﬁshmeal, human- ﬁsh relationships, seascape, ﬁsheries
Carlos stepped off the bus with a bright yellow bucket over ﬂowing with fresh ﬁsh.
The twenty-two days spent ﬁshing each month as part of his work as a deckhand
on the industrial boats of the ﬁshmeal company had ﬁnally concluded. With a proud
swagger and bucket in hand, he made his way to the palm thatch hut where the elderlyconversed. Across the street from the gathering point, Carlos laid out different kinds of
ﬁsh side-by-side on the sidewalk. The cue being the ﬁsh on the ground, the elderly folk
rushed to grab the mackerel and sardines. Before returning to make himself comfortable
at home, he ﬁrst took some ﬁsh to his mother ’s household. Carlos took two plump black
skipjacks wrapped in plastic bags out of his backpack: “There is no way I was sharing
Environmental Humanities 17:2 (July 2025)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-11713486 © 2025 Michael A. Vina
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

these with the men on the highway. These ﬁsh are beautiful and also ﬁlled with life. ”His
mother Maria ’s morning routine typically involves processing different kinds of ﬁsh:
removing the guts, spine, and head, and draining the excess blood. On this occasion, she
carefully removed the ﬁsh eggs and took them to the kitchen, where she would later use
them in Carlos ’s breakfast. Maria spread the ﬁsh guts in the chicken coop, where chickens
quickly consumed the innards with much gusto. She also placed an additional portion
of discards in a small plastic bin for the local pig breeder. Maria also burned the head,spine, and tail in the outdoor oven pit, late r spreading the ashes around the plantain
trees in her home garden.
Maria ’s daughter-in-law usually burns the eggs with the rest of the guts instead of
eating them. To feed her chickens, she uses a product known as balanceado , partly made
ofﬁshmeal and enriched with other supplements that made her “chickens grow faster,
but taste different. ”Maria ’s husband Juan also reminded his daughter-in-law that the
ﬁshmeal company turns gravid ﬁsh into ﬁshmeal and that purchasing feed supports
continued ﬁshmeal production. “The eggs have strength and vitality, ”he added, empha-
sizing that nowadays, “people act like the factory, wasting away the good parts of the
ﬁsh. ”Fishers often criticized each other, comparing themselves and peers to the ﬁsh-
meal factory, particularly during beach seining activities when they discarded ﬁsh such
as cat ﬁsh and other ﬁsh that have low commercial value but are locally appreciated. Juan
also emphasized that ﬁsh are much savvier nowadays, less oily and skinnier, explaining
how the stress and anxiety of witnessing their “family members ”(other ﬁsh) die due to
overﬁshing fundamentally changed ﬁsh.
During time spent on ﬁshers ’boats, at dinner tables, in home gardens, and at the
ﬁshmeal factory, the terms desperdicio (waste) and desperdiciado (wasted) became com-
mon utterances. Two discourses of waste caught my attention because they referred to
common but disparate realities embedded in ﬁshmeal production. One reality signaled
the waste from the factory in the form of sludge and pungent, nauseating odors ex-
pelled from the factory ’s smokestacks. While ﬁshmeal waste has a long history of inter-
acting with people ’s lungs and skin and instigating social protests in the region, over-
ﬁshing and increased ﬁshmeal production emerged as a greater cause for concern. This
second reality tied to the capital accumulation of the ﬁshmeal company pointed to the
wasted lives of gravid ﬁsh sucked from industrial purse seine boats through pipelines,
into the factory, and later pressed, churned, steamed, and dried. The way ﬁshers experi-
enced the loss of gravid ﬁsh as opposed to other ﬁsh helped me to situate their notions
of the good life with the ever-increasing expansion of political economies of the sea and
their internal contradictions, namely the critiques of ﬁshmeal economies as predatory
overﬁshing and the appreciation of these same economies as providers of ﬁsh, income,
employment, and other material bene ﬁts.
In trying to understand both the trajectories of ﬁsh and ﬁshers in expanding
political economies of the sea, I have been drawn to Marco Armiero ’s formulation of the
Wasteocene, a concept and a logic that “unites humans and nonhumans in its production394 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

of wasted lives and places. ”1Thinking through the Wasteocene opens alternative curiosi-
ties about the lifeworld of ﬁsh and the ways that economies and ecologies become en-
tangled with changing ﬁshing practices. This article emphasizes the “wasting rela-
tionships ”that render ﬁsh and ﬁshers conceptually and physically wasted through
the “destructive production ”of industrial ﬁshing and ﬁshmeal production.2This work
bridges the Wasteocene with the broader multispecies turn in humanities and social
science research. Although Armiero notes the critical role nonhumans play in producingthe Wasteocene, his concept remains tethered to an anthropocentric focus.
3In the case
ofﬁshers and the ﬁsh they seek to intersect, this all-too-human bent obscures the con-
trasting modes of relating to the seascape and the sociomaterial qualities of ﬁsh as they
are increasingly caught in industrial purse seine nets. It is through the sociomaterial
qualities of ﬁsh, both alive and dead, that it is possible to glean its wasted life, the inde-
terminacy of calculating its stocks amid an uncertain and volatile seascape, and its
ontological status as a savvy and anxious subject and commodi ﬁed object, or as non-
human life that reshuf ﬂes the tenuous boundaries of legality and illegality. Thus I also
place the Wasteocene in conversation with the concept of “economies of death ”to high-
light the necropower “governing life and death ”on industrial boats and ﬁshmeal factories
and “how certain lives and bodies are made killable and disposable. ”4As Eben Kirksey
a n dS t e f a nH e l m r e i c hs t a t e ,t h em a t e r i a l i t yo fb o t ht h el i f ea n dd e a t ho fn o n h u m a n sgive shape to the worlds we tend to label as strictly human.
5In this sense, ﬁsh bodies
exert a gravitational pull or act as “affective catalysts ”6that attract ﬁshers and com-
pany interests in sometimes competing ways.
While studies on human- ﬁsh relations have increased in response to the critique
that anthropologists and human geographers are more inclined to study terrestrial warm-
blooded animals than aquatic creatures, th ese works remain centered on small-scale
ﬁshing, Indigenous-state relations, and salmon aquaculture.7One notable exception is
Paula Satizabal and Wolfram Dressler ’s work in the Colombian Paci ﬁc, which examines
how institutional processes shape broader scale conservation and market forces that
shift the meaning and value of ﬁshers ’livelihoods, where ﬁsh are enacted as a resource,
as a source of protein (or milk in local terms), and as an exotic item on restaurant menus.8
While the authors discuss the role of ﬁsh in forming particular assemblages, ﬁsh remain
unchanged through the three different assemblages. This is a common symptom of
1. Armiero, Wasteocene ,2 9 .
2. Armiero, Wasteocene , 2; Gordillo, “On the Destructive Production of Food. ”
3. Armiero, Wasteocene ,3 .
4. Gillespie and Lopez, “Introducing Economies of Death, ”1.
5. Kirksey and Helmreich, “Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography. ”
6. Bennett, Vibrant Matter ,x i i .
7. Bear and Eden, “Thinking like a Fish? ”; Duggan, Green, and Jarre, “Thinking like a Fish ”; Todd, “Fish
Pluralities ”; Lien, Becoming Salmon .
8. Satizabal and Dressler, “Geographies of the Sea, ”1867.Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 395Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

maritime anthropology in general, where ﬁsh appear as a static economic resource,
food, and symbol. In contrast I draw attention to the sites of ﬂourishing multispecies
anxiety where human- ﬁsh encounters revolve around the capture and death of gravid
ﬁsh and the bittersweet contemplation of the economic bene ﬁts generated by the con-
tinued squandering of ﬁsh lives.
This article draws on one and a half years of ethnographic ﬁeld research con-
ducted in coastal Manabí Province, Ecuador, between 2014 and 2016, and six additionalmonths between 2019 and 2020 in the communities of El Encuentro, which hosts the
AZUL ﬁshmeal company, and Esterito, ten kilometers away. I employed participant obser-
vation methods to learn how ﬁshers generate ecological knowledge about the seascape
and the role of livelihood diversi ﬁcation in the historical and socioecological transfor-
mations that have changed people ’s access to and control over ﬁsh. These activities
included large-scale purse seine ﬁshing, small-scale ﬁshing practices such as foraging
mollusks along the intertidal zone, and using ﬁshnets and handlines. Further, I con-
ducted semistructured interviews with ﬁfty-ﬁveﬁshers from two communities who are
either artisanal or industrial ﬁshers or move between both sectors, as well as ﬁve marine
biologists in Guayaquil and Manta, three company managers, and two technicians. The
interview sessions focused on themes such as environmental change, El Niño, ﬁshery
regulations, ﬁshing practices, ﬁshmeal production, and human- ﬁsh relations. Historically,
small-scale ﬁshing was often one of several subsistence activities, including farming, for-
aging, and hunting. Today, industrial ﬁshing is a full-time occupation for many ﬁshers,
especially those in communities closest to the ﬁshmeal factory. However, small-scale
ﬁshing, foraging, and hunting are still vital for many ﬁshers involved in industrial ﬁsh-
ing operations. Indeed, out of ﬁfty-ﬁve interviewees, forty-two identi ﬁed as artisanal
and industrial ﬁshers.
In addition, walking became a crucial methodological approach, enabling obser-
vations of interactions that might have gone unnoticed and generating spontaneous
encounters with ﬁsh and people. I traced paths and routes through the coastal landscape
and seascape that locals found important in terms of history and environmental change.
However, I also improvised my paths in the ﬁ
eld, which led to a better sense of people ’s
daily trajectories. In thinking a bout the tensions between gravid ﬁsh and ﬁshers ’live-
lihoods, I also followed ﬁsh on sea and land, often slowing down due to slippery boat
decks and dangerous industrial ﬁshing equipment. This forced slowing down at mo-
ments allowed me to take notice of deep-seated memories and fragmented histories
that stirred hope and angst linked to seascapes subjected to socioecological changes
of different magnitudes.9
The article ﬁrst introduces a brief environmental history of ﬁshmeal production
in the area, drawing attention to how company personnel relate to ﬁsh and ﬁsh eggs.
The article then weaves together sto ries from three different human- ﬁsh sensibilities:
9. Tsing, Mushroom at the End of the World .396 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

(1) knowing ﬁsh as a savvy and anxious animal; (2) the wasted lives of gravid ﬁsh on
board industrial boats; and (3) the marginal gains generated as ﬁshers move between
their households and industrial ﬁshing boats, devising strategies to lessen wasting
relationships. Together, these stories illustrate how ﬁshmeal production, ﬁsheries
intensi ﬁcation, and shifting marine ecologies differentially implicate and affect ﬁsh
andﬁshers.
Ruined Seascapes
Javiera Barandiaran and Casey Walsh argue that the historically contentious relation-
ship between economic growth and the resulting adverse effects on the environment
and local livelihoods are often referred to as “creative destruction, ”10a term that has
inﬂuenced mainstream economic thinking and justi ﬁed social and environmental injus-
tices in the name of innovation, progress, and capital accumulation. Gaston Gordillo ar-
gues that the term makes the destruction associated with large-scale industrial projects
an objective that is “acceptable and worth pursuing. ”11Gordillo suggests replacing crea-
tive destruction with “destructive production ”to rethink industries such as ﬁshmeal
production complicit in producing wasted ecologies through surplus capital accumula-
tion and large-scale food production in Latin America and the Global North.12While re-
placing one term with another reveals social and environmental injustices, it also ob-scures the creativity in the destruction. Speci ﬁcally, it may ignore the ways that ﬁshing
families have reinvested the economic bene ﬁts of stable employment to support their
small-scale ﬁshing livelihoods while also overlooking how the ﬁshmeal company has
deployed corporate social responsibility initiatives to gradually gain acceptance and re-
ceive praise for their social and economic contributions to the Ecuadorean economy.Additionally, it may also disregard the temporary care farmers show toward the ani-
mals that consume the feed in factory farms.
Surprisingly, ﬁshmeal production has received little attention from anthropolo-
gists compared to the ﬁnalized marketable commodities of monoculture, aquaculture,
and agri-food production. However, animal feed based on ﬁshmeal was the critical ingre-
dient that revolutionized poultry and swine production in the Global North after World
War II.
13Following the use of ﬁshmeal as agricultural fertilizer, scientists and indus-
try leaders recognized the high levels of protein, nutrients, and minerals in ﬁshmeal,
which would promote faster growth in chickens and pigs. Feeding ﬁshmeal to live-
stock allowed factories to restrict the movements of these animals as they did not
need to forage anymore.14
10. Barandiaran and Walsh, “Production/Destruction in Latin America, ”718.
11. Gordillo, “On the Destructive Production of Food, ”798.
12. Gordillo, “On the Destructive Production of Food. ”See also Longo and Clausen, “Tragedy of the
Commodity. ”
13. Wintersteen, Fishmeal Revolution ,2 .
14. Wintersteen, “Smell of Money, ”Haalboom, “Oceans and Landless Farms. ”Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 397Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

The abundant anchoveta populations off the Peruvian coast due to the nutrient-
rich upwelling process brought on by the Humboldt Current captured the attention of
investors in the United States, Europe, and Peru.15Once the Californian sardine ﬁshery
collapsed in the early 1940s, the epicenter of ﬁshmeal production relocated south through
a coalition of investors who acquired boats and technology from the extinct Californian
ﬁshery.16The quiet seaside town of Chimbote transformed into an industrial site for ﬁsh-
meal production, among other industries, and became known as the “Peruvian Pitts-
burgh ”in the 1950s.17
With the eventual collapse of the Peruvian anchoveta after decades of over ﬁshing,
many operations relocated to Ecuador due to the con ﬂuence of both the Panama and
Humboldt currents, which attracts a large population of pelagic ﬁsh species important
forﬁshmeal production, such as sardines and mackerel. Southern Manabí, Ecuador, has
historically been an economic backwater. While the Ecuadorean coast was not at the
center of the Spanish conquest, their short- lived presence was enough to unleash sig-
niﬁcant changes in the area. By the beginning of the 1600s speci ﬁc areas suffered a se-
vere demographic collapse instigated by exposure to new diseases, acts of violence, and
forced labor under onerous conditions.18Over time, montubios (rural peasants whose
identity is linked to farming more than ﬁshing) and cholo ﬁshers who ﬂed from planta-
tion labor inland, resettled along the coastal margins, ﬁshing, farming, and taking spo-
radic advantage of the economic boom-and-bust cycles in timber, tagua , coffee, and cat-
tle ranching.
During one of the ﬁrst walkabouts through the factory ’sm a i no p e r a t i o n s ﬂoor,
the deafening noise of the machinery working nonstop overwhelmed my ability to hear
clearly. The heat that emanated from the ovens and constantly spinning steel silos ele-vated the temperature signi ﬁcantly. Noting my discomfort, Manuel, the head manager,
stated that none of those setbacks ever bothered him because the heat and sound of the
machines smelled of money. In town, the smell of rotten ﬁsh mixed with a scent described
as burnt engine oil generated similar comments such as “There is the money ”or“The
boats must have caught many ﬁsh last night. ”
While walking between the silos I encountered auxiliary workers quickly taking
buckets ﬁlled with discarded ﬁsh parts such as heads, guts, bones, and tails to the cook-
ers. Several buckets contained ﬁsh eggs of different sizes still in the sac. One of the fac-
tory employees that accompanied us suddenly stated, “It is a shame that these eggs
never became ﬁsh. So many lives lost. ”Somewhat befuddled, Manuel responded, “Those
eggs never contained life because they were never fertilized. The female ﬁrst spawns at
sea, then the males fertilize the eggs outside her body. Before that happens, there is no
15. Ueber and MacCall, “Rise and Fall of the California Sardine Empire. ”
16. Wintersteen, “Protein from the Sea, ”9.
17. Wintersteen, “Smell of Money, ”38.
18. Newson, Life and Death in Early Colonial Ecuador , 254 –55.398 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

life, so it must be used. If not, it goes to waste. ”He emphasized that the company paid
a higher price for the eggs than the other waste because they contain additional nutri-
ents and produce optimal ﬁshmeal. Manuel also added that it was impossible to over-
ﬁsh pelagic ﬁsh nowadays because of improved scienti ﬁc practices and technology.
Indeed, the manager ’s statements re ﬂected how decades ago, investors viewed the
abundant anchoveta off the Peruvian coast as wasted resources that offered a poten-
tial investment opportunity,19an opening that cemented a relationship with nature
premised on “extracting surplus from life. ”20
After pollution from the factory gained attention beyond the community, the com-
pany donated money to NGOs for conservation projects and became involved in public
health campaigns and recycling initiatives, making invisible the black, gray, and brown
sludge that gradually covered rocks, the seabed, and Isla Morada ’s shores. Morada is-
land is an ichthyological phenomenon that attracts migrating ﬁsh to certain sections
around its craggy shores throughout the year. Archaeological evidence shows that In-
digenous ﬁshers routinely caught black skipjacks and other scombrids for thousands
of years,21and historical records from the defunct syndicate that once collectively gov-
erned the beach seine ﬁshery from the 1920s to the 1950s show that the black skipjack
was a highly prized ﬁsh.22While ﬁsh such as snook, snapper, weak ﬁsh, and grouper live
below its waters year-round, others such as bonito, frigate tuna, skipjack tuna, andblack skipjack appear a handful of times, their presence lasting from four days to a cou-
ple of weeks.
In the discursive evocations of company managers and personnel, ﬁsh emerged as
a global hope for resolving hunger and malnutrition. This mirrors the historical rela-
tionship and tension about the uses of anchoveta in Peru. Kristin Wintersteen mentionstwo competing visions for the use of pelagic ﬁsh in the 1950s and 1960s: using these ﬁsh
to mitigate malnourishment within Peru, particularly among Andean groups with less
access to ﬁsh, or using anchoveta to produce ﬁshmeal for national and export markets.
23
Sixty years later, these visions converged on the grounds of the AZUL company as man-
agers stressed that they formed part of a broader movement mitigating world hunger
and even national issues of undernourishment by creating high-quality feed for ani-
mals consumed in Ecuador and abroad. They insisted that producing ﬁshmeal to satisfy
the international and national demand for feed for farm-raised shrimp and ﬁsh re-
ﬂected a concern for both global and local communities, what Cymene Howe refers to
as“anthropocenic ecoauthority, ”where company personnel formulated “ethical claims
on behalf of and in regards to the anthropoge nically altered future of the biosphere,
19. Probyn, Eating the Ocean .
20. Asdal, Druglitro, and Hinchcliffe, “Introduction, ”10.
21. Bearez, Gay, and Lunniss, “Sea Fishing at Salango. ”
22. Southon, “Competition and Con ﬂict.”
23. Wintersteen, “Protein from the Sea. ”Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 399Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

human and nonhuman. ”24For AZUL, ﬁshmeal production has several potential trajecto-
ries in terms of local economic well-being, world hunger, and the national economy.
The ambitious claims of the ﬁshmeal company readjusted their extraction of ﬁsh and
production of ﬁshmeal to serve the noble cause of mitigating world hunger. This con-
cern transcended what managers considered the mundane worries of small coastal
communities, where calls for rede ﬁning bycatch laws to protect gravid ﬁsh clashed with
the company ’s ecoauthority over ﬁsh.
The Savvy yet Anxious Fish
For several evenings Arturo, his son Luis, and I had been ﬁshing near Isla Morada with-
out much success. Arturo and Luis ’s strategy shifted from night to night, presenting the
ﬁsh with dead and live bait. I noted Arturo ’s inclination to ponder the abilities of his
favorite target species, snook. One evening Arturo used a piece of a plastic bag he dili-
gently shaped with his knife and scissors to resemble a medium-sized jelly ﬁsh. Surpris-
ingly the plastic jelly ﬁsh attracted more ﬁsh than the other baits; perhaps, as Arturo ex-
plained, “they were curious, not accustomed to seeing such a strange bait. I have used
this before, and I always catch plenty of ﬁsh, but I try not to use it too often because
they will get accustomed; they become savvy. ”
After an hour in which he landed seven snook, Arturo submerged a long bamboo
stick in the water, except for the last few centimeters. He began listening intently to the
activity underwater, describing the sounds as electricity and “popcorn. ”Instead of turn-
ing on his small twenty- ﬁve-horsepower engine, he rowed slowly to where he suspected
theﬁsh congregated. Using a ﬂashlight, Arturo scanned the water ’s surface. Noticing the
bright patchy lights that ﬂickered near the surface when ﬁsh swam under the light, Ar-
turo and Luis quickly began preparing three lines. Arturo suspected there was a school
of black skipjacks, describing their dorsal markings as a mix of iridescent blue with
black composed of three to ﬁve horizontal stripes. Suddenly he felt several tugs on
each line. As he tried to control the lines with the help of Luis, he exclaimed that the
ﬁsh seemed savvier than usual because instead of swimming to deeper waters where
the line would become tense and secure the hook, they swam near the boat, loosening
the tension of the line. Finally, after tiring the ﬁsh, the men hauled two large skipjacks
into the boat, both ﬁshﬂapping uncontrollably until tiring after a few minutes. As Luis
grabbed a wooden stick, Arturo stopped him before he could hit one of the ﬁsh on the
side of the head: “Why so hasty? ”“You act like the factory, ready to kill anything with-
out thinking! ”He grabbed the ﬁsh using an old shirt and cradled the ﬁsh near his lower
abdomen. As he applied pressure on its underbelly, some eggs and a shiny, dense liquidoozed out. “They are gravid, no wonder they were so savvy, they are desperate to live
out their life. You know, they are savvier when they have life inside them. ”To Luis ’s
disappointment, Arturo grabbed both ﬁsh and tossed them into the water.
24. Howe, “Anthropocenic Ecoauthority, ”383.400 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

From a Deleuzian perspective, Christopher Bear and Sally Eden argue that recrea-
tional anglers attempt to become ﬁsh when seeking encounters with ﬁsh. Engaging with
ﬁsh and their watery world requires relating to individuals and groups of ﬁsh as well as
making sense of water color, movement, and other “rhythmicities ”that allow them to
engage with animals that are hard to detect.25Yet becoming ﬁsh only illustrates one pos-
sible relation without considering at least speculatively what ﬁsh may become and what
ﬁsh gain from these encounters. Thus, conversations with ﬁshers about ﬁsh revolved
around the uncertain speculation that went beyond the physical qualities of water and
ﬁsh to imaginaries about how they learn, develop meaning, and change in response to
shifting circumstances such as over ﬁshing. In this case, more so than becoming ﬁsh,ﬁsh-
ers and ﬁsh attempted to become as savvy as each other. Both could become savvy and
exhibit a viveza , which Broad and Orlove describe in the Peruvian context as a “speci ﬁc
sort of alertness that combines sharpness, wit, and a refusal to be tricked or fooled. ”26
This human- ﬁsh closeness contrasts with taxonomic assumptions that ﬁsh are dis-
tant from humans because they are cold-blo oded, live in aquatic environments, and
lack language.27
Savviness is not a given property of either ﬁsh or humans but instead is a result of
the different ways in which artisanal and industrial ﬁshing practices have come together
a n dc o p r o d u c e dh u m a n - ﬁsh savviness. For instance, the lives of ﬁsh move within an
environment in ﬂuenced by currents, wind, swells, and water temperatures, as well as
confront human and nonhuman predators, pollution, and a changing climate. Simi-
larly, ﬁshers grapple with opportunities and ci rcumstances that often arrive sporadi-
cally, like waves or currents. They must grapple with economic hardship, political uncer-
tainty, and insecurity at sea. Constant movement characterizes ﬁshers ’lives, shifting in
and out of different situations while linking the ﬂow of knowledge concerning ﬁshing
activities in different locations al ong the coast. Thus, becoming savvy for ﬁshers and
ﬁsh involves short-term strategies and lon g-term resilience, maintaining a creative
openness to particular situations that emerge from a socioecological milieu rife with
uncertainty and perpetual movement at diffe rent velocities, one where it has increas-
ingly become more challenging to secure ﬁsh and where, for ﬁsh, it has become increas-
ingly harder to survive.
For most of their lives, Saul and Arturo have been artisanal ﬁshers and have had
short stints ﬁshing aboard the larger purse seiners when they ﬁrst appeared on the sea-
scape in the early 1970s. During their short experience aboard the larger boats, Saul and
Arturo noted that when the crew caught black skipjacks and other scombrids in the
larger nets, they would die quicker, inferring that the sheer number of ﬁsh caught and
the quickness of the mechanized systems to pull up the net caused the ﬁsh much stress
25. Bear and Eden, “Thinking like a Fish?, ”344.
26. Broad and Orlove, “Channeling Globality, ”290 –91.
27. Palsson, “Idea of Fish, ”114.Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 401Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

and anxiety. The high levels of intelligence displayed by ﬁsh and their ability to learn has
led to European legislative measures adopted to reduce the stress that salmon experi-
ence as they are fattened and killed for human consumption.28The Ecuadorean ﬁshers ’
experience offers clues about the stressful lives of ﬁsh out at sea beyond the realm of
domestication. While the many ﬁsh I observed alive and followed once dead are not en-
closed in pens as salmon are, they have become increasingly encircled in nets. Thus, not
only does a savvy ﬁsh emerge from ﬁshers ’practices and relational engagements with
seascapes, but also anxious and stressed ﬁsh.
Fish are not only “nonhuman knowns ”but are also active in producing knowledge
about the watery worlds they inhabit.29Fish can share affective states with humans
such as stress, anxiety, excitement, and joy. Despret asserts that Jakob von Uexküll ’s use
of the Umwelt concept to “rebuild the world as the animal perceives it ”did not mean that
he tried to assume the “affected perspective ”of animals, a move that requires a relation-
ship of closeness and intimacy.30The intimate relationship between ﬁsh and coastal
dwellers begins at an early age. Parents teach their children the word espina (ﬁshbone)
to prevent them from choking, even before teaching them the words mother and father .
Throughout their early years, children will eat ﬁsh two to three times daily, prepared in
various ways. As they grow older they will wake up to the loud calls of merchants selling
ﬁsh. They will also assist other ﬁshers in disentangling ﬁsh from nets and processing
them with their mothers in the kitchen and home gardens. When they become old
enough, they will catch ﬁsh with handlines, ﬁshnets, and harpoons or head off to ﬁsh
with other men aboard ﬁberglass boats or larger purse seiners.
Thus, ﬁshers not only needed to remain attentive to changes in the seascape that
ﬁsh perceive to be important such as water color and temperature, the direction of the
current, tidal shifts, or the presence of humans, but they also needed to assume an
affected perspective that drew them into the social (and underwater) worlds of ﬁsh
subjects. As Tim Ingold states, animal inte lligence is not a capacity to react to external
effects, but instead, the subjective worlds of animals are “one trail of growth and develop-
ment in a heterogeneous ﬁeld of interests and affects. ”31In this case, the death of many
gravid ﬁsh and the technological shifts associated with the continued expansion of indus-
trialﬁshing dictated the ﬁelds of interest that affected the mood, savviness, and anxiety
levels of ﬁsh.
Understanding what makes ﬁsh tick does not usually lead to care or concern about
ﬁsh pain or suffering, yet there were instances where care spontaneously emerged from
practices centered on returning gravid ﬁsh to sea to complete their lives. However, caring,
as shown in other human-animal assemblage s, is never too far from killing, as today ’s
28. Law and Lien, “Practices of Fishy Sentience. ”
29. Hinchcliffe, “Sensory Biopolitics. ”
30. Despret, “Responding Bodies, ”55–57.
31. Ingold, “Anthropology beyond Humanity, ”20.402 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

eggs can very well be tomorrow ’sﬁsh being hooked, encircled, or speared.32Fleeting yet
relational forms of caring for gravid ﬁsh temporarily sustain the link between ﬁshers and
ﬁsh, and as shown in Arturo ’s example, care “requires attention and ﬁne-tuning to the
temporal rhythms of an ‘other ’and to the speci ﬁcr e l a t i o n st h a ta r eb e i n gw o v e nt o -
gether. ”33Arturo ’s and other ﬁshers ’care and concern for ﬁsh can be thought of as a prac-
tice that “connotes both affective concern (caring about) and practical action (caring
for). ”34Fishers cared about the future of ﬁsh tied to the well-being of coastal communi-
ties and cared for gravid ﬁsh, releasing them in hopes that they spawn before falling
prey to other predators.
Wasted Lives
The materiality of large catches aboard purse seiners, such as ﬁshﬂapping in the net,
theﬁshy smell in the air, and the sound of engines working overtime generated excite-
ment among the crew and captains due to increased pro ﬁts for both ﬁshers and the
company. However, a latent anxiety could be instantly sensed when the catch consisted
of gravid ﬁsh. In the case of ﬁshers on board industrial purse seiners, the entanglement
of affective states encompassed a “weirdly-weird moment ”that Timothy Morton de-
scribes as “the uncanny, unexpected fallout from the myth of progress. ”35The volumi-
nous catches mean a larger paycheck for everyone, but the capture of gravid ﬁsh signals
a more indeterminate future: “a serpent in a loop, swallowing its own tail. ”36When
catches exceeded several tons, a large hose that transported ﬁsh to a conveyor belt
on the boat sucked the ﬁsh directly from the water. A degree of grief was palpable over
the loss of so many eggs, evident in how many ﬁshers “felt sorry ”for the death of “so
much life that would be burned by the factory. ”While some ﬁshers aspired to return
the gravid ﬁsh to sea, the screams of their supervisors and captains and the little time
available to secure the ﬁsh silenced their hopes.
The increasing gap between ﬁshers and ﬁsh on industrial boats begins with the
echoes and images that ﬂash on the sonar monitor ( ﬁshﬁnders) as it sends cone-shaped
sound pulses toward the sea to locate objects. While sonars aid captains in detecting
ﬁsh quicker than ever and revealing aspects of the seabed that are important for decid-
ing when to cast the net, these advanced gadgets cannot show the captain which ﬁsh
are gravid and which are not. Arturo ’s close interaction with the black skipjacks re-
vealed details about the ﬁsh that sonars as aggressive “capture machines ”37fail to de-
tect, such as the bulge on the underside of their bodies and their savvier reaction due
to their gravid condition. Arturo ’s relation with ﬁsh and the expansive intrusions into
32. Bocci, “Tangles of Care. ”
33. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”705.
34. Buch, “Anthropology of Aging, ”279.
35. Morton, Dark Ecology ,7 .
36. Morton, Dark Ecology , 19.
37. Johnsen et al., “Cyborgization of the Fisheries, ”23.Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 403Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

their world to become savvy while contemplating life underwater and inside ﬁsh bodies
were temporarily cast aside by industrial equipment, tonnage, and pro ﬁt margins.
After every ﬁshing trip concluded, company technicians ﬁlled out a standardized
company form. They recorded numbers and species names, which were then input into
databases and later shared with ﬁsheries institutions. Scientists at the National Fish-
eries Institute also calculated the available ﬁsh stock and collected data from other com-
panies to analyze maximum sustainable yield statistically. This helps ﬁsheries scientists
understand ﬁshing effort and make predictions about the long-term viability of the ﬁsh-
ery. Fishers ’conﬁdence in the company, much like in the state, is limited, and they often
expressed concerns and suspicions about the company ’s ability to provide credible mod-
els and forecasts about the future of small and large-scale ﬁshing. Consistent with Peter
R. Sinclair, Jahn Petter Johnsen, and Paul Ripley ’s analysis, power relations present in ﬁsh-
eries institutions and private companies tend to in ﬂuence knowledge production more
so than the apparent objectivity of scienti ﬁc practices used to assess pelagic ﬁsh popula-
tions.38This was not as evident inside the factory ’sw a l l sa s “weirdly-weird moments ”
were absent when conversing with managers who spoke with certainty about the sus-
tainability of the ﬁshmeal industry. However, ﬁshers critiqued the unwanted dumping
ofﬁsh,ﬁshing within protected areas or zones reserved for artisanal ﬁshers, underre-
porting total catches, and the wanton killing of all kinds of ﬁsh.
Beyond the mistrust in the company ’s recordkeeping and modeling, what was also
evident was that these scienti ﬁc practices and managerial discourses enacted ﬁsh as
stocks, as governable and stable objects, and as faceless beings devoid of individuality,
isolated from the broader relations assembled with ﬁshers and other ﬁsh along the sea-
scape.39Fudge argues that an animal ’s inability to “look back ”and to exhibit a degree of
self-awareness inhibits a more sensitive politics and ethics of the nonhuman: “Lack of
reason means lack of face, means lack of individuality, lack of home, which in turn
means that these beings are outsi de full ethical consideration. ”40Much as ﬁshers cri-
tiqued technocrats and state bio logists for not knowing what a ﬁsh is, employees in-
side the factory (who are or were ﬁshers) often re ﬂected that it was easier for the com-
pany to recognize ﬁsh as a bag of ﬁshmeal than as an actual animal. In contrast, divers
often described coming face-to-face with ﬁsh, noting their curious facial expressions
when the ﬁsh stared back at them. Other ﬁshers detailed the face of the ﬁsh once dead,
pointing to their eyes, teeth, and color patterns. Thus, for ﬁshers, there are no ﬁsh in
general or faceless populations of ﬁsh but a multiplicity of ﬁsh with unique ways of
interacting with humans and communicating with ﬁsh and other nonhumans.
On some evenings while the crew rested, some ﬁshers formulated calculations,
writing down notes on half-torn pieces of paper. Marlon, for example, would calculate
38. Sinclair, Johnsen, and Ripley, “Power and the Production of Science. ”
39. Telesca, “Accounting for Loss in Fish Stocks. ”
40. Fudge, “Animal Face, ”180 –81.404 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

how many eggs a ﬁsh could carry and how many potential ﬁsh they killed if there were
xnumber of ﬁsh. Deckhands repeated this mathematical problem when they noted the
clear liquid was oozing from ﬁsh bellies as the conveyor belt forcefully squished the ﬁsh
against one another. Both ﬁshers and company management transformed ﬁsh into
numbers, but the numbers used to set up the math problem differed. While ﬁshers cal-
culated the approximate amount of ﬁsh wasted inside the bodies of female ﬁsh, record-
keepers on board calculated approximate tonnage and pro ﬁt, a loss of life versus a gain
in pro ﬁt. Fishers ’claims that there is something wrong with killing gravid ﬁsh are incon-
gruent with the biological realities and economic logics the company and its personnel
assembled. Since gravid ﬁsh cannot be released once caught and cannot be detected
using sonar technology or do not ﬁt institutional de ﬁnitions of bycatch, they are “des-
ignated expendable, ”41left to die with the rest of the ﬁsh caught.
Navigating Marginal Gains
Due to declining ﬁsh populations in coastal waters and the increasing number of boats,
ﬁshers felt the only way to secure ﬁsh was on board the industrial boats. During inter-
views, industrial ﬁshing revolved around themes associated with pollution, over ﬁshing,
corruption, and predatory capitalism. Yet, in practice, ﬁshing households brought indus-
trial ﬁshing into the rhythms of everyday life, becoming intertwined with other liveli-
hood strategies with a longer trajectory, such as hunting, farming, foraging, and animal
rearing. Many ﬁshers now consider the once contested ﬁshmeal factory to be an integral
component of daily life. One of these opportunities includes the “mountains of ﬁsh,”as
Antonio described, dying on the private boats that they labor on and that momentarily
lie in a transition zone between the public sea and the private factory, allowing foropportunities to redirect their trajectory to households and local markets.
In general ﬁsh are viewed as common property accessible to whoever catches the
ﬁshﬁrst. Fish become privatized once they are secured onboard industrial boats, as
company policy prohibits ﬁshers from taking or unloading ﬁsh to other boats. However
on certain evenings, ﬁsh would be referred to as chancha (female pig), a portion of the
catch that ﬁshers covertly funneled out of the boats using collaborative strategies be-
tween deckhands, captains, and law enforcement. When catches consisted of gravidﬁsh, deck supervisors often guarded the ﬁsh to deter ﬁshers from funneling ﬁsh out of
the boat. Company managers and technicians considered gravid ﬁsh to be of high qual-
ity, and the fatter ﬁsh increased the catch weight to ful ﬁll monthly quotas the company
established according to pro ﬁt margins. Regardless of the warnings and the gaze of the
supervisors, amid the darkness, high winds, and Paci ﬁc swells, ﬁshers found ways to
take gravid ﬁsh, often leaving behind nongravid ﬁsh. Here, I return to Carlos, who, at the
beginning of the article, shared nongravid ﬁsh with townsfolk while secretly keeping the
gravid ﬁsh as a prized marginal gain to share in the intimacy of household ecologies.
41. Nixon, Slow Violence , 151.Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 405Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

Jane I. Guyer highlights how people in West Africa generate “marginal gains ”by crea-
tively navigating economic opportunities that emerge from the “disjunctures between
scales ”42embedded in both capitalist and noncapitalist economic practices and forms
of value. Marginal in the coastal Ecuadorean context does not mean that these clandes-
tine acts are insigni ﬁcant; instead, marginal refers to the minimal, virtually unnotice-
able practices that take place in the shadows of ﬁshmeal production, allowing ﬁsh and
ﬁshers to seep through the cracks of industrial ﬁshing infrastructure. Like the savvy
ﬁsh seeking opportunities to escape from nets, the savvy ﬁshers sought weak points in
theﬁshmeal company ’s enforcement practices.
While Guyer mainly focuses on economic bene ﬁts, I found that the gains from
these clandestine practices exceeded economic considerations. Marginal gains reverber-
ated around town, injecting liveliness into streets and households as ﬁshers shared and
circulated ﬁsh between friends and kin. Marginal gains are socially accepted, even desir-
able, but condemned by company personnel as the illegal behavior of “ﬁshers that never
learn and enjoy stealing. ”However, sharing ﬁsh intersects with local moral economies
that have a long history in the area, such as in times of crisis during intense El Niño
events or economic downturns associated with boom-and-bust cycles, but also for the
pleasure of doing so. Thus, marginal gains contrasted different forms of value at the
household scale with more capitalistic forms of extracting value from ﬁsh bodies.
The prolonged absence and short-term presence of ﬁsh produced a seesawing of
affects that led to questions about the extinction of ﬁsh and the livelihoods they help
weave. When Carlos caught ﬁve mullets along the intertidal zone, three of which were
gravid, he returned the three ﬁsh. He mentioned the ongoing crisis and lack of ﬁsh in
coastal waters: “What will our children eat? Will they ever see the abundance of ﬁsh we
used to enjoy? What if ﬁsh disappear? ”Fishers ’acts of ﬂeeting care for gravid ﬁsh were
not recent shifts emerging amid increased ﬁshing efforts but instead considered dying
practices. The reduced frequency of ﬁshers returning ﬁsh to the sea resulted from in-
creased pro ﬁts and markets that had driven ﬁshers to “kill every last ﬁsh, ”as Pedro
stated when he carefully released two gravid ﬁsh from the beach seine. What is a recent
shift, however, is the concern about the inevitable extinction of coastal lifeways linked
to the lives and movements of diverse ﬁsh.
In the acute absence of ﬁsh in coastal waters, the ability to coordinate allegiances
with captains, deckhands, and enforcement to funnel ﬁsh out of company boats main-
tains a world that ﬁshers feel is disappearing. Instead of irrational and illegal acts, re-
turning gravid ﬁsh to sea and clandestinely taking them from company boats are prac-
tices of “maintenance and repair ”43that create “livable and lively worlds ”44within an
otherwise bleak outlook of the future.
42. Guyer, Marginal Gains , 95.
43. Krøijer and Rubow, “Introduction, ”379.
44. Puig de la Bellacasa, “Making Time for Soil, ”705.406 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

What Future for Fish and Fishers?
In the opening pages of Wasteocene , Armiero argues that to produce alternatives to the
wasting relationships that characterize the expansion of capitalist-intensive industries,
nothing less than a “multispecies liberation alliance ”45is necessary. This article has
sought to show how the wasting relationships in ﬁshmeal production generate more
than just the residue of processed ﬁsh, the toxic and pungent scents expelled from fac-
tory smokestacks, or the sludge discharged underwater. There are also notable changesin human and nonhuman lives, such as the technological innovations, recordkeeping,
and scienti ﬁc practices that objectify and commodify ﬁsh, the behavioral changes and
affective shifts that ﬁsh have undergone, the dying practices of returning ﬁsh to sea,
and the covert strategies that ﬁshers devise to redirect ﬁsh from industrial boats to their
households. Additionally, the analytical speci ﬁcity the Wasteocene provides beyond
waste as garbage or as a dumping site makes a valuable contribution (and alternative)
to the broader narratives the Anthropocene puts forward.
Considering the entanglement between households, small-scale ﬁshing, and indus-
trial orderings, what does this show about caring for gravid ﬁsh when confronted with
the inevitable need to catch them for the company? Unexpectedly for ﬁshers, the stabil-
ity provided by abundant ﬁsh in the not-so-recent past and the moral economies tied to
coastal livelihoods increasingly rely on the marginal gains generated on industrial boatsfrom ﬁshers who maintain a mobile life between ecological and industrial zones. In an
adverse Wasteocene marked by increased uncertainty, Carlos and others ﬁnd value in
their industrial ﬁshing lifestyles despite their implication in simultaneously killing and
caring for gravid ﬁsh. They prefer this lifestyle to other alternatives distant from ﬁshing
because it allows them to merge seemingly contradictory moral norms associated withan artisanal ﬁshing identity and the labor demands of industrial ﬁshmeal production,
thereby generating a sense of stability through varied forms of relatedness with ﬁsh
that, in the increasingly commodi ﬁedﬁshing economy of coastal Ecuador, can no longer
be sustained by small-scale ﬁshing livelihoods.
Walking along the beach with ﬁshers raised “ghostly presences ”
46of intertidal
zones once teeming with life and movem ent. The looming fear of a life without ﬁsh
can be as anxiety-inducing as extinction itself, what Samuels refers to as “haunting
uncertainties ”47that exert much affective power in an already volatile climate where
a sense of control has become unfastened in small-scale ﬁshing spheres tied to the
challenges of securing ﬁsh in coastal waters. Taking and sharing ﬁsh momentarily con-
ceals the anxiety accompanying rapid socioecological change. These hopeful possibilities
for repair are akin to “commoning practices ”that simultaneously “produce wellbeing
through care and inclusion ”48and challenge the othering of human and nonhuman
45. Armiero, Wasteocene ,3 .
46. Mathews, “Ghostly Forms and Forest Histories, ”146.
47. Samuels, “Narratives of Uncertainty, ”229.
48. Armiero, Wasteocene ,3 .Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 407Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

bodies, revealing how sharing affective states with ﬁsh and sharing and eating ﬁsh
and their eggs with fellow humans might come to matter in wasted conditions.
Sharing ﬁsh may not obliterate the Wasteocene or ﬁshmeal production, but taking,
circulating, and sharing ﬁsh will continue to provide yearnings and coherence amid inco-
herent futures, as it has previously done. There is always a possibility that ﬁshmeal pro-
duction will come and go similarly to the other boom-and-bust cycles that have left their
mark on the coastal history of ﬁshing communities in Ecuador. However, one question
remains unanswered for ﬁshers: When or if ﬁshmeal busts, will ﬁsh still be around?
The answer depends on how savvy ﬁsh can become to outwit the ﬁshmeal company ’s
rapacious tendencies, as well as transformations in the human realm. Changes in by-
catch laws, as one example, require subverting existing “toxic narratives ”49of economic
growth and colonization of marine environments while developing new modes ofmore-than-human relating. Modeling in terms of catch rates and pro ﬁt margins silen-
ces particular de ﬁnitions of nonhuman life that could lead to better bycatch laws that
beneﬁt gravid ﬁsh. What if ﬁshery scientists assume an affected perspective and pro-
duced models using the calculations that ﬁshers formulated when gravid ﬁshﬂapped
hopelessly in the net? That is, the models would re ﬂect not only how much pro ﬁtt h e
company generates, but also how much life is wasted. These are more sensitive models
that consider the changing histories of ﬁsh and ﬁshers in the fraught contemporary
juncture that is the Wasteocene.
MICHAEL A. VINA holds a PhD in social anthropology from the University of Bergen. For more
than a decade he has drawn on ethnographic methods to explore human-seascape relations inEcuador, Costa Rica, and more recently coastal dunes in the United Kingdom and Brazil as a post-
doctoral fellow in the ERC project Sea, Sand, and People: An Environmental History of Coastal
Dunes at the University of Lisbon.
Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded by a doctoral fellowship at the University of Bergen, Norway. I am
especially grateful to ﬁshers and their families over the years for their participation, support, and
friendship. I thank the anonymous peer reviewers for their helpful and critical feedback. I would liketo also thank the editors at Environmental Humanities for their thoughtful comments.
References
Armiero, Marco. Wasteocene: Stories from the Global Dump . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2021.
Asdal, Kristin, Tone Druglitrø, and Steve Hinchcliffe, eds. Humans, Animals, and Biopolitics: The More-
than-Human Condition . London: Routledge, 2017.
Asdal, Kristin, Tone Druglitrø, and Steve Hinchcliffe. “Introduction: The ‘More-than-Human ’Condi-
tion; Sentient Creatures and Versions of Biopolitics. ”In Asdal, Druglitrø, and Hinchcliffe, Hu-
mans, Animals, and Biopolitics ,1–29.
49. Armiero, Wasteocene , 21.408 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

Barandiaran, Javiera, and Casey Walsh. “Production/Destruction in Latin America. ”Journal of Political
Ecology 24, no. 1 (2017): 716 –25.
Bear, Christopher, and Sally Eden. “Thinking like a Fish? Engaging with Nonhuman Difference
through Recreational Angling. ”Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29, no. 2 (2011):
336 –52.
Bearez, Phillipe, Patrick Gay, and Richard Lunniss. “Sea Fishing at Salango (Manabí Province, Ecuador)
during the Middle Formative Machalilla Phase. ”Latin American Antiquity 23, no. 2 (2012): 195 –
214.
Bennett, Jane. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
Bocci, Paolo. “Tangles of Care: Killing Goats to Save Tortoises on the Galapagos Islands. ”Cultural
Anthropology 32, no. 3 (2017): 424 –49.
Broad, Kenneth, and Ben Orlove. “Channeling Globality: The 1997 –98 El Niño Climate Event in Peru. ”
American Ethnologist 34, no. 2 (2007): 285 –302.
Buch, Elana D. “Anthropology of Aging and Care. ”Annual Review of Anthropology , no. 44 (2015): 277 –93.
Despret, Vinciane. “Responding Bodies and Partial Af ﬁnities in Human-Animal Worlds. ”Theory, Cul-
ture, and Society 30, no. 7/8 (2013): 51 –76.
Duggan, Greg L., Lesley J. F. Green, and Astrid Jarre. “‘Thinking like a Fish ’: Adaptive Strategies for
Coping with Vulnerability and Variability Emerging from a Relational Engagement with Kob. ”
Maritime Studies 13, no. 4 (2014): 1 –21.
Fudge, Erica. “The Animal Face of Early Modern England. ”T h e o r y ,C u l t u r e ,a n dS o c i e t y 30, no. 7/8 (2013):
177 –98.
Gillespie, Kathryn A., and Patricia J. Lopez. “Introducing Economies of Death. ”InEconomies of Death:
Economic Logics of Killable Life and Grievable Death , edited by Patricia J. Lopez and Kathryn A. Gil-
lespie, 1 –13. London: Routledge, 2015.
Gordillo, Gaston. “On the Destructive Production of Food: Some Lessons from South America. ”Journal
of Political Ecology 24, no. 1 (2017): 797 –800.
Guyer, Jane I. Marginal Gains: Monetary Transactions in Atlantic Africa . Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004.
Haalboom, Floor. “Oceans and Landless Farms: Linking Southern and Northern Shadow Places of In-
dustrial Livestock (1954 –1975). ”Environment and History 28, no. 4 (2022): 571 –99.
Hinchcliffe, Steve. “Sensory Biopolitics: Knowing Birds and a Politics of Life. ”In Asdal, Druglitrø, and
Hinchcliffe, Humans, Animals, and Biopolitics ,1 5 2 –70.
Howe, Cymene. “Anthropocenic Ecoauthority: The Winds of Oaxaca. ”Anthropological Quarterly 87,
no. 2 (2014): 381-404.
Ingold, Tim. “Anthropology beyond Humanity. ”Suomen Antropologi 38, no. 3 (2013): 5 –23.
Johnsen, Jahn Petter, Peter Holm, Peter Sinclair, and Dean Bavington. “The Cyborgization of the Fish-
eries: On Attempts to Make Fisheries Management Possible. ”MAST 7, no. 2 (2009): 9 –34.
Kirksey, Eben, and Stefan Helmreich. “The Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography. ”Cultural Anthro-
pology 25, no. 4 (2010): 545 –76.
Krøijer, Stine, and Cecilie Rubow. “Introduction: Enchanted Ecologies and Ethics of Care. ”Environmen-
tal Humanities 14, no. 2 (2022): 375 –84.
Law, John, and Marianne Elisabeth Lien. “The Practices of Fishy Sentience. ”In Asdal, Druglitrø, and
Hinchcliffe, Humans, Animals, and Biopolitics ,3 0 –47.
Lien, Marianne Elisabeth. Becoming Salmon: Aquaculture and the Domestication of a Fish .O a k l a n d :U n i -
versity of California Press, 2015.
Longo, Stefano, and Rebecca Clausen .“The Tragedy of the Commodity: The Overexploitation of the
Mediterranean Blue ﬁnT u n aF i s h e r y .”Organization and Environment 24, no. 3 (2011): 312 –28.
Mathews, Andrew S. “Ghostly Forms and Forest Histories. ”InArts of Living on a Damaged Planet ,
edited by Anna Tsing, Heather Swanson, Elaine Gan, and Nils Bubandt, 145 –56. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Morton, Timothy. Dark Ecology: For a Logic of Future Coexistence . New York: Columbia University Press,
2016.Vina / Ruined Seascapes of the Wasteocene 409Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

Newson, Linda. Life and Death in Early Colonial Ecuador . Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995.
Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2011.
Palsson, Gisli. “The Idea of Fish: Land and Sea in the Icelandic World-View. ”InSignifying Animals:
Human Meaning in the Natural World , edited by Roy Willis, 114 –27. London: Routledge, 1990.
Probyn, Elspeth. Eating the Ocean . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscienti ﬁc Futurity Pace of Care. ”Social Stud-
ies of Science 45, no. 5 (2015): 691 –716.
Samuels, Annemarie. “Narratives of Uncertainty: The Affective Force of Child-Traf ﬁcking Rumors in
Postdisaster Ache, Indonesia. ”American Anthropologist 117, no. 2 (2015): 229 –41.
Satizabal, Paula, and Wolfram H. Dressler. “Geographies of the Sea: Negotiating Human-Fish Interac-
tion in the Waterscapes of Colombia ’s Paci ﬁcC o a s t . ”Annals of the American Association of Geog-
raphers 109, no. 6 (2019): 1865 –84.
Sinclair, Peter R., Jahn Petter Johnsen, and Paul Ripley. 2009. “Power and the Production of Science:
Assessing Cod Stocks as the Mechanistic Fishery Collapses. ”MAST 7, no. 2 (2009): 35 –53.
Southon, Michael. “Competition and Con ﬂict in an Ecuadorian Beachseine Fishery. ”Human Organiza-
tion48, no. 4 (1989): 365 –69.
Telesca, Jennifer E. “Accounting for Loss in Fish Stocks: A Word on Life as Biological Asset. ”Environ-
ment and Society , no. 8 (2017): 144 –60.
Todd, Zoe. “Fish Pluralities: Human-Animal Relations and Sites of Engagement in Paulatuuq, Arctic
Canada. ”Inuit Studies 38, no.1 (2014): 217 –38.
Tsing, Anna Lowenhaupt. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist
Ruins . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015.
Ueber, Edward, and Alec MacCall. “The Rise and Fall of the California Sardine Empire. ”InClimate Var-
iability, Climate Change, and Fisheries , edited by Michael H. Glantz, 31 –47. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2005.
Wintersteen, Kristin A. The Fishmeal Revolution: The Industrialization of the Humboldt Current Ecosystem .
Oakland: University of California Press, 2021.
Wintersteen, Kristin A. “Protein from the Sea: The Global Rise of Fishmeal and the Industrialization
of Southeast Paci ﬁc Fisheries, 1918 –1973. ”DesiguALdades.net Working Paper 26, 2012. https://
www.desigualdades.net/Working_Papers/Search -Working-Papers/Working-Paper-26-_Protein
-from-the-Sea_/index.html .
Wintersteen, Kristin A. “The Smell of Money: Fishmeal on the Periphery of the Global Food Econ-
omy. ”Harvard Design Magazine , no. 39 (2014): 33 –40.410 Environmental Humanities 17:2 / July 2025Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/17/2/393/2288689/393vina.pdf by guest on 18 September 2025

