159
Cultural Politics , Volume 19, Issue 2, © 2023 Duke University Press 
DOI: 10.1215/17432197-10434321THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
On Container Aquaculture and the Datafication of Life
Yuxing Zhang
Abstract  Container aquaculture — a method that uses shipping  
boxes equipped with information technologies — is presented in China 
as an emblem of smart farming, and as a technological solution to 
the environmental degradation in natural water resources resulting 
from intensified aquacultural production. Container aquaculture 
aims at creating an orderly, self-  contained ecosystem wherein 
the fish are managed in tandem with the water milieu via data 
governance. Its infrastructure operatively automates aquacultural 
practices into optimizable modules and programs biological and 
mechanical processes into interlocked components bearing distinctive 
functionalities within the artificial ecosystem. This article argues that 
the case of container aquaculture shows that algorithmically regulated 
and automated ecosystematic management does not always fulfill 
its promise; one still needs to navigate a dense web of interspecies 
associations filled with gaps and crossings between modes of being 
and values. Datafication is just one way to know and organize. An 
algorithmically controlled ecosystem cannot always accommodate the 
open-  endedness of more-  than-  human ecologies. Drawing on works by 
Tsing, Stengers, and Satsuka, this article reappropriates what should 
be counted as the “smart” in farming by resituating it as a world- 
making practice in ecological collectives rather than in an abstract 
ecosystem, eschewing the fantasy of a singular criterion of evaluation 
and control.
Keywords  smart farming, ecology, algorithm, infrastructure, 
multispecies justice, more-than-human
On November 11, 2019, China’s Central Television (CCTV) 
devoted twenty-  two minutes of its prime-  time broadcast 
programming to the explosion of blue algae in Yangcheng 
Lake, the home of mitten crabs. Yangcheng Lake, located in Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 160Suzhou, serves as the source of drink -
ing water for the residents of the lower 
Yangtze River region. Aquaculture in this 
area mostly deploys offshore cultivation 
methods, involving floating net cages that 
are roughly one square kilometer in size. A 
massive amount of waste excreted by the 
crabs, along with unabsorbed antibiotics 
and fertilizers that are applied to increase 
productivity, are discharged into the lake. 
This gives rise to eutrophication — dense 
blooms of noxious, foul-  smelling phyto -
plankton and algal growth — every autumn 
when the crabs mature.
Intensified freshwater aquacultural 
production has caused irreversible environ -
mental degradation. Container aquaculture 
has gained traction in parts of China as 
a technological solution to the massive 
demand for fish protein. The method 
gained its name by using (often aban -
doned) shipping containers to raise fish, 
enabling maximum separation of aquacul -
tural practice from natural water resources. 
In 2019 China’s national aquacultural pro -
duction reached 64.8 million tons, contrib -
uting a market value of 1,293.5 billion RMB 
(renminbi, China’s national currency; China 
Fishery Law Enforcement 2020).
More than a method for environmental 
protection, container aquaculture is also an 
emblem of smart farming ( 智慧农业 ).1 The 
containers are equipped with sensors and 
object-  recognition cameras that continu -
ously collect and analyze data on the condi -
tion of the fish, their movements, and their 
water environment, so that farmers can 
quickly respond to changes in either the 
behaviors of the fish or the environment 
with a fine degree of precision. Feeding, 
water purification, and fish harvesting can 
be automatically controlled. Farmers can 
examine various production metrics on 
personal computers and mobile interfaces 
in real time.Container aquaculture is part of 
China’s move toward algorithmic man -
agement and automation in farming. It is 
supported by the government’s “Inter -
net Plus” national agenda, which strives 
to upgrade  traditional industries using 
information technologies (State Council 
2015). Container aquaculture was listed 
among the “key demonstration technology 
projects” by China’s agriculture ministry 
in 2019 (Godfrey 2020). Provincial agen -
cies across China have funded multiyear 
programs promoting container aquaculture 
in rural villages as part of the government’s 
environmental protection and poverty alle -
viation efforts (Godfrey 2020). In the 2020 
Smart Farming Development Summit, 
Qiangde Liu, the deputy secretary general 
of China’s Animal Agriculture Association, 
declared that datafication is the inevitable 
path for China’s farming development. 
What lies at the core of datafication is its 
capacity to abstract farming operations into 
datasets that can be used for targeted pre -
emptive intervention (Liu, quoted in Zhao, 
Guo, and Wu 2020). Datafication is about 
translating states and actions into quantita -
tive expressions, enabling real-  time track -
ing, pattern identification, and predictive 
analytics (Mayer-  Schoenberger and Cukier 
2013). It has been gradually normalized as 
a new paradigm in science and technology, 
legitimizing a widespread mythology: that 
extensive datasets can offer a higher form 
of intelligence with an unprecedented 
degree of accuracy (boyd and Crawford 
2012).2 In popular and scientific discourse, 
the datafication of aquaculture signifies a 
shift from an inefficient, unsustainable pro -
duction style toward a precision-  oriented, 
calculation-  intensive mode of computer -
ized subfield control (Antonucci and Costa 
2020; Liao 2020).
Researchers have begun to pay 
attention to the datafication of farming. Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 161Kelly Bronson and Irena Knezevic (2016: 
2) declare that farming “is undergoing a 
digital revolution,” which can reproduce 
long-  standing, unequal relations among 
food production players. In farmers’ daily 
operations, they unwittingly produce 
data for technology providers. However, 
farmers are often denied ownership of 
the datasets and their values (Fraser 
2019). Michael Carolan (2017) explores 
how access to data should be understood 
as an issue of justice, political ontology, 
and claim making. Other scholars have 
examined how trustworthiness works in 
the platformization of food distribution 
(Zhang 2022), the issue of market concen -
tration (Livingstone and Knezevic 2020), 
and the consequences wrought by uneven 
developments of agricultural technolo -
gies across the globe (Murray 2018). Few 
researchers have theorized the politics 
and epistemology of data-  driven farming 
practices through the lens of media stud -
ies, except for Christopher Miles’s (2019: 
3) study, which sees the discourse on 
precision agriculture as performing a kind 
of “persuasive, imaginary-  shaping work” 
that “enacts a form of algorithmic norma -
tivity.” For Miles, even though the datafi -
cation process reorganizes production on 
quantitative, rule-  based grounds, precision 
agriculture is  essentially an intensification 
of conventional agriculture (2).
This article seeks to show that con -
tainer aquaculture is more than an inten -
sification of conventional aquacultural 
methods. It will show that container aqua -
culture is a special kind of smart farming, 
in its adoption of a biodesign approach. It 
is a type of farming that grounds itself on 
ecological relations and the self-  sufficient 
circularity of the biosphere. To construct 
an artificial ecosystem where water can 
be circulated within the container, micro -
bial metabolic processes are mobilized to biologically exhaust nutrient loadings, 
maintain oxygenation and nitrification 
stability in the water, and improve the 
digestibility of fish species. Container 
aquaculture demonstrates a mode of eco -
systematic management in which the fish, 
the biological processes, and mechanical 
operations in the container are managed in 
tandem with data governance.
I have examined corporate marketing 
materials, news reports, design diagrams, 
patent documents, and relevant television 
programs related to container aquaculture. 
The article thus contributes to the criti -
cal literature on smart farming and data 
governance in two ways. First, it explicates 
the operational logics and implications of 
data-  driven ecosystematic management. 
Second, it explores what more-  than- 
human perspectives can tell us about the 
epistemological grounding and limits of 
algorithmic methods relating to the prac -
tices of farming and world making. More-  
than-  human approach  refers to a rubric of 
ethnographic research that takes seriously 
the agencies of more-  than-  human beings 
and the interconnectedness of humans and 
other life-  forms (Kirksey and Helmreich 
2010; Ogden, Hall, and Kimiko 2013). To 
redirect us from economic concepts (e.g., 
rationalization) and anthropocentric epis -
temology in which the more-  than-  human 
is subordinated to human ends, Anna N. 
Tsing (2015: 21) points out how life-  forms 
(e.g., matsutake mushrooms) make worlds 
in ways that confound modern scientific 
interpretations.3 A scientific understanding 
of ecosystems in farming implies bounded -
ness and formalization, but the ecological 
world(s) stitched together by life-  forms  
are “open-  ended gatherings” rather than  
a coherent, teleological “system” or 
“logic” (23).
Here, I argue, container aquaculture 
shows that algorithmically regulated and Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 162automated ecosystematic management 
does not always fulfill its promise; one still 
needs to navigate a dense web of inter -
species associations filled with gaps and 
crossings between modes of being and 
values that coexist. Put differently, farming 
takes place in ecology, and ecology does 
not equate with a model ecosystem. 
Ecology does not work like a machine. 
Datafication is just one way to know and 
organize. Drawing on works by Tsing 
(2015), Isabelle Stengers (2011), and Shiho 
Satsuka (2018), this article reappropriates 
what should be considered the “smart” in 
farming by resituating farming as a world- 
making practice in an ecological collective 
rather than in an abstract ecosystem, 
eschewing the fantasy of a singular crite -
rion of evaluation and control.
In the following sections, I discuss (a) 
how container aquaculture aims to con -
struct an orderly, self-  contained artificial 
ecosystem; (b) how data-  driven ecosys -
tematic management is operationalized 
and its implications; and (c) how out-  of- 
tune biological processes testify to the 
need to rethink farming as a world-  making 
practice, a process that always involves 
livable collaborations and working across 
difference. The article ends by reflecting 
on the politics of smart farming, and how 
the case of container aquaculture invites 
us to (re)consider how “smartness” should 
manifest in food production within a multi -
species world.
Ecosystematic Management
In China, container aquaculture is seen 
as an indicator of “the third epoch of 
aquacultural industry,” an “aquacultural 
ecosystem driven by a precision-  oriented, 
visualizable, automated, and condensed 
yet environmentally friendly management 
style” (Dajiang Fishery 2021; Yang 2020). 
Container aquaculture minimizes the threat of pathogens from the outside, which can 
also significantly reduce the use of antibiot -
ics for the benefit of production and the 
larger ecology (China Fishery Law Enforce -
ment 2018). An article in a Chinese maga -
zine specializing in aquaculture praised 
the container system for possessing the 
advantages of reducing biosecurity risks, 
cutting down antibiotic exposure, decreas -
ing the percentage of fat in fish’s flesh via 
controlling water streams, and alleviating 
the influence of natural disasters (Zhu, 
Shu, and Xie 2019). Similarly, Nongxin’s 
(2018) report celebrated container aqua -
culture as an innovative method that could 
bring about a positive outcome of “four 
savings”: land resource, water, human 
labor, and feed consumption.
Agriculture and Farming , a CCTV-  7 
show that focuses on introducing novel 
agricultural technologies, featured a 
container aquaculture episode (Ren 2018). 
It showed fish cultivated in computer -
ized containers, which were created by 
repurposing standard shipping containers. 
These “smart” tanks had hatch lids and 
automatic devices fitted on the top for 
feeding activities. The containers were 
coated with a three-  layer insulation shield 
for temperature control. The bottom fea -
tured a manufactured slope with a control -
lable, smooth-  surface hole and stainless- 
steel slide in one corner where fish could 
be automatically harvested when the slide 
was deployed. A local farmer explained 
that this design significantly saved human 
labor, allowing him to “harvest 4.5 kilo -
grams of fish in just 10 minutes” (Peng, 
quoted in Ren 2018). He showed the 
reporter how biomediation and mechanical 
filtration techniques separated waste from 
wastewater, reducing waste dispersion; 
the fish’s excrement was then used as 
organic fertilizer for planting. The program 
represented container aquaculture as a Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 163“smart” solution to the massive demand 
for “white meat” in China. It adopted algo -
rithmic technologies to execute precision- 
oriented management, solved food safety 
issues, and answered the government’s 
call for returning an uncontaminated envi -
ronment to the people.4
Container aquaculture demonstrates 
how the dilemma posed by the environ -
mental impacts of intensified production 
is reconstituted into a concern about 
infrastructure: the creation of an insulated 
technological “bubble,” a fetishization of 
enhanced sensor capability, and faith in 
data analytics. Technically, the container 
system comprises:
•  a perception layer — underwater cameras, 
radio frequency identification, and wireless 
sensor networks, for real-  time monitoring 
and life cycle assessment;
•  an Internet of Things (IoT) – based network 
layer of communication nodes and gate -
ways, whereby collected data are forwarded 
to the data infrastructure for storage and 
analysis; and
•  the application/end-  user layer, through 
which data are synthesized and presented 
(often on the farmer’s smartphone).
The container system can thus be seen 
as a form of data infrastructure, demon -
strating what Shannon Mattern (2015: 
98) called “infrastructural capacities” — it 
coordinates signal traffic via multilay -
ered “communication and communion,” 
enabling the system’s interconnectedness 
and interoperable data transmission. Verti -
cally integrated sensing devices afford the 
datafication of multifaceted biological and 
environmental dimensions inside the con -
tainer into quantifiable variables (e.g., tem -
perature, movement level of the fish, water 
current speed, oxygen dissolving level, and 
feed conversion ratio), which can give early indications of potential welfare problems. 
Supported by front-  and backstage data 
work, the fish are managed as at-  risk living 
entities whose growth conditions can be 
continuously monitored to ensure that they 
are being kept in an optimal condition.
However, what makes container aqua -
culture unique lies in its holistic, ecosys -
tematic approach to control. Data-  driven 
ecosystematic management, in this case, 
is not simply about datafication but also 
the construction of a self-  contained model 
ecosystem par excellence. In the scientific 
community, ecosystematic management  
refers to using “scientific knowledge of 
ecological relationships within a complex 
sociopolitical and values framework” to 
sustain the long-  term ecological resiliency 
of a given domain (Grumbine 1994: 31). For 
container aquaculture, ecological resiliency 
is translated into the equilibrium of the 
artificial container ecosystem. In other 
words, container aquaculture adopts a kind 
of data-  driven ecosystematic management 
strategy wherein living entities are man -
aged in tandem with environmental and 
mechanical processes. In the container, 
aquatic organisms are readily “involved” 
in each other’s lives. The maintenance of 
water quality is seen as synonymous with 
the maintenance of the well-  being of the 
fish. The fish are not managed as discreet 
entities; instead, they are cultivated as 
transcorporeal subjects (Alaimo 2012) 
interconnected with the flows of sub -
stances and agencies of the water milieu.
The emphasis on data-  driven eco -
systematic management was a descen -
dant of the broader trend in post – Cold 
War natural and social sciences in which 
cybernetics, systems thinking, signals, and 
feedback loops became the foundational 
vocabularies. The rationalist, managerial 
ideals of the self-  contained ecosystem 
for space research programs later served Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 164as the model for sustaining life on earth 
(Anker 2005: 240).5 Container aquaculture 
expresses an attempt to transform ecology 
into an orderly functioning ecosystem 
placed within a defined domain. Fish can 
be raised within an artificial container eco -
system, which reorganizes production and 
water environment maintenance based on 
calculative rationality, something of which 
present-  day computers are capable.6
Automating an Ecosystem
To operationalize ecosystematic manage -
ment and water resource circulation, con -
tainer aquaculture adopts a key aspect of 
platform design strategy: modularity. Mod -
ularity entails the structural compartmen -
talization of web contents by dividing them 
into reusable modules bearing distinct 
functions (McKelvey 2011), which eases 
the coordination of distributed operations 
(Benkler 2006). Anne Helmond (2015: 1) 
has theorized platforms as “pouring data 
systems” consisting of interoperable mod -
ular channels through which external web 
contents/applications can be easily added 
and made compatible to the core platform 
framework. Each modular component can 
work independently while contributing to 
the platform ecosystem’s overall data work 
(Nieborg and Helmond 2018).
The construction of an artificial eco -
system does not in itself make container 
aquaculture an instantiation of smart 
farming. In fact, its “smartness” lies in 
its (promised) infrastructural ability. Biotic 
processes (e.g., breaking down wastewa -
ter biosolids via anaerobic digestion) and 
abiotic processes (processes that are not 
derived from living organisms, like con -
trolling water currents) are broken down 
into modules of an artificial ecosystem. On 
a holistic level, the technology promises 
uniform expansion, as the container itself 
is built as a standardized, replicable device. For internal operations, the container 
infrastructure compartmentalizes com -
plex aquacultural practices (e.g., feeding, 
mechanically filtering wastewater) into a 
series of modular prototypes for integrated 
control.
Taking water purification and recircu -
lation as an example (itself a modular com -
ponent of the overall container system), 
there are two main types of container 
infrastructure. The semi-  enclosed type  
(陆基推水式 ) requires connection to arti -
ficial “ecological ponds” where water is 
filtered and biologically purified. The other 
type features a fully enclosed biocycling 
design (一拖二式 ), consisting of two fish- 
cultivation units and one water-  treatment 
unit to complete a self-  contained water- 
circulation feedback loop (Yao, Xie, and  
Lin 2019).
For the semi-  enclosed type, according 
to a documentary broadcast on CCTV-  17 
(2021), the wastewater first goes through 
a mechanical filter that screens large solid 
substances. The finer particles, along with 
dissolved compounds, are subsequently 
processed in “ecological ponds,” which 
comprise four sequential segments:
•  A 4.5-  meter-  deep pond that uses gravity for 
initial sedimentation
•  A one-  meter-deep pond that uses biofloc  
technology — using aggregates of algae, bac -
teria, or protozoa held together in a matrix 
along with aquatic plants — to consume 
nutrient loadings, elevate water respiration 
rates, and sustain nitrification stability
•  A pond with herbivorous fishes introduced 
in an appropriate proportion. The multi -
trophic method — incorporating species from 
different nutritional levels in the system so 
that the by-  products (e.g., waste) of one 
species are recaptured as source of energy 
for another — is implemented to avert algae 
bloom.Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 165•  A thermal-  control pond that keeps the puri -
fied water at an optimal temperature before 
it is sourced back to the fish-  cultivation 
module. Computational sensors are installed 
in each module to harness real-  time environ -
mental parameters (CCTV-  17 2021).7
The fully enclosed biocycling model 
integrates six modular components: water 
quality monitoring, excretion collection, 
water body purification, thermal and oxy -
gen level control, fish-  algae symbiosis, and 
a platform-  based decision-  support system 
(NFTEC 2018). The water purification mod -
ule comprises a microfiltering machine, 
Roots-  type blower, air pump and flow 
control lever, ozone generator, biochemical 
tank, and a central control system that 
collects and assesses various environmen -
tal parameters (e.g., pH level). Fifteen tons 
of water circulate throughout the modules 
per hour (L. Wang 2018). Pressurized 
water circulation forces the fish to swim  
in a certain direction, to accurately direct 
their excrement to the purification modules 
and to burn off fat. Nutrient-  rich waste -
water is processed via the mechanical- 
filtering and fish-  algae symbiosis modules 
(to remove detritus excreted by the fish, 
and to maintain oxygenation and nitrifi -
cation stability), and then fed back to the 
fish tank, constituting a self-  contained, 
resource-  circulation feedback loop (Liao 
and Luo 2019).
Container aquaculture deals with com -
plex material exchanges and interspecies 
attachments in a condensed environment. 
The risk of water quality degradation is nor -
malized into a sense of “permanent precar -
iousness” (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015: 694) 
that needs to be constantly acted on. The 
vertically integrated sensor system makes 
environmental sensing a highly distributed 
event. Each sensor (or group of sensors) 
provides a perspectival view of the overall ecosystem. For example, biofiltration effi -
ciency depends primarily on:
•  water temperature;
•  an acceptable nitrification rate, reached by 
the proliferation of nitrifying bacteria, con -
verting the toxic ammonia first into nitrite 
and finally into nitrate; and
•  a stable pH level in the system, which is 
primarily affected by the production of 
carbon dioxide from the fish and biological 
processes of the biofilter, as well as the 
acid produced from the nitrification process 
(Bregnballe 2015: 20).
To achieve effective biofiltration in such a 
condensed space is not straightforward. 
It requires complex intermodular coor -
dination and multispecies collaboration, 
constantly reflecting any trace of poten -
tial water deterioration so that preemp -
tive measurements can be undertaken 
promptly.8
The modular design of the container 
infrastructure breaks down complex tasks 
as well as biotic and abiotic processes into 
digestible units. It expresses a particular 
form of organization that aims at abstract -
ing living realities into pieces of program -
mable modules bearing distinct functions. 
A programmable platform allows its very 
code to be modified; codes define the rela -
tions and arrangements of platform con -
tents. Programming aquaculture works on 
the premise that relations among life-  forms 
can be abstracted into a kind of essen -
tialized correlation expressed in numeric 
terms. Biotic and abiotic agents in the con -
tainer can therefore be managed accord -
ing to an algorithmic relation, or what is 
termed ground truth in algorithms — that is, 
a labeled cluster of training data through 
which a supervised machine-  learning sys -
tem can generate its model of the world. 
It aims at defining and creating the “right” Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 166condition in which these processes can 
mechanistically express themselves in a 
particular way.
To a certain extent, container aqua -
culture promises to create an orderly, 
autonomously functioning ecosystem, in 
which whatever happens within the con -
tainer rests on what Tsing (2012: 505) has 
termed “precision-  nested scales.” Scalabil -
ity, according to Tsing, is a constructed fea -
ture that allows projects to grow without 
any indeterminacy of transformation (507). 
By programming both biotic and abiotic 
processes into functional modules of an 
artificial ecosystem, their relations can be 
holistically managed in scalable terms, 
which can supposedly capture contin -
gencies, or at least enable one to quickly 
respond to them.
Orit Halpern, Robert Mitchell, and 
Bernard Dionysius Geoghegan (2017: 110) 
define “smartness” as a mode of govern -
mentality embracing “the ideal of an infinite 
range of experimental existences, based 
on real-  time adaptative exchanges among 
users, environments, and machines.” 
According to these authors, the vision 
of smartness is inextricably tied to the 
language of crisis (120). An infrastructure 
might encounter unforeseen crisis; hence, 
present operations need to be constantly 
modulated to make the infrastructure more 
resilient to future uncertainty (112). The 
mechanism of container aquaculture works 
along a similar calculation-  intensive, practi -
cal epistemology. It promulgates the belief 
that living relations can be formalized and 
therefore made algorithmically manageable 
and optimizable. The modular system can 
self- organize. The modular operations can 
adjust themselves automatically according 
to internally referential measurement of 
performance.
In theory, the container infrastruc -
ture yields a simplified ecosystem par excellence; it  nears total automation 
and, by extension, significantly reduces 
the demand for human participation and 
judgment. To thrive, the fish and their 
surrounding biotic agents only need to pas -
sively cohabit, since the substantial flows 
and energy exchanges would supposedly 
unfold according to the structure of the 
system’s hardware. In the next section, 
I show how the case of container aqua -
culture implicates a need to (a) resituate 
farming as a world-  making practice taking 
place in a dynamic ecology rather than in a 
model ecosystem; and (b) reexamine what 
should be counted as the “smart” for farm -
ing, moving away from a technologically 
deterministic image of “smartness.”
World Making: From Ecosystem to Ecology
An episode of I Love to Invent , a television 
program from China featuring amateur 
scientists’ self-  developed artifacts, depicts 
the struggles that Jinliang Chen under -
went in disciplining microbes in container 
aquaculture (CCTV-  10 2018). Chen was an 
agroecological entrepreneur from Anhui 
Province, located in the interior where nat -
ural water resources are limited. To liberate 
aquaculture from the natural constraints of 
pond-  based methods, Chen aimed to turn 
abandoned shipping containers into “big, 
controllable aquacultural facilities” wherein 
the by-  product — fish manure — could 
be used as organic fertilizer for growing 
vegetables. In the program, Chen took the 
challenge of raising one thousand tilapias 
in his first attempt, and he used a con -
tainer comprised a fish-  cultivation tank and 
a biochemical water-  treatment module. 
Although the water was oxygenated and 
kept at twenty-  two degrees Celsius, the 
number of probiotics were insufficient to 
exhaust the massive waste excreted by 
the fish. An overabundance of nutrients 
in water can lead to overgrowth of algae. Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 167When dead algae decompose, this process 
consumes dissolved oxygen, which leads 
to fish hypoxia.
In his second demonstration, Chen 
added mechanical filters, oxygenation 
equipment, heater tubes, and bioballs, a 
plastic medium that provides surface areas 
for probiotics to cling to. However, the 
amount of fish excrement still exceeded 
the biodegradation capacities of the puri -
fying modules, resulting in an upsurge of 
ammonia nitrogen in water. For the third 
demonstration, Chen empowered the 
water-  treatment module with an additional 
mechanical filter and a biochemical tank 
equipped with denitrifying lava rocks, 
bioballs, and oxygen generators to cultivate 
aerobic probiotics. He also installed more 
sensors to collect real-  time environmental 
data. Surprisingly, this model still failed.
In an interview, Chen reflected that 
the circular container system relies on the 
symbiosis between the fish and microor -
ganisms in the water, but human eyes or 
sensors cannot trace the changes in their 
relations in a timely manner. The prolif -
eration of probiotics requires a farmer’s 
ongoing, meticulous attentiveness even if 
full- fledged environmental monitors are in 
place. In Chen’s experience, once indica -
tors of ecological disturbance were picked 
up by the sensors, it was often too late for 
any remedial acts to be effective in such a 
condensed environment.
For aquaculture, the cultivation of 
probiotics is crucial: they can denitrify, 
improve the digestibility of aquatic species, 
release chemical substances with bacte -
riostatic effects, and consume excessive 
nutrients to enhance water stress toler -
ance (Y. Wang, Li, and Lin 2008). However, 
aquatic microbes unfold at scales below 
everyday human perception and below 
even the quantifying capacity of sensors.
Chen’s collapsed ecosystem raises questions. Is controlling an ecology solely 
via technologized means even attainable? 
What are the limits of algorithmic methods 
in programming and managing life? Chen’s 
failed experiments show that container 
ecology is actually a unit of contingency 
and frailty, rather than a machine that can 
smoothly function according to preestab -
lished principles. Even though the “right” 
number of probiotics are introduced, they 
refuse to be made scalable. The ways they 
form symbiotic attachments are fundamen -
tally ephemeral and transcorporeal: they 
do not act according to uniform, precision- 
nested scales.
In recent years, scholars in anthropol -
ogy and social studies of science have  
paid specific attention to microorganisms, 
in several ways: their participation in post- 
Pasteurian discourse and practice  —  
for example, in artisanal cheese making —  
invites one to revisit the nature/culture 
divide (Paxson 2008); their forms and 
structure challenge conventional analytic 
frameworks and boundaries (Helmreich 
2009; Hird 2009; Paxon and Helmreich 
2014); and their elusiveness presents an 
alternative to the episteme of modern 
science and capitalist value production 
(Hathaway 2022; Satsuka 2019; Tsing 
2015). Astrid Schrader (2019: 256) notes 
that marine microbes exist “predomi -
nantly hauntologically.” The life-  sustaining 
tendencies of microbial collectives disrupt 
the individual/population dichotomy 
(259), which has led to profound scien -
tific uncertainties about the pathways to 
death for aquatic microbes (even how life/
death should be defined for them) because 
microbial intra-  actions within an algal 
bloom are fundamentally indeterminant 
(269). In one of her earlier works, exam -
ining an ongoing political-  scientific con -
troversy over the toxicity of a fish-  killing 
microorganism, Schrader (2010) suggested Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 168that the inextricable entanglement of 
(potentially) toxic dinoflagellates with 
life- forms in water challenges the conven -
tional notion of linear causality. Microbial 
“response-  ability” must be seen as a 
condition of “ontological indeterminacies” 
wherein their ephemeral activities cannot 
be easily transcoded into a program that 
runs in linear time (277).
Satsuka (2018) has provided a useful 
framework within which to understand the 
contingent nature of microbial multitudes. 
Satsuka argues that modern science con -
ceptualizes the world “as a universal space 
filled with things in which humans try to 
see things by separating them into indi -
vidual units and by observing them from a 
perspectival vantage point” (82).9 That is, 
the episteme of modern science privileges 
the mutually exclusive, individual body 
that occupies space as the model unit of 
ontological existence. Reflecting on her 
ethnographic research on a forest biomass 
study and the grassroots satoyama  forest 
revitalization movement in Japan, Satsuka 
suggests that the ways in which microbes 
form interspecies entanglement are much 
more elusive than the modernist spatial 
topology. The existence of microbes 
should be approached as “events” (82), a 
constant act of emergence through which 
life composes itself via encounters with its 
surrounding world. For microorganisms like 
mycorrhizal fungi, it is difficult to discern 
the structural mechanism of their symbi -
otic relations and dissect the functionality 
of each species (94). Their interspecies 
entanglements never reach a point of 
completion, nor do they form relations 
in a defined, hierarchical manner. Their 
elusiveness requires “the art of noticing” 
(Tsing 2015) or meticulous “attunement” 
(Satsuka 2019) to see how microbial mul -
titudes compose themselves along with 
other beings.In container aquaculture, the ways 
in which aquatic microbes flow and form 
symbiotic attachments do not conform to 
an atomistic ontology (which presumes 
the existence of discreet entities that can 
be anchored in a spatial representational 
scheme). The movements and effects of 
aquatic microbes cannot be fully pro -
grammed because their life cycles and 
boundaries evade the gaze that guides the 
design of the container infrastructure or 
other smart-  farming facilities: organizing 
production based on regimentation, sys -
tematic ordering, and informed calculation.
As discussed in earlier sections, 
automating a simplified, self-  contained 
ecosystem depends on breaking down 
both biotic and abiotic processes into func -
tional modules along a procedural chain. It 
works on the premise that there exists an 
essentialized, quantitative correlation that 
leads to ecosystem stability, and that can 
be analyzed and actualized via surveillance 
and automation. Life-  forms would only 
need to passively cohabit and do work. 
However, as Chen’s failed experiments 
remind us, aquatic microbes’ ephemeral 
appearances and disappearances and their 
interspecies “response-  ability” cannot be 
fully relegated to the position of back -
ground supporters for the well-  being of the 
fish. They unfold as a cloud of possibilities 
that are “materially real” yet only “partially 
knowable,” emergent amid “contingent 
relations of multiple beings and entities” 
(Ogden, Hall, and Kimiko 2013: 6). There -
fore, to maintain reciprocal symbiosis in 
the water ecology, humans’ attentiveness 
remains indispensable if one wishes to 
make the organismic relations in tune with 
the overall operativity of the container 
system.
However, this does not necessar -
ily mean that the existence of microbial 
multitudes is ontologically incompatible Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 169with algorithmic methods. Nor do I intend 
to make a case that one need to become 
an “animist” in a traditional sense — to 
“communicate” with microbes in order to 
raise fish. What is at stake here is that con -
tainer aquaculture testifies to the need to 
rethink the taken-  for- granted mythology of 
calculative relationality that presumes the 
legibility and manipulability of life-  forms 
and their relations in mechanistic terms.
The fissure revealed here resonates 
with what Stengers (2011) refers to as 
the fracture between facts and values, 
or world and formalization. Stengers 
has challenged science’s pretensions to 
universality and objectivity, as it demotes 
perspectives other than its own to merely 
secondary, irrational beliefs. For Stengers, 
there exist as many modes of being 
and values as there are entities; and the 
relevance of science must be revisited 
in the specificities of its practice. To do 
so, one can resituate science as part of 
what Stengers has called an “ecology of 
practices”: “the science of multiplicities, 
disparate causalities, and unintentional 
creation of meaning” (34).
Stengers’s (2005) notion of ecology 
conveys something broader than the sci -
entific definition of the term. In ecological 
collectives, scientific practices come into 
existence via making relations to other 
material and value-  making practices that 
coexist. The notion of ecology foregrounds 
the need to unearth the multiplicities of 
associations as entities participate in form -
ing collectives, a process wherein more- 
than-  human beings also have an important 
voice outside the rubric of vacuous scien -
tific abstractions.
Chen’s (CCTV-  10 2018) failed demon -
strations testify that farming does not take 
place in an abstract model ecosystem, but 
in a dynamic ecology. In this vein, the cre -
ation of container ecology should be seen as a world-  making practice: a negotiation 
of relationship formation, material trans -
mission, and value alignment that does not 
necessarily reach an ideal state of absolute 
harmony. The notion of world making does 
not flatten agency. It allows us to consider 
the agencies and identities of the more- 
than-  human in a more nuanced way, and 
see how particular actions — no matter 
whether they are done by humans, more- 
than-  human organisms, or machines —  
create worldly effects.
The unfulfilled dream of an autono -
mous, orderly functioning ecosystem 
makes visible the crossings and frictions 
necessary to the composition of a shared 
world. Understanding container aquacul -
ture as a world-  making practice does not 
mean that we need to abandon algorith -
mic technology. What is at stake here 
is that container aquaculture invites us 
to consider the differences between an 
ecology and an ecosystem. It reveals the 
very limits of algorithmic management 
and the hubris of achieving total control 
over life-  forms according to calculative 
rationality, which attempts to objectify 
life as a passive resource, something that 
can be mobilized according to precision- 
nested scales toward productionist ends. 
The abstract formalization of ecology 
leads to a concept of nature — a general -
ized, singular noun — that legitimizes the 
abrasive resource exploitation that serves 
as the foundation for capitalist production 
(Williams 1976).
The container world itself is an irreduc -
ibly complex association of value-  emitting 
organisms, technologies, and human par -
ticipants, an ecological collective wherein 
different values and ways of being are 
negotiated. Creating “smart” container 
worlds thus requires one to take seriously 
the nonsingular agencies of the more-  than- 
human and find ways to muddle through Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 170gaps and crossings, eschewing the fantasy 
of a singular criterion of evaluation and 
control.
Not a Conclusion: The Politics of 
Container Aquaculture
The datafication of farming has brought 
a profound change at the levels of epis -
temology and ethics. It reframes the 
concerns about the environmental impacts 
of intensified production as questions of 
infrastructure and numbers. Data-  driven 
ecosystematic management is operation -
alized via translating aquacultural prac -
tices into always-  updating modules, and 
managing biotic and abiotic processes as 
functional components of an artificial eco -
system in tandem with data governance. 
However, as philosophers of science have 
long showed us, science is not value free: 
claims to objectivity are made by subjects 
who observe and represent the world 
through particular epistemes (Daston and 
Galison 2007). With the rise of calculation- 
intensive methods crystalizing into a new 
orthodoxy, other voices and forms of value 
are sidelined.
Container aquaculture is an intriguing 
case with which to examine the politics of 
smart farming. It also provides hints about 
how we should understand what algorith -
mic methods are and what should be con -
sidered the “smart” in farming. Container 
ecology does not equate with an abstract 
ecosystem. The algorithm interprets, if not 
reduces, the multiplicity of life-  forms and 
their associations to an arrangement of 
weighed probabilities. In “Doubt and the 
Algorithm,” Louise Amoore (2019: 148) 
shows that, while algorithms condense the 
multiplicity of reality to a single output with 
a numeric value between 0 and 1, doubt 
and partial accounts still dwell uneasily 
within. Put another way, algorithms do not 
eradicate uncertainty. The computational structure of algorithms dictates that the 
output is itself a numeric probability, a 
single value/actionable procedure distilled 
from a multiplicity of potential pathways, 
weighings, and thresholds. Algorithmic 
reckoning is a process in which a series of 
highly malleable processual calculations 
are used to arrive at an output.10 Amoore 
argues that algorithmic systems appear 
to be “objective” because their output 
“places a decision beyond doubt in the 
sense that it always already embodies the 
truth-  telling of the ground truth data” (151). 
In this vein, she proposes to reinstate 
doubt as a posthuman critical faculty (164). 
The form of doubt proposed by Amoore 
is different from Cartesian skepticism; 
instead, it embraces what Donna Haraway 
(1988: 584) has called “partial, locatable 
knowledges” that are accountable and can 
enable the “possibility of new webs of 
connections.”
The case of container aquaculture 
reveals the limits of data-  driven (ecosys -
tematic) management: it does not fulfill 
its promise of creating an autonomous, 
mechanistic artificial ecosystem. Moments 
of incoherence and gaps do not neces -
sarily point to absolute incompatibility or 
radically different ontologies that should be 
taken as something negative for science 
to conquer. Instead, they remind us that 
farming actually takes place in dynamic 
ecological collectives, and humans still 
need to learn how to live with the contin -
gencies and cacophonic rhythms among 
different life-  forms. Many times, attuning 
to the rhapsodic rhythms and lines of value 
alignments among entangled life-  forms is 
not easy. However, moments of pause —  
or even confusion or astonishment — can 
direct us to the possibility of communica -
tion and collaboration beyond the schemas 
set by modern science.
The formal, quantitatively conclusive, Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 171procedural rules of calculative rationality 
seemingly serve to free farming from 
human skills, deliberation, and judgment, 
all of which imply politics. Farmers can 
simply submit to the protocols and rules 
of action given by the machines. However, 
if we take seriously Stengers’s (2011) 
articulation of ecology and see container 
aquaculture as a world-  making practice, 
the notion of politics is brought to the fore -
front.11 World making always entails the 
prioritization of certain relations and modes 
of being while obscuring others, regardless 
of whether the actors involved feel or are 
recognized as political subjects as such 
(Otsuki et al. 2018: 7 – 8). The quotidian 
politics of multiplicity in ecology formation 
is prior to representational/structuralist 
politics, which is a product of Enlighten -
ment and modern liberalism, assuming 
that “humans are rational individuals with 
universal and intrinsic rights who possess 
the agency to resist external forces” (8).12 
Otsuki and colleagues’ articulation of 
quotidian politics resonates with Jane Ben -
nett’s (2010) notion of “vibrant matter,” 
which challenges the mainstream political 
theory that largely views the world as 
composed of dead matter, a collection of 
objects constituting a passive backdrop for 
human affairs. Bennett argues that more- 
than-  human beings and nonliving things 
are active protagonists in and of them -
selves; their agencies often exceed human 
intentions. The frictions experienced in 
daily farming practices point to the subtle 
form of politics embodied in world making. 
The choice about what kind of ecology  
we wish to create is also about what kind 
of value to align, what type of world we 
want to be part of, or even what it means 
to be human.
To envision a more ethical food 
production system involves transgress -
ing anthropocentric categories and the “innovate or perish” credo of the techno -
cratic discourse. To not be foreclosed in 
our epistemological purview, we must be 
open to staying with the trouble (Haraway 
2016). Pursuing something along these 
lines will not be straightforward. Given 
the pressing challenges today — wars, 
social inequality, corporate monopoliza -
tion, environmental degradation, and the 
massive demand for food (including fish 
protein) across the globe — the matter of 
what happens to the more-  than-  human 
might seem like a minor issue through a 
capitalist lens. Nevertheless, collaborative 
survival at a time of ecological apocalypse 
demands cross-  species coordination (Tsing 
2015). Concerns about technical capac -
ity or the feasibility of precision-  oriented 
ecosystematic management miss the 
opportunity to engage with the politics 
of smart farming. What is really at stake 
here is what container aquaculture reveals: 
ecology actually entails a cloud of value- 
emitting interspecies associations that 
cannot be fully structured into a procedure 
of cause-  and- effect control. Instead, in this 
light, we need to ask: How to (re)define 
ethics in “smart” farming? How to collabo -
rate with the living as well as the nonliving 
and create more reciprocal ways of food 
production with human participation and 
technology that (re)affirm doubt and partial 
accounts rather than trying to erase them?
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Schwartz Reisman 
Institute for Technology and Society at the University 
of Toronto. I thank Tero Karppi, the journal editors, 
as well as the two anonymous reviewers, whose 
constructive feedback improved the article.
Notes
1. Smart farming is also known as precision 
agriculture or digital farming. I use smart farming  
because in Chinese the phenomenon is termed Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 172智慧农业 , which can be literally translated as 
“smart” or “intelligent” farming.
2. Existing scholarship on data governance 
has largely focused on the ways in which 
algorithmic systems shape human societies, 
reproducing — or even amplifying — social 
discrimination and inequality (see Angwin et al. 
2016; Bucher 2018; Chun 2021; Costanza-  Chock 
2018; Eubanks 2018).
3. World making is different from ontology. 
Proponents of anthropology’s recent “ontological 
turn” have proposed the term pluriverse , to 
challenge the Eurocentric perspective that 
evaluates “other” cultures, but the term risks 
reimagining a world consisting of multiple social 
bubbles/cosmologies. Thinking through the 
notion of world making allows one to see the 
polyphonic processes of value translation and 
association formation in real-  life practice in a 
more nuanced way (see Tsing 2018).
4. I am aware that some of the primary sources 
(e.g., television documentaries) are distributed 
via government-  funded channels, whose wider 
political agenda needs to be interrogated. 
However, this falls beyond the scope of 
this article, as I do not argue that container 
aquaculture is a perfect technological solution to 
ecological crises and food security problems.
5. On the conceptual level, the container functions 
like a quasi-  enclosed life-  support infrastructure, 
something very similar to the space cabin, 
wherein the astronaut’s body is maintained as 
an “ecobiopolitical” subject (Olson 2010). For 
space travel, the astronaut’s body and the cabin 
environment are dually organized via continuous 
probabilistic risk assessments to check for the 
astronaut’s mission readiness (172). Originating 
in military research of the 1950s, space cabin 
development programs have researched the 
“carrying capacity” and “environmental ethics” of 
enclosed facilities, to support humans’ long-  term 
space travel (Anker 2005).
6. By calculative rationality  I mean a kind of 
informed calculation that is quantitatively 
conclusive, something that is different from the 
situated understanding of consequence typical of 
human deliberation and judgment (see Erickson 
et al. 2013; Smith 2019).7. Fish mainly excrete nitrogen in their urine, and 
phosphorous in their feces. A mechanical filter 
can remove a large amount of phosphorous but 
cannot remove the main fraction of the nitrogen, 
because it is dissolved in water. Nitrogen thus 
needs to be converted to nitrate biologically.
8. For example, Guangzhou Chengyi Fishery 
Technology Co. offers subscription-  based 
hardware and software service for partner 
farms. Upon the installment of computational 
sensors and mobile application, farmers can 
examine and optimize farm performance via 
fifteen monitor screens. For example, when 
the underwater sensor detects that the oxygen 
dissolving rate is lower than 3 mg/L, the aerator 
will be automatically activated until it reaches 
4 mg/L. Chengyi’s intelligent monitoring and 
decision-  support system can generate reports 
on farm productivity metrics (e.g., electricity 
conversion efficiency) to clients in real time (Liao 
and Luo 2019: 28).
9. In “Sensing Multispecies Entanglements,” 
Satsuka’s (2018) ideas are inspired by Bin 
Kimura’s (1982) philosophy on the distinction 
between mono (things, which occupy space) 
and koto (event/“about-  ness” of a thing, which 
foregrounds how things are embedded in 
happenings). Kimura’s philosophy draws on 
Martin Heidegger’s articulation of beings and 
Being; Viktor von Weizsäcker’s idea that life 
itself does not come to an end, only individual 
living being does; as well as on the works of 
Henri Bergson, Gilles Deleuze, Michel Henry, 
and Japanese thinkers such as Kitaro Nishida 
(Satsuka 2018: 83 – 84).
10. For example, the thresholds between label 
categories are decided by designers, and the 
labeling of training data can be impacted by the 
individual annotator’s subjective interpretation of 
the annotation guidelines.
11. The idea of ecology is related to what Stengers 
(2011) has called “cosmopolitics,” which 
considers how the multitude of beings, living and 
nonliving, create realities wherein associations 
are continuously forged and broken. Stengers’s 
cosmopolitics represents a nonfoundationalist 
approach, since it rejects the idea that truth 
exists in mind or is just there prior to practice.Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 17312. Grant Jun Otsuki and colleagues’ (2018) notion 
of quotidian politics takes inspiration from 
postcolonial perspectives (Chakrabarty 2009; 
Spivak 1999), the “one-  world world” debate (Law 
2015; Ingold 2018), and Michel Foucault’s (1988) 
discussion of micropolitics in the basic conduct of 
life. The authors use the term quotidian  because 
it is “capacious enough to hold other forms 
of worlding” in which the “possibilities of an 
‘otherwise’ can be found in quotidian practices” 
(Otsuki et al. 2018: 8). The concept pushes us to 
sense, and perhaps touch, other modes of value 
and being in subtle yet profound ways; it enables 
us to attend to new affinities and obligations (9).
References
Alaimo, Stacy. 2012. “Porous Bodies and Trans- 
corporeality.” Larval Subjects  (blog), May 24.  
https://larvalsubjects.wordpress.com/2012/05  
/24/stacy-  alaimo-  porous- bodies-  and- trans  
- corporeality.
Amoore, Louise. 2019. “Doubt and the Algorithm: 
On the Partial Accounts of Machine Learning.” 
Theory, Culture, and Society 36, no. 6: 147 – 69.
Angwin, Julie, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren 
Kirchner. 2016. “Machine Bias: There’s Software 
Used across the Country to Predict Future 
Criminals. And It’s Biased against Blacks.” 
ProPublica , May 23. https://www.propublica 
.org/article/machine-  bias-  risk- assessments- in  
- criminal-  sentencing.
Anker, Peder. 2005. “The Ecological Colonization of 
Space.” Environmental History  10, no. 2: 239 – 68.
Antonucci, Francesca, and Corrado Costa. 2020. 
“Precision Aquaculture: A Short Review 
on Engineering Innovation.” Aquaculture 
International  28, no. 1: 41 – 57.
Benkler, Yochai. 2006. The Wealth of Networks: 
How Social Production Transforms Markets and 
Freedom . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Bennett, Jane. 2010. Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology 
of Things . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
boyd, danah, and Kate Crawford. 2012. “Critical 
Questions for Big Data: Provocations for 
a Cultural, Technological, and Scholarly 
Phenomenon.” Information, Communication, and 
Society  15, no. 5: 662 – 79.Bregnballe, Jacob. 2015. A Guide to Recirculation 
Aquaculture: An Introduction to the New 
Environmentally Friendly and Highly Productive 
Closed Fish Farming Systems . Coopenhagen: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations and EUROFISH International 
Organization.
Bronson, Kelly, and Irena Knezevic. 2016. “Big Data in 
Food and Agriculture.” Big Data and Society 3, 
no. 1: 1 – 5.
Bucher, Taina. 2018. If . . . Then: Algorithmic Power and 
Politics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carolan, Michael. 2017. “ ‘Smart’ Farming Techniques 
as Political Ontology: Access, Sovereignty, and 
the Performance of Neoliberal and Not-  So- 
Neoliberal Worlds.” Sociologia Ruralis 58, no. 4: 
745 – 64.
CCTV-  10. 2018. Wo ai faming ( I Love to Invent ). 
“Baibian yuxiang”  (“Versatile Fish Container”). 
Aired December 25. China Central Televsion-  10.  
http://tv.cctv.com/2018/12/25/VIDETrHUZ7ory  
AWscLjPiRHG181225.shtml.
CCTV-  17. 2021. Shui zhi panzhongcan ( Who Knows That  
Meal in the Dish ). “ ‘Sishui’ ruhe yang huoyu”  
(“How to Raise Living Fish in ‘Dead Water’ ”).  
Aired April 19. China Central Television-  17. 
https://tv.cctv.com/2021/04/19/VIDEs7Wj7w01  
Lr2i483vfKKu210419.shtml?spm=C47996  
.PmwNE0WIyO1P.EYeIwa11HCnI.30.
Chakrabarty, Dipesh. 2009. “The Climate of History: 
Four Theses.” Critical Inquiry  35, no. 2: 197 – 222.
China Fishery Law Enforcement, and Ministry of  
Agriculture and Rural Affairs. 2018. 
“Nongye nongcun buzhang Yu Kangzhen: 
Jizhuangxiangyangyu shi yizhong xin jishu moshi, 
shi yangzhiye lvse fazhan de yici juti shijian” 
(“Kangzhen Yu, Minister of Agriculture and 
Rural Affairs: Container Aquaculture Is a New 
Technological Model, an Experiment of Green 
Faming Development”). Aquaculture Business 
Guide 8: 4 – 5.
China Fishery Law Enforcement, National Fisheries 
Technology Extension Center, and China Society 
of Fisheries. 2020. Zhongguo yuye tongji nianjian 
(China Fishery Statistical Yearbook 2020 ). China 
Agriculture Press.
Chun, Wendy H. K. 2021. Discriminating Data: 
Correlation, Neighborhoods, and the New Politics 
of Recognition . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 174Costanza-  Chock, Sasha. 2018. “Design Justice, A. 
I., and Escape from the Matrix of Domination.” 
Journal of Design and Science . https://jod  
.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/costanza-  chock/release/4.
Dajiang Fishery. 2021. “Zhihuihua yuye shi shuichan 
yangzhi de xin fengkou, zheshi zhende ma?” 
(“Is It True That Smart Aquaculture Will Be the 
Next Big Thing for the Aquacultural Industry?”). 
Tencent , March 29 . https://new.qq.com/omn  
/20210329/20210329A0625L00.html.
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison. 2007. Objectivity . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Erickson, Paul, Judy L. Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca 
Lemov, Thomas Sturm, and Michael D. Gordin. 
2013. How Reason Almost Lost Its Mind: The 
Strange Career of Cold War Rationality . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Eubanks, Virginia. 2018. Automating Inequality: How 
High-  Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the 
Poor. New York: Macmillan.
Foucault, Michel. 1988. “Technologies of the Self.” In 
Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel 
Foucault , edited by Luther H. Martin, Hugh 
Gutman, and Patrick H. Hutton, 16 – 49. Amherst: 
University of Massachusetts Press.
Fraser, Alistair. 2019. “Land Grab/Data Grab: Precision 
Agriculture and Its New Horizons.” Journal of 
Peasant Studies 46, no. 5: 893 – 912.
Godfrey, Mark. 2020. “Chinese Container Aquaculture 
Firm Selected for Government-  Funded 
Demonstration Project.” Seafood Source , 
September 8. https://www.seafoodsource  
.com/news/aquaculture/chinese-  container  
- aquaculture-  firm-  selected-  for- government  
- funded-  demonstration-  project.
Grumbine, R. Edward. 1994. “What Is Ecosystem 
Management?” Conservation Biology  8, no. 1: 
27 – 38.
Halpern, Orit, Robert Mitchell, and Bernard Dionysius 
Geoghegan. 2017. “The Smartness Mandate: 
Notes toward a Critique.” Grey Room , no. 68: 
106 – 29.
Haraway, Donna J. 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The 
Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege 
of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies  14, no. 
3: 575 – 99.Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: 
Making Kin in the Chthulucene . Durham, NC: 
Duke University Press.
Hathaway, Michael J. 2022. What a Mushroom Lives 
for: Matsutake and the Worlds They Make . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Helmond, Anne. 2015. “The Platformization of the 
Web: Making Web Data Platform Ready.” Social 
Media and Society 1, no. 2: 1 – 11.
Helmreich, Stefan. 2009. Alien Ocean: Anthropological 
Voyages in Microbial Seas . Berkeley: University 
of California Press.
Hird, Myra J. 2009. The Origins of Sociable Life: 
Evolution after Science Studies . New York: 
Macmillan.
Ingold, Tim. 2018. “One World Anthropology.” HAU: 
Journal of Ethnographic Theory 8, nos. 1 – 2: 
158 – 71.
Kimura, Bin. 1982. Jikan to jiko ( Time and Self ). Tokyo: 
Chuokoronsha.
Kirksey, S. Eben, and Stefan Helmreich. 2010. “The 
Emergence of Multispecies Ethnography.” 
Cultural Anthropology 25, no. 4: 545 – 76.
Law, John. 2015. “What’s Wrong with a One-  World 
World?” Distinktion: Scandinavian Journal of 
Social Theory  16, no. 1: 126 – 39.
Liao, Fen. 2020. “Zhihui yuye chanye tupu, yiwen 
kandong wulianwang, dashuju qudong xia 
yuye xin moshi” (“An Industry Map of Smart 
Aquaculture, an Article that Introduces You to 
a New Mode of Aquaculture Powered by the 
Internet of Things and Big Data Analysis”). 
Zhongguo Chanye Jingji Xinxi Wang (China 
Industry Economy Information Network). http://
www.cinic.org.cn/sj/sdxz/nysc/895513.html.
Liao, Jing, and Yong Luo. 2019. “Guangzhou chengyi 
shuichan: Zhihui yangyu keji xingyu” (“Guangzhou 
Chengyi Fishery: Fishing Intelligently, 
Aquacultural Development via Technological 
Innovation”). Haiyang yu yuye (Ocean and Fishery ) 
11: 26 – 28.
Livingstone, Carly, and Irena Knezevic. 2020. “From 
Online Cart to Plate: What Amazon’s Retail 
Domination Means for the Future of Food.” 
Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and 
Community Development 9, no. 4: 311 – 29.Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

THINKING INSIDE the  BOX
CULTURAL  POLITICS 175Mattern, Shannon. 2015. “Deep Time in Media 
Infrastructure.” In Signal Traffic: Critical Studies 
of Media Infrastructures , edited by Lisa Parks and 
Nicole Starosielski, 95 – 112. Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press.
Mayer-  Schoenberger, Viktor, and Kenneth Cukier. 2013. 
Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How 
We Live, Work, and Think . London: John Murray.
McKelvey, Fenwick. 2011. “A Programmable Platform? 
Drupal, Modularity, and the Future of the Web.”  
Fibreculture Journal , no. 18. https://fibreculture 
journal.org/fcj-  128-  programmable-  platform  
- drupal- modularity- and-  the- future-  of- the- web/.
Miles, Christopher. 2019. “The Combine Will Tell the 
Truth: On Precision Agriculture and Algorithmic 
Rationality.” Big Data and Society 6, no. 1: 1 – 12.
Murray, Nick. 2018. “Agriculture Wars.” Viewpoint  
Magazine , March 12. https://www.viewpointmag  
.com/ 2018/03/12/agriculture-  wars.
NFTEC (National Fisheries Technology Extension 
Center), and China Society of Fisheries. 2018. 
“Jizhuangxiangyangyu moshi zhu hebei zhuolu 
tuopingongjian”  (“Container Aquaculture Method 
Helps Zhuolu in Hebei Province Get Rid of 
Poverty”). Zongzhan xuehui dongtai  (The Main 
Center Academic Association News ), May 29 . 
http://www.nftec.agri.cn/zzxhdt/201902  
/t20190222_6341982.htm.
Nieborg, David B., and Anne Helmond. 2018. “The 
Political Economy of Facebook’s Platformization 
in the Mobile Ecosystem: Facebook Messenger 
as a Platform Instance.” Media, Culture, and 
Society 41, no. 2: 196 – 218.
Nongxin. 2018. “Wangxiang yangyu xin chulu — 
 jizhuangxiang shi shengtai yangzhi”  (“A New 
Approach to Net Fishing — Container-  Based 
Ecological Fishing”). Nongye yangzhi xin jishu 
(New Agricultural Technology ) 11: 4 – 7.
Ogden, Laura A., Billy Hall, and Tanita Kimiko. 2013. 
“Animals, Plants, People, and Things: A Review 
of Multispecies Ethnography.” Environment and 
Society: Advances in Research 4, no. 1: 1 – 23.
Olson, Valerie A. 2010. “The Eco-  Biopolitics of Space 
Biomedicine.” Medical Anthropology 29 , no. 2: 
170 – 93.Otsuki, Grant Jun, Shiho Satsuka, Keiichi Omura, and 
Atsuro Morita. 2018. Introduction to The World 
Multiple: The Quotidian Politics of Knowing and 
Generating Entangled Worlds , edited by Keiichi 
Omura, Grant Jun Otsuki, Shiho Satsuka, and 
Atsuro Morita,  1 – 17. New York: Routledge.
Paxson, Heather. 2008. “Post-  Pasteurian Cultures: 
The Microbiopolitics of Raw-  Milk Cheese in the 
United States.” Cultural Anthropology 23, no. 1: 
15 – 47.
Paxson, Heather, and Stefan Helmreich. 2014. “The 
Perils and Promises of Microbial Abundance: 
Novel Natures and Model Ecosystems, from 
Artisanal Cheese to Alien Seas.” Social Studies 
of Science 44, no. 2: 165 – 93.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. “Making Time for 
Soil: Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace 
of Care.” Social Studies of Science 45, no. 5: 
691 – 716.
Ren, Min, executive producer. 2018. Keji yuan 
(Agriculture and Farming ). “Datie xiangzi lai 
yangyu”  (“Using a Huge Iron Container to Raise 
Fish”). Aired July 30. China Central Television-  7. 
YouTube video, 25:23. https://www.youtube.com  
/watch?v=S0ewzIEKPew.
Satsuka, Shiho. 2018. “Sensing Multispecies 
Entanglements: Koto  as an ‘Ontology’ of Living.” 
Social Analysis 62, no. 4: 78 – 101.
Satsuka, Shiho. 2019. “Rhapsody in the Forest: Wild 
Mushrooms and the Multispecies Multitude.” 
In How Nature Works: Rethinking Labor in a 
Troubled Planet , edited by Sarah Besky and Alex 
Blanchette,  191 – 211. Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press.
Schrader, Astrid. 2010. “Responding to Pfiesteria 
Piscicida (the Fish Killer): Phantomatic 
Ontologies, Indeterminacy, and Responsibility in 
Toxic Microbiology.” Social Studies of Science 40, 
no. 2: 275 – 306.
Schrader, Astrid. 2019. “Marine Microbiopolitics: 
Haunted Microbes before the Law.” In Blue 
Legalities: The Life and Laws of the Sea , edited 
by Irus Braverman and Elizabeth R. Johnson, 
255 – 73. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Smith, Brian Cantwell. 2019. Th e Promise of Artificial 
Intelligence: Reckoning and Reasoning . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

Yuxing Zhang
CULTURAL  POLITICS  • 19:2 July 2023 176Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1999. A Critique of 
Postcolonial Reason: Toward a History of the 
Vanishing Present . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
The State Council. 2015. “China Unveils Internet Plus  
Action Plan to Fuel Growth.” Xinhua , July 4.  
http://english.www.gov.cn/policies/latest  
_releases/2015/07/04/content_28147514  
0165588.htm.
Stengers, Isabelle. 2005. “Introductory Notes on an 
Ecology of Practices.” Cultural Studies Review 11, 
no. 1: 183 – 96.
Stengers, Isabelle. 2011. Cosmopolitics II . Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Tsing, Anna N. 2012. “On Nonscalability: The Living 
World Is Not Amenable to Precision-  Nested 
Scales.” Common Knowledge 18, no. 3: 505 – 24.
Tsing, Anna N. 2015. The Mushroom at the End of 
the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist 
Ruins . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tsing, Anna N. 2018. “A Multispecies Ontological 
Turn?” In The World Multiple: The Quotidian 
Politics of Knowing and Generating Entangled 
Worlds , edited by Keiichi Omura, Grant Jun 
Otsuki, Shiho Satsuka, and Atsuro Mori, 233 – 47. 
New York: Routledge.
Wang, Lei. 2018. “Chen Jinliang: Yong jizhuangxiang 
yangchu jiankang yu”  (“Jinliang Chen: Using  
Containers to Cultivate Healthy Fish”). China  
Youth Daily , December 25. http://zqb.cyol.com 
/html/2018-  12/25/nw.D110000zgqnb  
_20181225_2-  12.htm.
Wang, Yan-  Bo, Jian-  Rong Li, and Junda Lin. 2008. 
“Probiotics in Aquaculture: Challenges and 
Outlook.” Aquaculture 281, nos. 1 – 4: 1 – 4.Williams, Raymond. 1976. Keywords: A Vocabulary of 
Culture and Society . New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Yang, Yang. 2020. “Zhihui yangyu: Chuangye daren de 
xin nongye mengxiang”  (“Smart Aquaculture: An 
Avid Entrepreneur’s New Aquacultural Dream”). 
Zhongguo nongcun keji ( China Rural Technology ) 
307: 35 – 37.
Yao, Junyao, Yuebo Xie, and Yuqing Lin. 2019. 
“Mokuaihua shengtai shuichan yangzhi fangfa” 
(“A Module-  Based Ecological Aquaculture 
Method”). China patent no. CN1093291184A. 
China National Intellectual Property 
Administration. http://epub.cnipa.gov.cn  
/tdcdesc.action?strWhere=CN109329184A.
Zhang, Yuxing. 2022. “From Social Trust to Blockchain- 
Mediated Trust.” Roadsides , no. 7: 44 – 50. 
https://doi.org/10.26034/roadsides-  202200707.
Zhao, Junlan, Zhixiong Guo, and Ningjing Wu. 2020. 
“Xianchang qianyue 1.6 yi! Nongxin hulian tuichu 
zhulianwang 5.0, quanmian kaiqi yangzhu shuzhi 
shidai”  (“Contracting 1.6 Hundred Millions on 
Site! Nxin Launched Pig Network 5.0 and a New 
Era of Smart Pig Farming”). Nongmu qianyan 
(Agricultural Husbandry Frontiers ), October 14.  
https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/VKYmF57Wsboqgry  
PPSxQlw.
Zhu, Zewen, Rui Shu, and Jun Xie. 2019. 
“Jizhuangxiang shi shuichan yangzhi moshi 
fazhan xianzhuang fenxi ji duice jianyi” (“An 
Analysis of the Development and Future of 
Container Aquaculture”). China Fishery 4: 28 – 30.
Yuxing Zhang is a PhD candidate in information studies at the Faculty of Information, 
University of Toronto. Her works have been published in Media, Culture, and Society , 
Canadian Journal of Communication , and Roadsides .Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/cultural-politics/article-pdf/19/2/159/2011667/159zhang.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 04 October 2025

