Landscape Research
ISSN: 0142-6397 (Print) 1469-9710 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/clar20
Thinking with soil in heritage matters
Christina Fredengren
To cite this article: Christina Fredengren (2025) Thinking with soil in heritage matters,
Landscape Research, 50:2, 274-287, DOI: 10.1080/01426397.2024.2424601
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2024.2424601
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 23 Nov 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1027
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=clar20
Landscape ReseaRch
2025, VOL. 50, nO. 2, 274–287
Thinking with soil in heritage matters
Christina Fredengren 
department of a rchaeology and classical s tudies, s tockholm/Uppsala University, s tockholm, s weden
ABSTRACT
This paper explores what could be learned ‘by thinking with soil’ in 
heritage matters, and ‘thinking with heritage’ in soil matters. Soil is con -
nected to major sustainability issues as it is life-essential to a wide range 
of beings. Soil is rarely thought of as heritage, despite becoming a scarce 
resource over time. It is argued that heritage as ‘landscapes of human 
perception’ is not enough to meet the challenges at hand, whereas the 
alternative ‘heritage as phenomena’ allows for discussing the long-term 
material/immaterial multi-species interrelations that build up in situated 
soils. It gives better positions to discuss justice and care between gen -
erations and convivial re-generation of landscapes. The paper works with 
a case study from mid-Sweden to show how different ‘agential-cuts’ of 
soil give rise to stakeholder tensions as different worlds are produced.
Heritage services work with issues of how to manage significant resources from the past, use 
them in the present, and pass them on to the future. Hence heritage deals with matters and 
materialisation processes that ties situated relations between generations. This places heritage 
matters directly in contact with major sustainability issues of how to balance resource use in 
the present with the needs of future populations. Heritage has been handled in two major 
discourses, one that deals with cultural heritage and one that deals with natural heritage. This 
binary may be a hindrance in tracing heritage as a boundary transgressing phenomenon where 
several relations and agential forces come into play bringing about change and under-articulating 
connectivities between culture and environment (Fredengren 2021 ; Harrison, 2015 ). There have 
been several efforts to link up the two, for example through the European Landscape Convention, 
and in academic and practical works (see e.g. Borgerhoff Mulder & Coppolillo, 2005 ; Lowenthal 
& Olwig, 2015 ). However, the landscape concept in heritage policy and planning often leans 
on notions that privilege immaterial values and human perception over ecological relations, 
which adds further to the nature: culture divide (Fredengren 2021 , 2021 ). There is a need to 
discuss relationships between heritage and sustainability in ways that transgress this divide and 
that take multispecies worlds and temporally evolving materialisation processes seriously. This 
paper explores what could be learned if agricultural soil, which neither sits easily in the natural 
or cultural category and rarely is thought of as heritage, were approached through a heritage 
lens. Drawing on Alaimo ( 2012 ) this paper deals with the question of what sustainability wants 
to sustain and looks at how different sustainability efforts conflict or converge when it comes 
to soil as heritage and to what extent such sustainability includes multispecies worlds.
The research arose through a visit to the exhibition – the Summer of Soil – held in a rural 
community in mid-Sweden.1 The exhibition opened up several aspects of soil, such as the 
importance of soil for food production, the different materials that soil consists of, and how it 
© 2024 The a uthor(s). p ublished by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT christina Fredengren  christina.fredengren@arklab.su.se
This is an Open a ccess article distributed under the terms of the c reative c ommons a ttribution-nonc ommercial-nod erivatives License ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way. The terms on which this article has been 
published allow the posting of the a ccepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.KEYWORDS
Posthumanism; care; soil; 
sustainability; 
multispecies; conviviality; 
extractivism; politics of 
the longterm; heritage; 
landscapehttps://doi.org/10.1080/01426397.2024.2424601
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 275
forms over time. Later on, small farms in the nearby area were visited. People were concerned 
about the planting of energy forests on good farming land by a risk-capital company. The 
fieldwork gave rise to ideas for research on what would happen if earth and soil as living 
ecologies with long histories were to be considered heritage. This paper makes use of material 
from these visits as well as from information on web pages and media reporting. It uses these 
as a case study for tying into ongoing research on soil in the environmental humanities. As 
has been argued by researchers in the project Humus Economicus2 soil is misrecognised in 
several societal processes. This paper identifies such soil misrecognition in heritage-making i.e. 
that soil is disregarded and often forgotten about when heritage is dealt with in future-oriented 
planning processes. The reasoning applies to several societal decisions about the use of agri -
cultural soil for planting energy forests, as places for solar panels or buildings.
Research history
In 2015 the Un announced the International Year of Soils3 as it is a resource under threat, often 
interlinked with issues of development and underdevelopment, with food crises and the 
over-exhaustion of soil. Shiva ( 2009 ) pointed out we have not only reached peak oil but also 
peak soil. In discussing soil security, several capacities of soil are acknowledged and given value 
as producing above-ground food and biomass through supporting root systems. It contributes 
to climate regulation as carbon and nutrient stores and provides habitat for biodiversity. 
Furthermore, soils are acknowledged for providing recreation for people and cultural heritage 
services, for example as archives of archaeological artefacts (European Commission 20064). 
Several museums worldwide deal with soil use and soil qualities.5 The book Soil as World Heritage  
(Dent, 2014 ), highlights that there might be a need to deal with soil heritage. However, it 
becomes clear that it is not primarily the soil itself that is understood as heritage materia. 
Instead, it is the remains of soil experiments and a variety of agricultural equipment and 
machines that point towards the technological improvement of the soils that are primarily 
considered heritage. But there is more to soil and soil heritage than this.
In the Environmental humanities, research has started to engage differently with this materia. 
By ‘thinking with soil’ Salazar, Granjou, Krzywoszynska, Tironi, and Kearnes ( 2020 , pp. 6–7) set 
out to review current discourses, practices, and framings of soil critically. This makes space for 
other ways of engaging in earth matters. Soil is increasingly appreciated as a living, dynamic 
materia (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017 ; Krzywoszynska & Marchesi, 2020 ; Lyons, 2020 ; Meulemans, 
2020 ). It is produced through situated power formations and differently situated soil practices, 
imaginaries, affectivities and relations. Puig de la Bellacasa, ( 2017 ), argues that soil science has 
served to focus research on the soil as a receiver of crops and soil science is often aligned with 
productionism and situated within linear techno-scientific timescapes. Such productivity-focus, 
places soil narratives in an economistic mindset, and more so than studying soil as living 
multi-species communities, where care is practised. Lyons ( 2020 ) points to that human-soil 
relations can be shaped as resistance. Lyons fieldwork in Columbia highlights how there is a 
need for other imaginaries of soil that are not bound to production and growth alone. Soil 
comes about through erosion, decay and regeneration. They develop through relational pro -
cesses, that also expose formerly unnoticed relationships between labour, politics, and ecologies 
(Jacobs & Wiens, 2022 ). Soils are multispecies historical archives, constantly on the move to 
become something else.
However, the heritage aspects of soil have not yet come centre stage in these discussions 
on ‘Thinking with Soil’ . Furthermore, as will be argued here, thinking with soil in heritage offers 
a way to challenge anthropocentrism in heritage studies and policy-making in ways that move 
beyond capturing soil as contributing mainly to immaterial values of human perceptions, and 
engage with soil as a living heritage materia. Also, to encounter situated soils as heritage might 
be a way to return to and acknowledge the transtemporal connectivities and material 
276 C. FREDEnGREn
agentialities of them in soil science. It could also open up more convivial soil practices to find 
ways of living better together in situated places. Conviviality is conditioned on paying more 
attention and practising care and empathy for the several ‘othered’ others with whom we share 
the environment as well as to account for such togetherness in planning for our shared places 
(Fincher & Iveson, 2015 ).
The heritage cut of soils
This paper makes use of Critical Feminist Posthumanism and new Materialism to highlight ethics 
and power-laden relations and adapts these for analysing heritage formation, as earlier explored 
by Fredengren ( 2021 ). In that paper, it was argued that heritage is a material-semiotic relational 
phenomenon that comes about through agential cuts  into an interconnected world of more-than-
human entwinements. According to Barad ( 2007 ) an agential cut is a provisional stabilisation 
of a worldly entangled phenomenon under study. Hence, a heritage cut  captures parts of the 
world provisionally through a heritage designation. not only does a cut create meaning for 
humans or produce a heritage representation of the world (as reflected in a group identity, a 
particular perception, or an ascribed value). An agential heritage cut can also change the world 
in its materiality, as such labelling often prescribes what routes to take in its future develop -
ment, in conservation, preservation, or development. Heritage cuts can be observed in material 
performative statements about stewardship, restoration, regeneration, and re-use that make 
real-world, material, and immaterial differences. Different heritage cuts  have both material and 
immaterial effects and they regulate temporal and intragenerational relations. Heritage desig -
nations have real-world-altering effects. By this, they also speak into matters of sustainability 
and sustainable development and the cuts made, when making use of different lenses to figure 
out different routes of sustainability.
Importantly, different cuts that shape how the world develops also involve different ethics 
of how resources-in-relations are passed on from and entangle past, present, and future gen -
erations. Thereby heritage can be analysed as agential networks that transgress temporal 
boundaries. These theories will be applied in this case study to explore how soil comes to 
matter as a living multi-temporal heritage materiality that ties several human and more-than-
human ecologies together, and explores how different soil, sustainability and heritage cuts 
make a difference in how situated worlds develop. These tools will be used to structure a case 
study of situated soils in mid-Sweden in three parts; one that deals with soil in a curated 
exhibition and permaculture, one that deals with soil as risk capital and its use for energy 
forest plantation, and one that deals with residents and their relationship to soils exposed 
to change.
Curated soil
The exhibition Summer of soil  was held in Järna, south of Stockholm, as a part of a collaborative 
initiative6 on the soil between the years 2013–2015, linked to the Un  initiative on Soils. The 
webpage of the exhibition replicates its panels and soil is described as ‘the plants digestive 
system’ where complex and raw materials are broken down by micro-organisms to support the 
absorption and metabolism of plants. As many urban people have little experience with soils, 
their involvement in the landscape is implicated in their need for food. Hence, the curators 
emphasised the link between soil and nutrition in the online display, and the exhibition explored 
regenerative farming methods such as permaculture design. Those methods aim to repair and 
maintain living soils through for example composting. Some farms in the area work the land 
according to such principles. Composting and soil care features frequently in their practices. 
This has real material effects on the soil produced in this place.
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 277
Some panels focus on what the soil and its worms provide to the environment, such as 
oxygenising ground, soaking up water, storing carbon and transforming the humus. The exhibit 
draws on soil scientist Elaine Ingham who describes soil as a living web that can be resilient 
and capable ( 2004 ). This is often described as the food-web model of soil.
Most remarkably, from a heritage perspective is the display text that explains the amount 
of time it takes for fertile soil to grow. Seemingly it has taken 2000  years to compose such soil 
to a depth of 10 cm ( Figure 1 ). no reference was given in the exhibition. However, how much 
soil grows, depends on several different and situated factors, but there is a rule of thumb that 
topsoil grows 1  cm every 100–300 years (see ReVelle & ReVelle, 1992 ).
The final panel has the message that there is a need to restore ecology, to preserve soil and 
its biodiversity ( Figure 2 ). A reference is made to Wilson ( 1992 , p. 340) who proclaimed that 
Figure 1.  panel from the exhibition summer of s oil focusing on soil formation and content. summer of s oil exhibition 
2013, Ytterjärna, sweden.
Figure 2.  panel from the exhibition summer of s oil focusing on soil restoration, preservation and care. summer of s oil 
exhibition 2013, Ytterjärna, s weden.
278 C. FREDEnGREn
‘the next century will, I believe, be the era of restoration in ecology’ . The web page of Summer 
of Soil states the aspirations of the exhibition: ‘We seek to showcase a win-win-win scenario 
between, soil stewardship, nutritious food and resilient immune systems and health. Showing 
that regenerative agriculture does not just benefit soil, but also has the potential to secure 
more nutritious and tasty food, leading to more resilient immunity and well being’ .
The agential cut  made in the curated exhibition is most akin to the discourse of soil in the 
‘thinking with soil’ research. The exhibition panel does however not qualify what is meant by 
soil being a living web. It could mean that soil is the habitat for many living beings, such as 
bugs, worms, microbes, and fungi and that soil with its crops produces nurture for both humans 
and animals and enables life. Likewise, soil can be analysed both as multispecies habitat, where 
its inhabitants co-produce living soil, which brings on further transformative powers. Hence 
situated soils gain agency and aliveness due to the combined action of several relations. Situated 
soils are entangled collectives where the distinction between what is cultural and what is nat -
ural, or alive and dead is not always necessary or possible to make. They can´t be broken down 
into different components of parent materials, gas, water and microbes as their living and 
life-altering capacities work across such boundaries (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017 , p. 189). Soils 
have elsewhere been captured as ‘crucibles of life’ to underline their life-generating powers (see 
Given, 2018 ). Bennett ( 2010 , p. viii) explains how matter can be acknowledged as vital, vibrant, 
and self-organising existences with powers to interfere in societal events. As a vital matter, soils 
make out agential landscapes on the move (disregarding if they are perceived as landscapes 
by humans). The agential cut  made in the exhibition focuses on soil capacities and what pro -
duces healthy soils. It connects to permaculture design that focuses on improving the structure, 
nutrient content, and biology of soils,7 albeit with a focus on food production. While a long-time 
perspective is in focus, and heritage/sustainability-related terms like conservation, regeneration, 
and restoration are used, the soil is not specifically discussed as heritage and relations that 
develop over time are not in focus.
Soil extractivism and energy forests
Such cuts of soil can be juxtaposed with developments going on in the vicinity of the exhibitions. 
A large amount of soil in the landscape is bought up by a company. As stated on their web,8 
they manage land and forestry in Sweden and own 16  000 hectares. This company plants an 
energy forest of hybrid poplar trees on agricultural land. These mature over some 209–30 years. 
Energy forest is considered a crop, and hence planning authorities have dealt with them as a 
form of continued land use, comparable to the crops of traditional agriculture that they replace. 
The company’s sustainability arguments and states that they want to develop its properties with 
care for nature, reduce environmental destruction, and contribute to long-term sustainable forestry. 
Their sustainability aims to create value from soil and to have the best forests in the future.10 
Both forests and soils are understood as resources that primarily serve humans. The company 
anticipates climate change with higher temperatures and shorter winters and proposes to handle 
this through another selection of hardier plants more resilient to disease, insects and mould
The company argues for the planting of energy forests as they are not in favour of either 
traditional or ecological farming as it does not provide economically viable ways of saving 
nature. Also, traditional farming uses fertilisers, toxic substances, and machinery heavy on fuel. 
The planting of energy forests gives benefits to the environment as it could work as a filter for 
water and clean toxic ground from for example cadmium. Furthermore, it is argued on the 
company web page that there is no great need for agricultural food production as people in 
the Western world are obese. Hence, there are social benefits in reducing agricultural production 
and turning farming land into forestry. The heritage aspects of the landscape are captured as 
an intention to keep the landscape open in places due to public demand and also to save 
some places where there are archaeological sites if the county board asks for it.11
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 279
The company also challenges political sustainability goals. Among these are the Swedish 
Miljömål which consists of one generational goal, with the promise to hand over a society with 
major environmental problems solved to the next generations, and 16 goals for environmental 
quality. To achieve this society needs to have a rich cultivation landscape12 where the values 
of agricultural lands, biodiversity and heritage values are protected. However, the company 
informs that they do not abide by what they call naturmål, instead, they have set up their own 
premises for sustainability. Furthermore, an argument is made that if the state wants sustain -
ability services for the common good from a private landowner, they need to pay companies 
for the service. According to the company, societýs sustainability goals should be met through 
the vast amount of publicly owned forests in Sweden and not by the private companies them -
selves. Furthermore, if the company were to contribute to these goals, it ought to be compen -
sated by the state for its use of private capital to supply benefits to society.
The agential cut made in these soils by the company is to frame them in an extractive 
land-owning perspective as creators of value for the investor. Their ownership of soil also makes 
a temporal cut into a materia that has formatted over considerable periods, long before current 
ownership legislation was in place. In this cut, the soil itself is not considered heritage. Heritage 
is equated with some sites that people may like to visit. The higher goal for sustainability is to 
sustain income for the company over time. It is less linked to the sustainable use of the soils 
and more linked to creating forestry products to answer the demands for ecological products 
within the energy and transport sectors.
Research shows how short-rotation poplar plantations decrease the output of food crops 
and challenge fodder supply for animals and hence connect the altered use of agricultural land 
to issues of global food security. It also reduces organic matter in the soil as well as moisture 
and nutrient content and risks exposing soils to depletion. It affects the compaction and struc -
ture of soil, and in effect, poplar plantations could cause land degradation and they consume 
more water than other crops. The roots stretch into the soil layers and work soil-altering. Together 
with the decrease in soil fertility, it can be costly to turn the soil back into farming land and 
restore it. However, this is dependent on the local context (see de Jong, Akselsson, Egnell, 
Löfgren, & Olsson, 2017 ; Wang & Xin, 2016 , FAO13). This company’s agential cut does not artic -
ulate any particular aspects of soil restoration and regeneration to remedy soil extractivism. To 
decide on a development as this would from a soil as heritage perspective need to include 
information on the costs of restoration of lands if they need to go back into farming lands and 
clarify who takes these costs that otherwise would need to be charged to future generations.
Soil use from community perspectives
The company’s use of farming soil has created local turmoil. The contested nature of the activ -
ities is demonstrated in letters of complaint sent to local newspapers and in blogposts.14 In the 
plantations some trees may grow 15–20 m tall, which will impinge on the open farming land -
scape in the area and disturb peoplés views.15 It alters the aesthetic values of the surrounds. 
The cut of the local residents channels into an argument that have been framed in the landscape 
convention, where the heritage losses are articulated as a loss of viewsheds in the landscape.16 
This can be a successful route as evidenced in recent court rulings,17 where arguments around 
the preservation of long sight lines in the landscape have hindered the planting of forestry on 
farmland in southern Sweden.
However, this heritage landscape cut only covers a small spectrum of relations with soil. It 
frames soil as primarily produced through human/anthropocentric immaterial and visual relations 
to the soil, which underestimates mutual agential and relational powers of soil materia. The 
landscape as a perception approach hence risks alienating people from their more-than-human 
collaborative partners, hence not working for a convivial co-habitation of places (Fredengren 
2021 , Fredengren, 2022 ; Given, 2018 , p. 140).
280 C. FREDEnGREn
Community members have also raised the issue that the plantation will affect soils that people 
have invested in for generations. The illustration above ( Figure 3 ) shows people linking arms with 
the gold ring (migration period 400–550 AD) found in a treasure hoard near these lands planted 
with energy forest.18 The text on the picture says that people want to plough money in the 
ground for their grandchildren. That is an investment for five generations ahead. Hence, the 
drawing points towards an argument of intergenerational linkages going back in time and stretch -
ing into the future. This is, in the drawing, pitched against the ongoing energy forest developments 
for the financial gains of a single person. The ongoing soil extractivism is captured in the figure 
by the text as ‘Mina pengar ska växa på träd’ i.e. My money will grow on trees and ‘Tillfällena 
gör Mannen’ with the ‘M’ signalling a link to the right-wing market liberal party of Moderaterna. 
The text ‘Land + Skog = Tomt’ portrays local male politicians as opportunist developers who want 
to transform farmland that, under most circumstances, is not allowed to be zoned for housing 
developments via energy forestry, to land that could be classified as suitable for building houses.
The cut made here is the focus of the open landscape and farming land as an inheritance. 
It also features how present generations invest in soil for future generations. Furthermore, the 
drawing shows links between the soil and several human generations, going back to the Iron 
Age and forward in time to their descendants. While this cut emphasises the long-term relations 
with soil, it potentially excludes more-than-human generations and how to convivially share 
place over time with multispecies communities. A production relationship with soil is also 
present in this cut. At the same time, residents in these communities engage in different soil 
practices, where the earth is cared for and fed by compost and manure. There are material 
soil-care practices and the mutualistic weaving of soil-food-soil matrixes.
none of the stakeholders articulates that the soil itself is heritage, nor has the heritage sector 
entered the discussion claiming that the agricultural soils are heritage. Hence it can be argued 
that there are several cases of complete and partial soil misrecognition in the heritage field, as 
the situated soils are not dealt with as the long-term materialising entities, they are.
Thinking with soil in heritage matters
The observations from the case studies show that agricultural soil could potentially be captured 
as heritage. One route in heritage-making is based on visual arguments and values of open 
landscapes. However, soil is a vital co-created resource that builds up across time and 
Figure 3.  drawing that illustrates the tensions around land use provoked by the planting energy forest in this locality, 
local artist a nna Bohlin.
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 281
more-than-human generations. Several other heritage cuts of soil could be made. In policy 
documents such as the Miljömål mentioned above, heritage is a value ascribed by humans to 
the cultural environment. In EU writings, soil gets drawn into heritage discussions as valuable 
archives of the past. Archaeology has traditionally treated soils as containers for data (see 
Holtorf, 2022 ) that provide studies of human history with artefacts, stratigraphy and features. 
This is also reflected in studies of geoarchaeology and soil micromorphology. Earth materials 
also hold records of human- and animal remains as well as traces of former vegetation, which 
gives insights into botanical history as well as soil DnA to indicate what beings were living in 
the place over time. However, such cuts narrow down soil heritage discussion as they are 
focused on what soil contains and can be extracted from them and hence disregard soil with 
all its entangled relations from being heritage.
Recently, the importance of long-term anthropogenic action for the forming of soils has 
been noted. The black soils of Ukraine, where earthworm activity at the habitations from the 
neolithic and onwards as well as their composts have contributed to the build-up of these 
extraordinarily fertile soils (Dreibrodt et  al., 2022 ). The fertile dark soils of the Amazon, with 
high-nutrition charcoal content, have been described as anthrosols (Palace et  al., 2017 ). Such 
soils (IUSS Working Group WRB 2022 ) are defined as having horizons removed or as modified 
by humans adding contents or chemicals artefacts or other compounds such as concrete, soot 
etc. Important to note is that these anthrosols also include archaeological remains, that as in 
the case of the black soils, clearly affect both multispecies subterranean lifeworlds and inter -
fingers with the worlds above ground.
Lately, the idea of archaeological soil being an artefact has re-entered the stage.19 However, 
this approach also carries problems as it overemphasises humans as the maker of soil. Ingold 
and Hallam ( 2014 ) point out that people don´t make things, but they can assist in how they 
grow. neither would people alone make situated soils. Landscapes can instead be understood 
as lived and practiced realities and soil heritage is appreciated for its regenerative capacities 
(Whatmore & Hinchcliffe, 2010 , p. 444, Holtorf, 2022 ). Hence, the soil in the study area has 
partly been produced by humans but has also come about through the practices and relations 
of several non-human others. While the soil in the study area could be captured both as an 
artefact and an anthrosol, it is more than that. Applying the thinking tool of heritage as a 
phenomenon would highlight that no human really can claim to have made soil (or any other 
heritage) on their own, they have only assisted the direction of its growth. This by entering 
the stage and by re-tying some of all situated soil relations.
Given ( 2018 , pp. 134–139) suggests that local soils can be investigated through how they 
sustain their nutrient cycles by recruiting different participants such as carbon and nitrogen, 
rainfall, and compost. It is possible to turn the table and see how soils in the study area both 
have enrolled the labour of several humans and animals that together cleared the land and 
fed it, as the geological processes as the land rose from the sea, in a long-term composing 
and composting. The tracing of the local soil would also mean taking into account if the soil 
has been cared for or depleted– and what relations it has been tying together and what power 
politics, justices and injustices, it is produced through. The soil in question has been tended 
to, appropriated by noblemen and regained by smallholders. Also, microbes and fungi have 
colonised the lands and nitrogen cycles co-created it. Living and dying vegetation and bodies 
of humans and animals have been a part of the soil-making and tracings of the situated soils 
in the study area would also follow how different agential cuts make situated soil entanglements 
come into being.
To work with soil as a heritage phenomenon would mean paying attention to several 
more-than-human agencies to acknowledge their work and understand what difference soil 
makes in their lifeworlds. However, such an argument needs to move carefully and engage with 
the soil-materia in new ways to navigate through anthropocentrism to understand how human 
agency is facilitated by different relations that build up the soil. One problem is that soil could 
282 C. FREDEnGREn
be analysed both as a natural formation and cultural artefact and there is a need to explore 
soil processes as a boundary-transgressing resource in the making of heritage. Similar problems 
(as in the soil as artefact argument) would occur if heritage soils were limited to soils produced 
by traditional farming tools and methods as heritage soils, as that would again centre human 
agency as the maker of soil, which would disregard long generations of multispecies 
soil-making agents.
There are different trajectories of soils, that form a part of the resource handed over to 
future generations as an inheritance. Among these are freak soils, the polluted city soils where 
plants have colonised disturbed lands (Meulemans, 2020 , p. 20). Some soils come about through 
industrial farming, monocropping, and pesticides. These popularly called ‘zombie soils’ are nearly 
dead as unwanted fungi and herbs are killed and the soil is depleted of nutrients. Whether the 
soils planted with energy forest turn out to be such soils remains to be seen, it depends on 
what interventions come into place.
An anthropocentric heritage landscape perspective is too narrow to account for the multiple 
agential relationalities of this materia that stretch out over time. The various cuts as in the use 
of agricultural lands for energy forests, and community protests do not engage in the soil and 
its multispecies communities – and they are not geared towards a convivial world-making and 
have their own situated versions of what worlds their specific sustainability wants to sustain. 
‘Thinking with soil’ in heritage would acknowledge soil as a material-semiotic phenomenon and 
as a gathering of several different sources, forces, and cuts. This approach could open up for 
paying attention to the material and immaterial interlacing’s of soil-in-place, but also look at 
what routes are possible to take in present and future world-making. That means it is important 
to heed not only what soil represents in history-writing but also what relations situated soils 
enrol and what they are in the process of becoming.
Thinking with heritage in soil matters
As Krzywoszynska and Marchesi ( 2020 ) writes, soil is a complex materiality. Adding to this 
complexity are soil’s underarticulated and undertheorized temporal relations and implications. 
The case study also shows different temporal relations are activated in the engagement with 
soil (from the extractivist cycles aimed at near-future gain to the cyclical and relational tempo -
ralities of compost care). Discussions of soil as a heritage phenomenon would acknowledge 
situated soils as a coming together of several different agencies that co-work manifestly or 
latently over time . Soil entangles deep time processes of geological parent materials and 
long-term processes of decay and withering. Its life cycles stretch over and connect up both 
human and more-than-human generations in the slow growth of agricultural soils as temporally 
relational materia (reminding ourselves of the 20  cm of soil growth that takes us back to pre -
historic times). While soil microbes have short life cycles, some of them can lie dormant for 
over 100 years and by forming relations with fungi spring into activity again (Joergensen & 
Wichern, 2018 ). As Puig de la Bellacasa ( 2017 , p. 205) writes soil may ‘enrich temporal imaginings’ 
and such imaginings can be expanded by highlighting the transtemporal relations involved in 
growing soil as a heritage in the making and taking.
The exhibition opened up for time perspectives of some 2000 years for fertile farming soils 
to form, while some people in the local communities referred to several human generations of 
investors into soil and the risk capitalist involved in cycles of some 20–30 years for the invest -
ment to give yield. However, soil is most often not treated as either heritage, or a long-term 
resource for society. This can be compared with trees and forestry, which are of interest for 
long-term economics or politics i.e. the politicisation of the long-term ( nordblad, 2017 ). neither 
soil nor heritage is regularly discussed in terms of the politicisation of the long term, while it 
ought to be given such attention. To think with soil, just as with trees, can give incitement of 
engaging into longer temporalities, as it means to work with a materia that outlives a single 
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 283
human life, it also entices deliberations that affect the life potentials for several generations 
and hence is tied to discussions on sustainability.
One of the core principles of these is that the needs of the present should be met ‘without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (Un, 1987 , p. 54). The 
phrasing of the generational goal separates the existing future individuals from the future ones 
in body, space and time. As discussed in such separations between generations have led phi -
losophers to the question if someone who does not yet exist can have rights. The problem can 
be dealt with by devising the ‘ intra’-generational  as a figurative thinking tool and by arguing 
that past, present and future generations are entangled with each other. Hence, they can be 
considered as ethical subjects to care for as they are stretched over time in their virtualities 
(Fredengren, 2022 ). This can be a useful move for how to engage in the generational goals of 
sustainable development differently and see how practices both in the past and present terri -
torialise the future. Also, as in the case study, anthropocentric generational thinking risk excluding 
several othered others (future generations of humans and non-humans) from being in the 
negotiations of what future potentialities a particular landscape has and what ethical differences 
particular cuts leads to (Fredengren, 2022  and Fredengren & Åsberg, 2020 ) and this is questions 
that both heritage and sustainability discourses need to deal with.
Engaging in soil and soil care across generations implies getting ‘involved with a diversity 
of timelines’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017 , p. 171). It also means to become entangled in more-than-
human intragenerational relations. As shown in the case study, there is a multitude of material 
and temporal trajectories involved in the soils. The 30  years or so it takes for the energy forest 
to mature, the 2000 years of soil care that made them come into place and the even longer 
temporalities of the geological processes that made the grain formation come into existence. 
To acknowledge that heritage intervenes in such relational webs might affect how to engage 
in how to take care of significant resources from the past, use them in the present, and pass 
them on to future generations (Fredengren, 2022 ; Fredengren & Åsberg, 2020 ). Such alterations 
to heritage making can be read through post-human feminist scholarship to place intra- and 
intergenerational ethics, response-ability, justice, and care on the agenda, but also to acknowl -
edge how different materialising agencies from the past exercise agencies and entangle the 
present and future.
Capturing soil as a nature-culture heritage phenomenon could be helpful in identifying new 
links between heritage, sustainability, and landscape. This means acknowledging a variety of 
heritage soil trajectories and focusing on tracing life-essential temporal relations woven over 
time. A crucial question for the heritage sector would then be how this resource that has grown 
over time could be cared for to nourish present and future more-than-human generations. This 
would open up for looking at what relations need care for to deal with the several sustainability 
challenges ahead, and for how to get on better in a damaged world. It would also push for a 
discussion on how today, neither the needs of the present generations nor those of future 
generations are met on a global scale, and how the planting of energy forests on farming land 
serves some human populations, but not others.
Soil care, conviviality and regeneration
This paper asks what could be learned ‘by thinking with soil’ in heritage matters, and ‘thinking 
with heritage’ in soil matters, and the case study as well as the consulted research literature 
show that the ‘landscape as perceptions’ is not enough to cover for the several multispecies 
and transtemporal relations that develop in soil. At the same time, dealing with soil as a her -
itage phenomenon can open up for acknowledging other agencies that are at stake in soil 
formation and to add different temporal and materialising relations to think with heritage in 
soil matters. That means exploring the past/presence of soils and its trajectories into the future. 
Also, thinking with soils in heritage matters might work for multispecies care in heritage and 
284 C. FREDEnGREn
sustainability discussions and thereby help us to pay better attention to and care for crucial 
and nurturing relations for living better in more-than-human worlds and futures i.e. to work 
for a more convivial co-habitation of place.
If landscape heritage were to work beyond what is captured visually and bridge nature and 
culture, it would have to reconnect to several more-than-human materialisation processes and 
relations that matter over time. This is necessary for how to review the links between heritage 
and sustainability. The case study points towards agential cuts that are quite anthropocentric, 
where both sustainability ethics as well as situated power differentials and potentials coincide 
and clash with each other as they are acted out in the landscape.
Here, the planting of energy forest on farming land leads to one type of sustainability, that 
needs to be juxtaposed with other sustainability efforts and mediated concerning what action 
possibilities and lifeworlds are opened up and what possibilities are closed down by the change. 
The reasoning above highlights how different sorts of anthropocentric focus can be challenged 
by engaging in questions about multi-species participation in the creation of soil, but also to 
start a discussion on how to format heritage consultation processes where the needs of several 
more-than-human others can be heard and acknowledged at the negotiation tables of change. 
This is particularly important for thinking about the afterlife of the soils in the case studies.
Sustainability is often argued through a retro-rhetoric and by the use of heritage concepts 
such as conservation, restoration and regeneration of resources. For the soils in question, a 
grand challenge is the amount of repair work needed to get back the agricultural soil and if 
it is a restoration of soils to monoculture crops that is most urgent or if other futures for this 
soil bring about more nurture. Just as one needs to ask what sustainability wants to sustain, 
similar questions about what restoration wants to restore and conservation wants to conserve 
need to be asked. Increasingly scholars write about soil care as the maintenance work that we 
do to repair the world so one can live in it as well as possible. This means that care is ‘vital in 
the interweaving in a web of life’ (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017 , pp. 3–4, 170). In such care work, 
a convivial approach might be fruitful to acknowledge the life essential agencies at work in 
soil heritage. Conviviality is described as both being together and being attentive to the pres -
ence of others in our surroundings and to cater for such togetherness in planning and also to 
make efforts to include and to practice empathy with several othered others, in places that are 
shared (Fincher & Iveson, 2015 ). However, with a heritage as phenomena lens, such conviviality 
and care do not need to be restricted in time to the present, as we share a place transtempo -
rally with past, present, and potential generations. Hence heritage soils need to be treated with 
care so they can cater for several threads of relations over time.
Conclusion
Soil can be argued to be heritage on different grounds. Soil can contain archaeological material 
and work as archives for studying history. Furthermore, several soil museums attest to the tools 
and practices humans made use of in working with soil. However, most often the soil itself is 
not seen as heritage. This is connected to a separation into cultural and natural heritage, where 
the human practices of tending to soil is cultural heritage and the soil at best, is considered 
as natural heritage. As evidenced in the case studies, soil is not regularly classified or argued 
as heritage of any type, but is more regarded as residual or secondary material and a source 
of income for the benefit of primarily humans. There are challenges and tensions around soil, 
where different stakeholders engage with soil and make material and immaterial cuts into 
interconnected soils in ways that have given rise to conflicts and that will affect the action 
possibilities for future generations. Soil is in the case studies connected with sustainability, but 
also here the sustainability goals and action plans for engaging with soil differ, from the pro -
tection of the resource for future production to regenerative practices of soil care for the 
creation of more resilient soils.
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 285
There are other ways of ‘thinking with soil’ (Salazar et  al., 2020 , pp. 6–7). These works bring 
about critical soil studies and open up other ways of relating to soil. Also here, heritage matters 
have been left out of the discussion. The current paper has tried to remedy this by making use 
of tools from critical feminist posthumanism, discussing soil as a power-infused developing 
relational heritage. This highlights the transtemporal connectivities and material potentialities 
of situated soils, which can enable engagement in situated soils as a matter that concerns 
several human and more-than-human generations. This heritage cut on soils opens the discus -
sions on who is included and represented at the negotiations of soil change and urges for 
deliberations of intragenerational justice and care, when questions about soil come for societal 
deliberation and for underlining that such deliberations are most important for dealing with 
the generational goals of sustainable development. However, such deliberations also hinge on 
the rationale for how to manage soil as a significant resource that is passed through genera -
tions. It needs to be debated if the soil is to be preserved and returned to what it once was, 
regenerated to regain its production capacity or be dealt with in a convivial manner that strives 
for multispecies flourishing in localised spaces.
However, foremost soil as heritage is linked to the questions and dilemmas that occur in 
discussions of how to live better on a damaged planet and to engage in a plethora of temporal 
relations and care – this is where soil as heritage phenomena matters.
Notes
 1. https://www.summerofsoil.se  and https://www.fao.org/global-soil-partnership/resources/events/detail/
en/c/173536/  Accessed 2015 and again 240325.
 2. https://humuseconomicus.se/sv/om/.
 3. https://www.fao.org/soils-2015/news/news-detail/en/c/353737/.
 4. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2006:0231:FIn:En:PDF.
 5. https://soilsexposed.org.
 6. http://www.summerofsoil.se  Accessed 150710, 170720, 240325.
 7. https://www.permaculture.org.uk/practical-solutions/introduction-soil.
 8. http://www.hvalfisken.se.
 9. http://www.hvalfisken.se/miljo-och-hallbarhet/jordbruksmark/information-till-myndigheterna
-rorande-hedensberg-75  Accessed 2016 and 240319.
 10. http://www.hvalfisken.se/verksamheten
 11. http://www.hvalfisken.se/miljo-och-hallbarhet/jordbruksmark/information-kommunicera
d-med-trosa-kommun-lanstyrelsen-sodermanland-och-narboende-i-trosa.
 12. https://www.sverigesmiljomal.se/miljomalen/ett-rikt-odlingslandskap/.
 13. http://www.fao.org/docrep/004/ac122e/ac122e02.htm.
 14. https://www.realtid.se/knepet-gav-finansmannen-mer-skogsmark-att-avverka-lagen-ar-tandlos ; https://sn.se/
bli-prenumerant/artikel/rk27mzer/sn-bd-0kr-dp_week ; https://sverigesradio.se/artikel/5285316.
 15. http://www.osp.nu/energiskog-i-vasterljung/.
        http://www.dagensps.se/pengar/stenrik-finansman-i-svar-grannfejd/.
 16. https://sn.se/debatt/artikel/poppelodlingar-forstor-oppna-kulturlandskap/lqywdkdr.
 17. Svea Hovrätt, Mark- och miljööverdomstolen 060308, dom 2019-03-07.
       Stockholm Mål M4255-18.
 18. https://fargaregardsanna.wordpress.com/tag/vasterljungs-guldring/blogpost  from 20150821, visited 2016 
and 240320.
 19. https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/2023/may/exhibition-explores-ancient-ukrainian-egalitarian-city.
Acknowledgements
This work is my stand-alone contribution to the research project Humus Economicus – on soil and soil-blindness 
and an input to the Relics of nature project. The case study of soil as heritage was originally presented at TAG 
and a symposium at Stockholm University in 2015 see https://www.su.se/polopoly_fs/1.229764.1427192310 !/menu/
standard/file/PAG-2015_Workshop_program_and_abstracts.pdf . I would like to thank the local residents and my 
reviewers for benevolent comments.
286 C. FREDEnGREn
Disclosure statement
no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
norwegian Research Council, FRIPRO, ‘Relics of n ature’ , project nr: 314607. Formas, Humus Economicus, 
2020-01062.
Notes on contributor
Professor Christina Fredengren  is an archaeologist who works within the Environmental Humanities. Fredengren 
has been a founding member of the SU Environmental Humanities research school and network and has a 
research interest in heritage soil, wetlands and multispecies matters as well as theory matters. The research has 
often involved cooperation with artists.
ORCID
Christina Fredengren  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6431-754X
References
Alaimo, S. ( 2012 ). Sustainable this, sustainable that: new materialisms, posthumanism, and unknown futures. PMLA/
Publications of the Modern Language Association of America , 127(3), 558–564. doi: 10.1632/pmla.2012.127.3.558
Barad, K. ( 2007 ). Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter and meaning.  
Durham: Duke University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. ( 2017 ). Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds.  Minnesota: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Bennett, J. ( 2010 ). Vibrant matter: A political ecology of things . Durham: Duke University Press.
Borgerhoff Mulder, M., & Coppolillo, P . ( 2005 ). Conservation: Linking ecology, economics, and culture  (pp. 1–52). 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
de Jong, J., Akselsson, C., Egnell, G., Löfgren, S., & Olsson, B. A. ( 2017 ). Realizing the energy potential of forest 
biomass in Sweden – How much is environmentally sustainable? Forest Ecology and Management , 383, 3–16. 
doi: 10.1016/j.foreco.2016.06.028
Dent, D. ( 2014 ). Soil as world heritage . London: Springer.
Dreibrodt, S., Hofmann, R., Dal Corso, M., Bork, H.-R., Duttmann, R., Martini, S., … Müller, J. ( 2022 ). Earthworms, 
Darwin and prehistoric agriculture-Chernozem genesis reconsidered. Geoderma , 409, 115607. doi: 10.1016/j.
geoderma.2021.115607
Fincher, R., & Iveson, K. ( 2015 ). Conviviality as an ethics of care in the city. In K. Gibson, D. Bird Rose, & R. Fincher 
(Eds.), Manifesto for living in the Anthropocene  (pp. 23–28). Brooklyn, n Y: Punctum Books.
Fredengren, C. ( 2022 ). Intragenerational justice and care. In R. Braidotti, E. Jones, & G. Klumbyte (Eds.), More 
posthuman glossary  (pp. 69–72). London: Bloomsbury.
Fredengren, C. ( 2021 ). Re-thinking deep time landscapes. In S. Kluiving, K. Lidén, & C. Fredengren (Eds.), 
Environmental humanities: A rethinking of landscape archaeology  (pp. 91–106). London: Sidestone Press.
Fredengren, C. (2021). nature: Cultures. heritage, sustainability and feminist posthumanism. Current Swedish 
Archaeology , 23(1), 109–130. doi: 10.37718/CSA.2015.09
Fredengren, C., & Åsberg, C. ( 2020 ). Checking in with deep time. In R. Harrison & C. Sterling (Eds.), Deterritorializing 
the future: Heritage in, of and after the Anthropocene  (pp. 56–95). London, UK: Open Humanities Press.
Given, M. ( 2018 ). Conviviality and the life of soil. Cambridge Archaeological Journal , 28(1), 127–143. doi: 10.1017/
S0959774317000609
Harrison, R. ( 2015 ). Beyond ‘natural’ and ‘cultural’ heritage: Towards and ontological politics of heritage in the age 
of Anthropocene. Heritage & Society , 8(1), 24–42. doi: 10.1179/2159032X15Z.00000000036
Holtorf, C. ( 2022 ). An archaeology of growth and regeneration. In L. Papmehl-Dufay (Ed.), Under storkökets golv. 
Arkeologisk undersökning i Gamla Skogsby september och oktober 2021, Kalmar Studies in Archaeology XIV  (pp. 
85–123). Kalmar/Växjö: Linnaeus University.
Ingham, E. R. ( 2004 ). The soil foodweb: Its role in ecosystems health. In C. R. Elevitch (Ed.), The overstory book 
cultivating connections with trees  (pp. 62–65). Holualoa: Agroforestry net.
LAnDSCAPE  RESEARCH 287
Ingold, T., & Hallam, E. ( 2014 ). Making and growing: An introduction. In E. Hallam & T. Ingold (Eds.), Making and 
growing: Anthropological studies of organisms and artefacts  (pp. 1–24). Farnham: Ashgate.
IUSS Working Group WRB. ( 2022 ). World reference base for soil resources. International soil classification system for 
naming soils and creating legends for soil maps  (4th ed.). Vienna, Austria: International Union of Soil Sciences 
(IUSS).
Jacobs, S., & Wiens, T. ( 2022 ). Breaking ground: Sifting soil stories at Bos Park. Journal of Architectural Education , 
76(2), 168–174. doi: 10.1080/10464883.2022.2097537
Joergensen, R. G., & Wichern, F. ( 2018 ). Alive and kicking: Why dormant soil microorganisms matter. Soil Biology 
and Biochemistry , 116, 419–430. volume doi: 10.1016/j.soilbio.2017.10.022
Krzywoszynska, A., & Marchesi, G. ( 2020 ). Toward a relational materiality of soils: Introduction. Environmental 
Humanities , 12(1), 190–204. doi: 10.1215/22011919-8142297
Lyons, K. ( 2020 ). Vital decomposition: Soil practitioners and life politics . Durham: Duke University Press.
Lowenthal, D., & Olwig, K. (Eds.). ( 2015 ). The nature of cultural heritage, and the culture of natural heritage . London: 
Routledge.
Meulemans, G. ( 2020 ). Reclaiming freak soils: From conquering to journeying with urban soils. In J. Salazar, M. 
Kearnes, C. Granjou, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (Eds.), Thinking with soils: Social theory and material politics  
(pp. 157–174). London: Bloomsbury.
nordblad, J. ( 2017 ). Time for politics: How a conceptual history of forests can help us politicize the long term. 
European Journal of Social Theory , 20(1), 164–182. doi: 10.1177/1368431016653241
Palace, M. W., McMichael, C. n. H., Braswell, S. C., Hagen, M. B., Bush, E., neves, E., … Frolking, S. ( 2017 ). Ancient 
Amazonian populations left lasting impacts on forest structure. Ecosphere , 8(12), e02035. doi: 10.1002/ecs2.2035
ReVelle, P ., & ReVelle, C. ( 1992 ). The global environment: Securing a sustainable future . London: Jones & Bartlett 
Learning.
Salazar, J., Granjou, C., Krzywoszynska, A., Tironi, M., & Kearnes, M. ( 2020 ). Thinking with soils: An introduction. 
In J. Salazar, M. Kearnes, C. Granjou, A. Krzywoszynska, & M. Tironi (Eds.), Thinking with soils: Social theory and 
material politics  (pp. 1–14). London: Bloomsbury.
Shiva, V. ( 2009 ). Soil not oil. Environmental justice in a time of climate crisis. Alternatives Journal , 35(3), 19–23.
Un. (1987 ). Report of the world commission on environment and development: Our common future. Brundtland report. 
United Nations Assembly. Session 42.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wang, J., & Xin, L. ( 2016 ). Effects of poplar plantations on the physical and chemical properties of soils: A case 
study in the north China Plain. Journal of Resources and Ecology , 7(5), 352–359.
Whatmore, S. J., & Hinchcliffe, S. ( 2010 ). Ecological landscapes. In D. Hicks & M. C. Beaudry, (Eds.), The Oxford 
handbook of material culture studies  (pp. 440–458). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilson, E. O. ( 1992 ). The diversity of life . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
