Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy
ISSN: 1548-7733 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tsus20
Toward a caring and (re)productive bioeconomy?
A feminist analysis of socio-technical innovations
and sustainability shortcomings
Sarah Hackfort & Anna Saave
To cite this article: Sarah Hackfort & Anna Saave (2024) Toward a caring and (re)productive
bioeconomy? A feminist analysis of socio-technical innovations and sustainability
shortcomings, Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy, 20:1, 2375808, DOI:
10.1080/15487733.2024.2375808
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2024.2375808
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 22 Jul 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1380
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tsus20
SuStainability: Science, Practice and Policy
2024, Vol. 20, no . 1, 2375808
Toward a caring and (re)productive bioeconomy? A feminist analysis of 
socio-technical innovations and sustainability shortcomings
Sarah Hackfort  and Anna Saave 
agricultural and Food Policy Group, d epartment of a gricultural e conomics, Humboldt-universitat zu b erlin, b erlin, Germany
ABSTRACT
The bioeconomy is touted as an innovative economic approach to make economies more 
sustainable through the use of biological resources and processes. In many bioeconomy 
policies, the expansion of biomass is key and is enabled by new biotechnologies and precision 
agriculture (PA). We respond to the demand for critical approaches to sustainability and ask: 
How can feminist (sustainability) research – specifically feminist ecological economics and 
feminist science and technology studies – help to assess the sustainability shortcomings of 
socio-technical innovations in the bioeconomy? We have drawn from these two fields to 
construct a framework of analysis and illustrate its application by looking at the field of PA, 
which has emblematic socio-technical innovations for biomass production in the agricultural 
bioeconomy. We illustrate how this analytical framework can reveal manifold sustainability 
shortcomings linked to these innovations, such as the reinforcement of power relations; the 
promotion of productivism; the undermining of precaution, sufficiency, and cooperation in 
technology development; the fetishization of data; and the delegitimization of local knowledge. 
While the application of the analytical framework is only exemplary, it shows how such an 
analysis allows for a fine-grained and multifaceted assessment of a specific field of innovations 
in the bioeconomy and how it can draw attention to structural and systemic sustainability 
shortcomings which are often overlooked.
Introduction
The bioeconomy has been propagated by European 
Union (EU) institutions, industries, and policymakers 
as an innovative economic concept that aims to pro -
vide a response to key sustainability challenges (EC 
2018 ). The goal of bioeconomy strategies worldwide, 
although with different emphases, is the transition 
from a fossil-based to a bio-based economy. The 
expansion of biomass use, such as energy crops or 
residues from the timber industry, and the increase 
of yields and productivity of biomass production 
enabled by new biotechnologies and precision agri -
culture (PA), are key in many bioeconomy policies. 
The belief in increased productivism and growth 
through established and new high technologies plays 
an important role (Boyer et  al. 2022 ; Eversberg et  al. 
2023 ), which is why current articulations of the bio -
economy could even be termed high-tech bioecon -
omy. Political and technological developments related 
to the bioeconomy shape society-nature relations and 
social organization, especially in the field of agricul -
ture (Tittor 2021 ; Puder and Tittor 2023 ), which is why researchers need conceptual tools to assess their 
sustainability.
Technology, knowledge, and innovation politics in 
the bioeconomy tend to have a rather narrow focus 
that insufficiently accounts for social, ecological, and 
political implications (Backhouse 2021 ; 
Ramcilovic-Suominen 2023 ). As a response to such 
narrow notions of innovation, feminist scholars have 
highlighted important factors such as asymmetric 
knowledge politics, unequal power relations, and 
dependencies (e.g., Haraway 1988 ; Preston and 
Wickson 2016 ). These are important to consider for 
more holistic assessments of the sustainability of 
innovations (social as well as technological) within 
(bioeconomy) transformations. In response to the 
demand for approaches that allow for critical inte -
grated assessments of sustainability, we have devel -
oped a feminist framework to analyze sustainability 
shortcomings related to socio-technical innovations 
in the bioeconomy. We will illustrate the application 
of the framework using the example of PA as a field 
with a number of emblematic socio-technical innova -
tions for biomass production in the agricultural 
© 2024 the a uthor(s). Published by i nforma uK limited, trading as taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT  Sarah Hackfort  sarah.hackfort@hu-berlin.de   agricultural and Food Policy Group, d epartment of a gricultural e conomics, 
Humboldt-universitat zu b erlin,  unter den linden 6, 10099 b erlin,  Germanyhttps://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2024.2375808
this is an o pen a ccess article distributed under the terms of the c reative c ommons attribution-nonc ommercial license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), 
which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. the terms on which this article 
has been published allow the posting of the a ccepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 8 February 2024
Accepted 28 June 2024
KEYWORDS
precision agriculture; care; 
precaution; science and 
technology studies; 
feminist critical 
sustainability sciences; 
analytical frameworkRESEARCH ARTICLE
2 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
bioeconomy. The key question of this article is: How 
can feminist (sustainability) research – specifically 
feminist ecological economics and feminist science 
and technology studies – help to assess the sustain -
ability shortcomings of socio-technical innovations 
in the bioeconomy?
With socio-technical innovations, we include in 
our focus technological innovations together with 
the related social practices around their development 
and use. In doing so, we account for the fact that 
technological innovations are not separate from their 
societal context (Winner 1980 ). Our aim is to pro -
vide a framework to better understand innovations, 
including the practices and paradigms in which they 
are embedded, and their implications. We investigate 
sustainability shortcomings, since bioeconomy inno -
vations, and also specifically PA, are developed with 
narratives and claims of sustainability.
Our investigation addresses a question which has 
been partly dealt with in bioeconomy research, that 
of the sustainability of such an envisioned transition. 
Here, bioeconomy policies have been criticized as a 
continuation of ecological modernization due to 
their growth- and technology-centered solution-  
seeking and related optimism, and for their econo -
mistic reductions regarding notions of innovation, 
technology, risk, and the economy. The growing 
demand for biomass creates conflicts between pro -
duction and nature conservation, while new technol -
ogies lead to socio-ecological tensions and conflicts 
over the valorization of nature (Boyer et  al. 2022 ; 
Eversberg et  al. 2023 ; Hackfort 2024 ). The substitu -
tion of fossil raw materials in the Global North 
requires enormous – and increasing – quantities of 
biomass, which further increases the pressure on soil 
and ecosystems, not only in the Global South. To 
make biomass use possible at a large scale and the 
production profitable, costs are externalized, with 
major social and ecological consequences, especially 
in the South and in the global peripheries (Backhouse 
et  al. 2021 ; Tittor 2021 ).
As a response, the focus of many bioeconomy 
policies is not only on expanding biomass produc -
tion but also on increasing eco-efficiency. However, 
efficiency does not solve the sustainability problems 
inherent in finite production spaces; at best, it shifts 
them temporally or spatially (Boyer et  al. 2022 ). The 
paradoxical outcomes of bioeconomy policies, despite 
claims of sustainability, have led some scholars to 
characterize the bioeconomy as a “failing project” 
(Lühmann and Vogelpohl 2023 ).
Feminist research echoes some of the critical per -
spectives on society-nature relations in the bioecon -
omy, especially the critique of ecological 
modernization and the green economy as sustainability strategies (Salleh 1997 ; Gottschlich 
et  al. 2014 ; Harcourt and Nelson 2015 ; Wichterich 
2015 ; Barca 2020 ). Feminist perspectives are an eye 
opener for underlying dynamics of externalization 
(Saave 2022 ), power, and inequalities related to inno -
vation and technology policies (Haraway 1988 ; 
Wajcman 2010 , Nelson, Faxon, and Ehlers 2024 ; 
Saave, Brinckmann, and Hackfort 2024 ). Some of 
these issues and challenges have been addressed in 
debates about “responsible research and innovation” 
(RRI), such as the inclusion of laypeople in 
decision-making, anticipation in the sense of system -
atic thinking, reflexivity as a critical examination of 
assumptions, and responsiveness as a willingness to 
adapt an innovation to societal reactions (e.g., 
Stilgoe, Owen, and Macnaghten 2013 ). Feminist sci -
ence and technology studies (STS) has taken debates 
and concepts developed in RRI to the next level. 
Instead of responding to exclusion with inclusion in 
existing unequal systems and structures of knowl -
edge production, for instance, they question the 
underlying discursive and material power relations 
that enable exclusion in the first place (e.g., Campbell 
2009 ; Grzanka, Brian, and Bhatia 2023 ).
This is why we assume that the fields of feminist 
ecological economics and feminist STS can help us 
to better understand and assess the sustainability 
shortcoming of innovations in the agricultural bio -
economy. We will draw from debates in these two 
fields to construct our framework of analysis and 
then illustrate its application by looking at 
socio-technical innovations in PA. While much of 
earlier critical feminist work on precision technolo -
gies centered around genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs) (see, for example, Wickson et  al. 2017), we 
focus on PA as a more recent development that has 
to date received scant attention. However, both tech -
nological developments are manifestations of 
high-tech agriculture and have much in common 
(Hackfort 2024 ).
PA refers to the use of digital technologies such 
as sensors, satellite imagery, and connected data-based 
tools and platforms in agricultural production to 
monitor and optimize agricultural production pro -
cesses (Miles 2019 ). PA includes, for example, the 
application of variable rate technology to apply fer -
tilizers and pesticides with digital data-based spray -
ing systems or big data-based recommendations for 
seeding and solutions for automatic weeding. With 
this comes a constantly growing collection of agri -
cultural data stored on platforms and clouds, which 
is expected to enhance knowledge of the needs of 
plants or the soil. PA is expected to enable a more 
precise use of inputs and increase efficiency  
and crop yields, while supposedly decreasing 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 3
environmental externalities and costs. As postulated 
in the German bioeconomy strategy, through “preci -
sion farming, land productivity can be increased in 
an economically and environmentally sustainable 
way” (BMBF and BMEL 2020 , 41, own translation). 
Behind these PA innovations stand specific under -
standings of economy, productivity, and sustainabil -
ity that merit closer examination. It is necessary to 
scrutinize the sustainability claims related to the 
recent trend of digitalization in agriculture as part of 
the agricultural high-tech bioeconomy which, accord -
ing to the relevant policies, aims for a sustainability 
transformation.
This article contributes to filling a gap by high -
lighting such sustainability shortcomings. Surprisingly, 
the rich diversity of feminist thinking has not yet 
been harnessed in the analysis of the socio-technical 
innovations of PA in the bioeconomy (with just a 
few exceptions, e.g., Nelson, Faxon, and Ehlers 2024 ). 
Y et, feminist research enables such a critical analysis, 
as it sheds light on the omissions of policies and 
innovations related to dominant sustainability claims.
By sustainability, we refer to a critical emancipa -
tory feminist understanding thereof, wherein care 
and justice are highlighted as essential elements. 
This implies thinking of society and nature not as 
polar opposites, but instead acknowledging their 
hybrid and relational character, and viewing sustain -
ability as a highly contested and power-laden con -
cept (Gottschlich and Bellina 2017 ; Boyer et al. 2022 ).
The article is structured as follows. Based on 
established feminist critiques of dominant sustain -
ability discourses, economic systems. and technolog -
ical innovations, we have developed a framework to 
analyze the sustainability shortcomings within 
socio-technical innovations in the agricultural bio -
economy. We then illustrate what our framework 
brings into view by looking at PA as a growing trend 
in the agricultural bioeconomy, using examples from 
empirical research in this field. We will lastly derive 
some conclusions on transformation perspectives for 
sustainable technology policy and economy, thereby 
pointing to possibilities of a caring and reproductive 
bioeconomy.
Theoretical reconstruction: Analyzing socio-
technical innovations in the bioeconomy 
from a feminist perspective
We developed our analytical framework by recon -
structing key ideas from feminist ecological econom -
ics (to delineate a critique of economic thinking and 
its sustainability) and from feminist STS (which 
focuses on innovations and risk assessment). As the 
bioeconomy is both a project of transition toward new forms of doing economy and an approach to 
achieving sustainability centered around technologi -
cal innovations processes, we believe that the 
strengths of these two approaches complement each 
other for a feminist analysis of this transformation.
(Re)productivity as an economic and 
sustainability critique
Among the ecological feminisms that have emerged 
since the 1960s (for an overview see Salleh 1997 ; 
Saave 2023 ), an approach called the “caring econ -
omy” ( Vorsorgendes Wirtschaften  in German) has 
developed a specific critique of sustainability, with 
roots in feminist ecological economics. Its goal is to 
make the connection between economy, ecology, and 
social issues visible, understandable, and thus socially 
shapable. We select this approach from the broader 
field of feminist ecological economics (Perkins 2007 ), 
because of its strength in connecting the analysis of 
society-nature relations with more applied research 
and policy proposals for dealing with nature more 
sustainably. This approach includes in its economic 
theory the areas of social provisioning and 
co-production with nature (TVW 2000 , 27). And it 
seeks answers to multiple current crises by develop -
ing new concepts that would enable a democratic, 
socially, and ecologically sustainable economy. The 
approach offers fundamental critical perspectives on 
the economy but can also be applied to the bioeco -
nomy specifically (as for instance already done by 
Brüll 2020 ). While other ecological feminisms place 
greater focus on, for example, commodification 
(Oksala 2018 ) or a critique of capitalist accumula -
tion (Saave 2023 ), the caring economy approach 
combines both critical perspectives on externaliza -
tion dynamics of the economy and analyses of 
society-nature relations.
Core critique of economy and notions of 
sustainability
Social and ecological crises share a common cause, 
which is rooted in capitalist market economies 
(Biesecker and Hofmeister 2010 ). Such economies 
are characterized by a separation between produc -
tion and reproduction: paid labor productivity and 
reproductive activities, such as unpaid care work and 
the productivity of nature, are viewed and valued as 
separate. This leads to a contradictory situation, 
where reproductive activities are considered a natu -
ral resource, and are exploited and used to create 
profits, but are not valued accordingly (Biesecker 
and Hofmeister 2010 ). The caring economy approach 
instead emphasizes that economic practices are in 
fact embedded in reproductive processes and 
4 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
activities. In doing so, the caring economy approach 
offers analytical tools to dismantle the unsustainabil -
ity of the current economy. With this analysis they 
build on earlier work by the Bielefeld subsistence 
theorists (Mies, Bennholdt-Thomsen, and von 
Werlhof 1988 ) but emphasize in their analysis the 
separation of productive from reproductive processes 
and respective understandings of productivity.
Classifications and devaluations around what is 
considered reproductive are often gender-specific 
and therefore reinforce a sexist social order, which 
the caring economy approach also strives to move 
beyond. Unlike the economic mainstream, a caring 
economy does not consider the so-called reproduc -
tive as a self-evident and infinitely available resource. 
From this feminist ecological critique thus follows 
an expansion of the sustainability discourse to 
include this reproductive dimension. Furthermore, 
and on a more practical level, this perspective argues 
that caring economies need to be built on three 
principles: precaution ( Vorsorge  in German1), coop -
eration, and orientation toward what is necessary for 
life (TVW 2000 ).
From productivity to (re)productivity
To address the conceptual omission of reproductive 
processes within economics, as well as within business 
practices in capitalist economies, caring economy 
scholars propose the concept of (re)productivity. (Re)
productivity denotes the undivided unity of all pro -
ductive processes in nature and society. While unity is 
not separated by devaluations regarding the reproduc -
tive, it does acknowledge differences between produc -
tive processes (Biesecker and Hofmeister 2006 , 19). 
The term refers to the often-forgotten fact that in 
every production process, processes of restoration and 
renewal through human or natural reproduction are 
already included. As a new category, (re)productivity 
replaces existing conceptual separations between pro -
ductive and reproductive processes and activities. It 
ultimately strives to enable a more sustainable 
social-ecological metabolism that builds on more 
appropriate mediations rather than separations 
between what is currently considered reproductive or 
productive, as both areas are actually productive. We 
take from this that productive and reproductive activ -
ities and processes are always interlinked and cannot 
be separated from each other.
This perspective allows for a critique of the econ -
omy that does not actively co-create reproductivity 
but instead takes it for granted. As a result, nature is 
both a product of natural productivity as well as a 
product of the economy and society. This is import -
ant to note since oftentimes nature is conceived as 
something outside of society that needs to be preserved (Biesecker and Hofmeister 2010 ; see also 
Mölders 2019 ; Gottschlich and Katz 2020 ). However, 
there is no such nature (anymore) and the bioecon -
omy contributes to this by also creating a hybrid 
product-like nature (Brüll 2020 , 95).
Implications for the bioeconomy: Ensuring 
renewability and precaution
Adopting a (re)productivity perspective is key for 
biomass production. From this perspective, it 
becomes evident that it is not automatic that 
so-called renewable resources like biomass are actu -
ally renewed. Regrowth depends on the permanent 
regeneration of suitable growth conditions, such as 
soil fertility and nutrient availability, biological diver -
sity, and so forth., and these conditions are in ques -
tion globally today (Brüll 2020 , 94). Maintaining the 
conditions for reproduction is a major sustainability 
challenge under the current capitalist mode of pro -
duction. From a (re)productivity perspective, the key 
aim of sustainable biomass use is to ensure that bio -
mass is not only extracted, but that the reproductive 
conditions ensuring that this resource is renewable 
are maintained. In adopting a precautionary princi -
ple with regard to sustainable biomass production, it 
becomes clear that biomass cannot be extracted end -
lessly. We take from this that a sustainable bioecon -
omy must ensure that the reproductive conditions of 
biomass production are renewed, not depleted.
From a (re)productivity perspective, sustainability 
is facilitated by an orientation toward the three prin -
ciples of a caring economy (precaution, cooperation, 
and orientation toward what is necessary for life), 
which replace the dominant principles of aftercare, 
competition, and orientation toward monetary mea -
sures. Importantly, the third strategic principle points 
to sufficiency as a sustainability strategy, which dif -
fers from current emphases on eco-efficiency and 
technological optimism within the bioeconomy and 
unlocks new routes for the sustainable organization 
of society. Employing precaution implies for any 
economy that “prediction and control make way for 
Vorsorge , the caring concern for the future present of 
others” (Adam 2013 , 126). Sociologist Barbara Adam 
further notes that
[Vorsorge]…entails that we extend both knowledge 
and concern to encompass our implication in poten -
tial outcomes, as they are stretched across space and 
time. Importantly, we are allowing concerns about 
what is right  and just (rather than cost effective) to 
enter considerations (Adam 2013 , 123–124).
This attention to time reveals the underpinnings 
of dominant economic thinking and dominant 
understandings of sustainability, including their 
underlying narratives of the control and domination 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 5
of nature and innovation, as rather limited. From 
this it follows that bioeconomy projects need to be 
aware of a future present and recognize the temporal 
dimension of sustainability, which can be taken care 
of by adopting an attitude of precaution.
Knowledge in technology development
Another relevant aspect within feminist research more 
generally, that of contested knowledge production, is 
also echoed in the caring economy framework. It is 
important to address knowledge production when 
moving toward more sustainable ways of “doing econ -
omy. ” To redesign (re)production processes, some 
authors of caring economy approach advocate, for 
instance, for socio-ecological technology and product 
development that includes not only male “expert 
knowledge” but also the “everyday knowledge of all 
affected actors” (Biesecker and Hofmeister 2013 , 154; 
see also Röhr and Weller 2021 ). According to these 
authors, such equal consideration would also alter 
previous gender relations. More sustainable, (re)pro -
ductive bioeconomies would “produce, maintain and 
sustain reproductive functions with the help of sci -
ence, local knowledge, and design, as far as possible” 
(Brüll 2020 , 96; own translation). We derive from this 
insight that diverse and also non-hegemonic forms of 
knowing about natures and (re)productivity should be 
a basis for technology development.
A second feminist research tradition is interesting 
and fruitful for our framework: the field of feminist 
STS, specifically work engaged with the ethics of 
care. At present, forging the bioeconomy follows a 
predominantly technology-centered way of doing 
economy. Therefore, it is important to complement a 
critique of the economy and sustainability with a 
critique of technology and innovation processes.
Ethics of care as a critique of innovation and 
technology
While the (re)productivity perspective aims to cri -
tique the unsustainability of economic models and 
processes, a care perspective, as developed in femi -
nist research, offers important insights to critically 
assess innovations at the intersection of society, 
nature, and technology: In ecofeminism and feminist 
sustainability research, care serves as an ethical prin -
ciple for individual actions and as a transformative 
principle for a sustainable – in terms of just and 
precautionary – democracy (Plumwood 1991 ; Tronto 
2013 ; Gottschlich et  al. 2014 ). For our framework, 
we now particularly refer to STS scholars who have 
identified key features of a care perspective on tech -
nologies, especially assessing the risks and implica -
tions of biotechnology and GMOs (e.g., Groves 2015 ; Martin, Myers, and Viseu 2015 ; Preston and Wickson 
2016 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 2011 ; Whittingham and 
Wynberg 2021 ). Our aim is to make this work fruit -
ful for the analysis of other precision technologies in 
a next step.
Social and socio-ecological relations
Care perspectives emphasize the importance of rela -
tionality. They direct attention to how innovations 
influence relationships among humans – such as 
farmer-farmer inter-reliance – and to society-nature 
interactions (Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 ). The exam -
ple of GMOs is illustrative here, as the technology 
shows how property rights have created new and 
longstanding dependencies for producers and con -
sumers of biomass and food, and thus how a tech -
nology can alter existing relationships and create 
new social and ecological relationships (Preston and 
Wickson 2016 , 53). Traditionally, farmers maintained 
a close bond with seeds, saving and choosing them 
meticulously over generations. This connection 
allowed both crops and farming methods to evolve 
together. However, the introduction of commercial 
hybrid and genetically modified seeds disrupted this 
relationship, demanding annual purchases for consis -
tent results; they are patented, necessitating yearly 
seed buying and contractual agreements that forbid 
replanting or further research. Moreover, patented 
GMOs can strain relationships among farmers, 
affecting collaborations, and can lead to conflicts 
between farmers and the farming community, for 
instance over the challenges of the coexistence of 
GMO and GMO-free production (Friedrich et  al. 
2019 ). This example illustrates the importance of 
paying attention to how the introduction of innova -
tions can transform relations within society and 
socio-ecological systems.
Context and risk
With care it is argued that many approaches to 
innovation policy remain within limited technology 
and risk-assessment frameworks, which do not ade -
quately consider the existing particularities of spe -
cific contexts, including their complexities and 
scientific uncertainties across space and time. They 
are thus too narrow to account for unintended 
effects beyond a positivistic understanding of risks 
in (natural) science (Preston and Wickson 2016 , 49). 
“Just as other technologies, GM [genetically modi -
fied] crops do not exist in a vacuum but operate as 
socio-technical and eco-social systems. They are 
shaped by the interests, values, goals and visions 
that arise from their contexts of development and 
deployment” (Preston and Wickson 2016 , 50). This 
means, for example, that in addition to the potential 
6 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
effects of GMOs on human health or the environ -
ment, a care approach as developed by Preston and 
Wickson demands that socio-economic or political 
factors be included in the assessment of the hazards 
and sustainability of innovations. This includes the 
influence of economic interests and the tightening 
of control of a few powerful actors over food pro -
duction and the technologies that shape it. From 
this observation we identify the need to broaden 
understandings of context to include ecological but 
also social and economic risks in assessing the sus -
tainability shortcomings of precision technologies in 
biomass production.
Dependence, power, and vulnerability
A care approach focuses on uneven relationships 
and directs attention to the interconnected depen -
dencies and power relations within economic or 
agricultural systems (Whittingham and Wynberg 
2021 , 5). It is important to note that dependence 
itself is not inherently problematic; it is an inherent 
aspect of relationality, life, and economic systems 
(Preston and Wickson 2016 , 52). For our assessment 
of sustainability shortcomings, it is important to 
direct attention toward asymmetric and longstanding 
dependencies together with power asymmetries in 
agriculture and food production that benefit some 
actors more than others. From the past, we know 
how control over the development and use of tech -
nologies like GMOs by a few powerful actors – mul -
tinational corporations, for instance, which claim 
ownership of GM crops as patented property – might 
intensify vulnerabilities and dependencies for organic 
farming systems, as well as for both producers and 
consumers (Friedrich et  al. 2019 ). In the context of 
agriculture, technologies like pesticides, fertilizers, 
and technical support systems are well-known exam -
ples of how innovations can increase the reliance of 
farmers and consumers on a small but powerful 
group of corporate actors (Shiva 1991 ; Clapp 2021 ). 
Herbicide-tolerant GMO crops designed by former 
chemical companies, to be used in conjunction with 
specific chemicals owned by these same firms, raise 
significant concerns about the sustainability of new 
innovations, the underlying motivations behind the 
fostering of such relationships, and whether the 
actors behind these innovations are “engaged in  
the relationship in a caring and nurturing manner or 
whether the relation is extractive, profit-driven, and 
destructive” (Preston and Wickson 2016 , 52). A care 
approach urges us to consider structural dependen -
cies, vulnerabilities, and concentrations of power and 
control that systemically privilege some while mar -
ginalizing others in the context of food and biomass 
production.Affects and emotions
A care perspective considers the affects and emo -
tions associated with technology use, whether they 
are perceived as legitimate or not, in political pro -
cesses and public debate. Feminist perspectives 
emphasize that individual and collective 
decision-making also has emotional elements, that 
societies are not governed by fully rational and 
autonomous individuals and decisions (Preston and 
Wickson 2016 ; Gottschlich and Katz 2020 ). Both 
rational and emotional logics are at play, which is 
why calling for the acknowledgement of affects does 
not mean excluding reason from decision-making, 
but rather including otherwise neglected aspects. 
The debate about GMOs shows how important these 
neglected aspects are, as “gut reactions or moral 
doubts are highly important and often ‘act as a veto 
irrespective of people’s views on use and risk’” 
(Preston and Wickson 2016 , 54). A care approach 
does not argue for the perception of affective aspects 
and emotions as sacrosanct or that they should 
replace other forms of assessment. It rather calls for 
the inclusion of more diverse – and currently often 
excluded – forms of experience in the development 
and assessment of innovations. From this we derive 
that concerns raised by lay persons or the public are 
nottoo emotional” but are legitimate and could 
inform innovation agendas, and thus deserve atten -
tion and further investigation (Whittingham and 
Wynberg 2021 , 6).
Narratives and knowledge
A care perspective calls for listening to a diversity 
of narratives and “providing room for the voice of 
those who might ordinarily be excluded” from 
innovation development, use, and assessments 
(Preston and Wickson 2016 , 54). A care approach 
thus aims for a more democratic and inclusive pro -
cess in innovation politics that reflects the “multi -
plicity of scientific and academic voices but also 
the voices of the marginalized” (Whittingham and 
Wynberg 2021 , 3). Feminist STS has pointed out 
that the claim of objectivity is problematic as every 
theory and innovation is based on assumptions, 
and knowledge production, including in the natural 
sciences, is always situated, embedded in society, 
and inevitably influenced by societal power dynam -
ics (Haraway 1988 ). Assumptions must be made 
transparent, different standpoints need to be nego -
tiated, and diverse actors should be included to 
avoid the exclusion of forms of knowledge and to 
achieve something approaching objectivity. A care 
perspective builds on this by highlighting the legit -
imacy of different knowledge forms and problema -
tizes the existence of patriarchal, technocratic power 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 7
relations in knowledge production, as well as in 
innovation development and related policy 
decision-making. From this it follows to ask what 
kinds of narratives and knowledges are associated 
with innovations, and which are marginalized or 
excluded in innovation development, use, and 
assessment.
A framework for a feminist analysis of 
sustainability shortcomings related to  
socio-technical innovations
While the (re)productivity perspective aims to cri -
tique the unsustainability of economic models and 
processes, a care perspective, as we have carved out 
from feminist STS, asks us, as Whittingham and 
Wynberg 2021 , 1) write,
[T]o broaden the framing of risk, to consider differ -
ent knowledges, to re-imagine ourselves as social, 
rather than economic beings, to tap into the capac -
ity of socio-ecological relations and to recognize 
and dismantle power structures…Such an approach 
broadens the scope of what constitutes risk and 
acknowledges the complexities present in our 
socio-ecological environment.
In synthesizing these two fields into our frame -
work of analysis for assessing sustainability short -
comings related to socio-technical innovations in 
the bioeconomy, we discovered some important 
areas of overlap. We found that both approaches 
emphasize the mediation of socio-technical innova -
tions with ecological processes ((re)productivity, 
renewability, and relations). While the STS care 
perspective places a focus on relations among actors and impacts on socio-ecological systems, the  
(re)productivity perspective highlights more the 
material implications of these relations and nature’s 
renewability. We found that the care perspective 
describes aptly the importance of an awareness of 
context and risk, while the (re)productivity per -
spective provides guidance for dealing with them 
(e.g., precaution, cooperation, and sufficiency strat -
egies). The insights provided by the STS care per -
spective regarding dependence, power, vulnerabilities, 
and affect and emotions are not as much mirrored 
in the (re)productivity approach. However, both 
approaches show some overlaps regarding the top -
ics of knowledge production and narratives. Based 
on these commonalities, differences and overlaps, 
we synthetized some of the categories to build our 
framework dimensions and to derive key questions 
for analysis (presented in Table 1  and illustrated in 
the following section using the empirical exam -
ple of PA).
Framework application: socio-technical 
innovations in precision agriculture
We now illustrate our framework by looking into 
socio-technical innovations in the field of PA as a 
key sector of the bioeconomy. For each dimension, 
we will give examples of the development and use of 
innovations from PA literature and from our own 
research in the field including literature reviews, 
participant observation in workshops, farm visits, 
and interviews to demonstrate how they shed light 
on possible shortcomings in sustainability policies 
and discourse.
Table 1.  Framework for analysis of the sustainability shortcomings of socio-technical innovations.
Synthetized d imensionderived from  
(re)productivity 
concept and/or 
from care discourse Questions to analyze the sustainability shortcomings of socio-technical innovations
(re)Productivity and 
renewability(re)Productivity How do innovations make a transformation of the economy toward mediation, instead of 
separation, between productive and reproductive more or less likely?
How do innovations reproduce patterns that undermine or enhance nature’s renewability?
Social and Socio-ecological 
relationscare How do innovations transform and disrupt relations among humans within society and in 
socio-ecological systems?
context, Precaution, and 
cooperationcare and (r e)
Productivitydo innovations account for the particularities of specific contexts, including their effects in distant 
spaces and times/the future?
are innovations developed with consideration for precaution and their social, economic or 
political implications?
are innovations developed and used based on, or to advance, cooperation and sufficiency, rather 
than only economic growth and profit?
dependence, Power, and 
Vulnerabilitycare do innovations emerge from, reproduce, or transform incumbent power relations and 
dependencies among stakeholders?
do innovations reinforce the vulnerability and marginalization of some individuals, actors, or 
systems more than others?
affect and emotions care What kind of affective reactions to innovations can be observed?
How are the reactions perceived and integrated into innovation policy agenda setting and public 
political debates?
narratives and Knowledges care and (r e)
ProductivityWhat kinds of knowledges are integrated into innovation development?
are certain narratives marginalized or excluded in the process of innovation development, use, 
and assessment?
8 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
(Re)productivity and renewability
Most existing PA applications – such as geographical 
positioning system (GPS)-enabled smart land 
machines2 or digital farm-management platforms – 
are tailored toward the needs of agro-industrial 
farming linked to a productivist paradigm (Miles 
2019 ; Montenegro de Wit and Canfield 2023 ), a 
term that denotes “the process by which a logic of 
production overdetermines other activities of value” 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2015 , 699). This implies under -
standing agriculture primarily as a productive, 
efficiency-oriented business, with the maximization 
of biomass yields through technologies at the center, 
and thus neglecting the long-term reproductive 
requirements, such as healthy soils as a precondition 
for growing. Reproductive processes are thereby 
excluded from consideration, which does not help to 
mediate production and reproduction as (re)produc -
tive processes. Moreover, this model comes with 
negative impacts on ecological and social reproduc -
tive capacities, including biodiversity loss and high 
carbon-dioxide (CO2) emissions (Sampson 2018 ). PA 
technologies such as data-based variable rate applica -
tions for chemical pesticides and synthetic fertilizers 
come with ambitious promissory claims. While they 
are marketed as potentially contributing to the 
reduction of farm inputs that are harmful for the 
environment, biodiversity, and the climate, empirical 
evidence about significant environmental gains is 
lacking. Current data about input reductions is 
rather scanty and points toward only small gains, 
rather than a fundamental reversal of currents trends 
of high petrochemical use (for the German example, 
see Kehl, Meyer, and Steiger 2021 , 119; Kliem et  al. 
2022 , 45). This suggests that under productivism, 
the problems of structural unsustainability in agri -
culture, such as biodiversity loss or overfertilization, 
cannot be solved through PA. Furthermore, due to 
current techno-economic path dependencies and 
lock-in effects, PA innovations actually reproduce an 
agro-industrial productivism that undermines nature’s 
renewability and makes a structural agroecological 
transformation of agri-food systems less rather than 
more likely (Hackfort 2023 ).
Social and socio-ecological relations
In the context of PA, asymmetric relations and exist -
ing inequalities between agri-business and farmers, 
as well as among farmers, are reproduced. This is 
particularly the case between large-scale and 
small-scale farmers, between those who follow a 
productivist model and those who do not. The more 
technologies diffuse into agriculture at large, the 
more small farmers are under pressure to adapt 
(Hackfort 2021 ). With digital innovations, social relationships are altered, making farmers even more 
dependent on corporate technology and service-  
provider companies such as John Deere. This is the 
case when farmers are not allowed (legally) or are 
not able to fix their “smart” machines but need to 
wait for the company’s digital maintenance team. 
Other examples are farm-data platforms and artifi -
cial intelligence (AI)-generated seed recommenda -
tions, which replace the knowledge and experience 
of farmers. Even if such innovations do not impact 
relationships as much as other precision technologies 
such as GMOs, they create new and disrupt existing 
social relationships, such as when earlier ties between 
advisors and farmers are complemented by AI sys -
tems and information-technology specialists 
(Comi 2020 ).
Context, precaution, and cooperation
PA innovations based on current patterns are devel -
oped toward and confined by the productivist 
agro-industrial paradigm. Expensive “smart” land 
machines or farm-management platforms are 
designed for large-scale agriculture by leading 
agri-business and agri-technology firms. Mostly used 
on farms following a rationality of increasing yields 
and economic growth, many innovations are not 
made for diverse farming contexts, including 
small-scale or sufficiency-oriented production. 
Designed primarily to serve capital-intensive indus -
trial agriculture, such innovations help reproduce the 
future path dependencies of unsustainable and poorly 
precautionary production models (Hackfort 2023 ; 
Miles 2019 ). Moreover, many innovations are char -
acterized by legal or technological lock-ins, often 
built into products by technology and service pro -
viders, that hinder farmers to freely choose other 
software or hardware equipment according to their 
needs. These lock-ins reinforce existing power rela -
tions and farmers’ dependence on corporate technol -
ogies and services, and eventually on the 
agro-industrial farming model. Such proprietary sys -
tems offered by corporate technology firms to main -
tain their market position and profits stand in 
contrast to the principles of cooperation and suffi -
ciency (Fraser 2021 ; Hackfort 2023 ).
Dependence, power, and vulnerabilities
The PA sector is characterized by monopoly struc -
tures, market concentration, and corporate power, 
with big agri-business companies such as Syngenta 
and Bayer/Monsanto and agri-technology firms such 
John Deere as leading innovation developers. 
Corporate power determines control over the tech -
nology and the distribution of benefits and economic 
value created (e.g., from the collected data). Through 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 9
in-built sensors in their tractors that measure soil or 
crop conditions, and crop yields, or incentives for 
the direct upload of farm data to their cloud plat -
forms, companies like John Deere collect and control 
large sets of big data, including the intellectual prop -
erty rights via the license agreements. Companies 
benefit from the data that farmers provide, usually 
without being compensated, while the firms retain 
the profits generated from that data, for instance 
through using it for their product and service devel -
opment. Based on that data, as with the sale of gly -
phosate and the corresponding GM-resistant seeds 
in a bundle, Bayer/Monsanto is now selling 
data-based recommendations (predictive seeding) 
together with its own company-  
owned seeds (Hackfort, Marquis, and Bronson 2024 ). 
Through such incentives farmers are likely to become 
path-dependent on the technological systems of the 
companies whose machinery and software they ini -
tially purchase. Agribusinesses have historically used 
a variety of mechanisms to corner the market on 
agricultural inputs and machinery, establish exclusive 
relationships with farmers, and create different kinds 
of lock-ins and forms of dependency from their eco -
nomic–technical ecosystems. Such practices 
strengthen ties between farmers and specific compa -
nies, eventually working as lock-ins for farmers and 
perpetuate oligopoly within agriculture.
Reducing farmers’ vulnerability and achieving sus -
tainability transformation requires more than curb -
ing corporate power. However, farms using PA based 
on these current patterns risk a reliance on innova -
tions that only aim at incremental changes through 
seemingly efficient technologies, instead of fostering 
a necessary structural transformation toward food 
sovereignty and agroecology-oriented food and bio -
mass production. Such alternative strategies, based 
on different understandings of sustainability and 
approaches that prioritize concepts like food sover -
eignty and agroecology, tend to be disregarded by 
policymakers and deprived of funding and invest -
ment (Clapp and Ruder 2020 ; Lajoie-O’Malley 
et  al. 2020 ).
Affect and emotions
In addition to scientific assessments based solely on 
reason and rationality, a care perspective also con -
siders the diverse emotions associated with innova -
tions as legitimate and important, rather than 
ignoring or disregarding them as “an obstacle to 
perceived objectivity” (Whittingham and Wynberg 
2021 , 5). This perspective contrasts with technologi -
cal rationalism, which views emotions and affects 
influencing values and preferences as something to 
avoid. From a care perspective, any affective hesitance and resistance regarding the use of PA 
innovations can be understood as a legitimate form 
of what has been termed ‘technological sovereignty’ 
(Montenegro de Wit 2021 ). This includes farmer’s 
decisions to opt against PA and prefer low-tech 
methods, for instance, when farmers may find drones 
“threatening” or have “no desire” to delegate tasks to 
machines, because they “enjoy touching the earth or 
observing why a particular plant is so prevalent this 
year” (unpublished interviews 2022; own translation).
Knowledge production and narratives
Feminist research asks what forms of knowledge are 
associated with technologies, and whether certain 
narratives are marginalized or excluded by their 
development. It emphasizes the cultural and ecolog -
ical relevance of the diversity of local, situated 
knowledges (Haraway 1988 ). These include agroeco -
logical practices which may not be included in the 
standardized data-knowledge bases of the algorithms 
underlying PA innovations (e.g., for pest control). In 
contrast to modern industrial agriculture that 
involves heavy use of synthetic inputs aimed at 
increasing soil productivity, permaculture and other 
forms of agroecological farming involve slow and 
labor-intensive practices that draw upon the “inferi -
orized” knowledges of farmers and farm workers 
(Puig de la Bellacasa 2017 , 169–216). However, with 
PA, data-driven predictions, recommendations, and 
platforms appear to be more objective and reliable 
than human experiential knowledge and intuition 
(Bronson 2022 ). This is what Miles ( 2019 , 5) calls 
“algorithmic epistemology, ” referring to the fetishiza -
tion of data that affects notions of legitimate knowl -
edge, such that traditional and local knowledge 
about plants and pests may be delegitimized. Farmers 
may no longer trust their own experience, but 
instead increasingly rely on algorithms and data-based 
predictions as expert knowledge, which obscures the 
fact that there are human decisions and prioritiza -
tions behind algorithms (Heimstädt 2023 ).
Discussion
We have combined two strands of feminist research 
to offer a framework of analysis that can help to 
identify sustainability shortcomings in the high-tech 
bioeconomy which claims to lead to more sustain -
ability. All of these steps have inherent challenges, 
which we reflect upon in this discussion.
First, the two strands come from different disci -
plinary backgrounds (feminist ecological economics 
and feminist STS) and thus focus on different fields 
of application (economy and sustainability critique, 
and innovation and technology development).  
10 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
We have therefore had to interpret them in ways 
that make their common ground intelligible, even 
though they use different terminology. For example, 
feminist ecological economics focuses on the relation 
of productivity and reproductivity, exemplified in the 
term (re)productivity, which we interpret as being 
closely linked to the idea from feminist care ethics 
in STS that innovation is embedded in social and 
ecological relations. Furthermore, both approaches 
aim to bring awareness to relatedness (of society and 
nature) and embeddedness (of economies).
On one hand, each approach emphasizes specific 
aspects that the other does not (or not to the same 
extent). For instance, feminist STS draws explicit 
attention to power relations and the affective aspects 
regarding innovations, which is not foregrounded as 
much in the caring economy approach. This second 
approach, on the other hand, places emphasis on 
the materiality of nature, including the renewability 
of ecological resources that cannot be taken for 
granted. It also emphasizes the reproductive founda -
tion of any economic process. These are two aspects 
that are not at the forefront of feminist STS 
considerations.
Using the case of PA, we have illustrated how our 
analytical framework can reveal manifold sustain -
ability shortcomings linked to these innovations such 
as the reinforcement of productivism; the lack of 
precaution, sufficiency, and cooperation in technol -
ogy development; the fetishization of data; and the 
delegitimization of local knowledge. While the appli -
cation of the analytical framework was only exem -
plary, it shows how such an analysis allows for a 
fine-grained and multifaceted assessment of a spe -
cific field of innovations in the bioeconomy and how 
it can draw attention to structural and systemic sus -
tainability shortcomings in reaching more sustain -
able outcomes which often get overlooked.
The sustainability shortcomings identified above 
are effects of what could be summarized under the 
term “precision productivism. ” This characterizes 
society-nature relations in the high-tech bioeconomy 
as denoting a specific articulation of ecological mod -
ernization, which has now taken a specific form in 
centering around precision technologies, such as 
those in PA studied here. Other technologies that 
belong to precision productivism include precision 
breeding (also known as genome editing) and preci -
sion fermentation, key innovations that are being 
promoted in the bioeconomy with the claim of mak -
ing economic systems (e.g., energy, agriculture) more 
sustainable through an increase in productivity based 
on a higher degree of precision in production tech -
niques. At the same time, the underlying mecha -
nisms of separating production from reproduction, as well as dominant production and consumption 
patterns – which are actually the root causes of the 
problems that these technologies are aiming to solve 
– are left untouched. Precision productivism as a 
paradigm in the bioeconomy hence does not steer in 
the direction of fundamental sustainability transfor -
mations; it rather reveals that established relations of 
power and (corporate) control in innovation devel -
opment and knowledge production in the bioecon -
omy are being reproduced.
A limitation of our study is that our illustration 
remains rather general in its focus on both technol -
ogy development and the use of PA innovations. 
However, this was reasonable considering our more 
modest aim of illustrating the application possibilities 
of the analytical framework. As the bioeconomy spans 
from biotechnology and agriculture to forestry, the 
possible applications of this framework are manifold.3 
Future research using our framework might focus on 
one aspect of socio-technical innovations (e.g., design 
or implementation) to deepen analytical insights.
Conclusion: toward a caring and (re)
productive bioeconomy
Since the bioeconomy is a project that has been 
characterized as centering around techno-fixes and 
as another expression of ecological modernization, it 
warrants precise analysis to assess its sustainability. 
We have shown how feminist perspectives can help 
to assess the sustainability shortcomings of 
socio-technical innovations in the bioeconomy. We 
had two objectives: to derive an analytical frame -
work from existing research and to illustrate it using 
empirical examples to show its usefulness. Through 
its application, we found that PA is embedded within 
solutions that are commonly focused on technologi -
cal innovations. Power imbalances – for instance, 
regarding inclusive knowledge and participation in 
technology development or key challenges such as 
ensuring the renewability of biomass production – 
remain insufficiently considered, which provokes sig -
nificant drawbacks on the path to sustainability. 
From this, we conclude that the transformation from 
a fossil-based to a bio-based economy by means of 
the high-tech bioeconomy might be a solution for 
substituting individual products or processes. 
However, the potential of the bioeconomy as a 
socio-ecological transformation project is low if it 
leaves untouched the technology- and growth-centered 
consumption and production patterns, with their 
negative effects on human and non-human nature 
and their reproductivity.
The feminist literature we have synthesized points 
to the necessities and possibilities of doing economy, 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 11
and especially of doing biomass production, differ -
ently. It emphasizes the importance of recognizing 
the relationality and interdependence of society and 
nature and the need for caring practices and princi -
ples as a counterproject to a precision productivism 
that lies at the heart of the current bioeconomy. 
Such caring practices and principles would counter -
act the externalization dynamics at play that threaten 
sustainability, especially in the long run. In fact, 
feminist perspectives on the bioeconomy point to an 
entirely different understanding of the economy and 
sustainability, bringing into view the entire social 
metabolism with nature, using new concepts such as 
(re)productivity.
These critical insights lead to the question of 
what a caring, reproductive bioeconomy could be. 
First, there is a need for different and expanded 
understandings, terminology, and practices of inno -
vation and technology development. On one hand, 
this includes alternative, emancipatory (digital) tech -
nologies that are based, for example, on less propri -
etary and more commons-based and open-source 
principles. On the other hand, it requires political 
and economic policies that go beyond innovation 
politics, such as anti-trust laws to curb corporate 
power in the agri-food system and to create more 
diversity and space for alternative actors, movements, 
and (low) technologies. Policy makers and other 
stakeholders concerned with innovation policy and 
technological development must understand and 
advance agriculture as a reproductive system.
Second, a feminist perspective illuminates that in 
addition to better technical solutions (efficiency), 
strategies for reducing the use of resources (suffi -
ciency) and the precautionary caring for natural 
resources and nature’s productivity must be at the 
center of sustainability. In particular, the temporal 
aspect of maintaining the conditions of reproduction 
is often missing in the technology-centered debates 
on the bioeconomy and related innovations.
Finally, we conclude that any type of technolog -
ical innovation, assessment, economic activity, and 
political governance in the bioeconomy that is not 
linked to the perspectives of care and (re)produc -
tivity – that is not designed to foster reproductive 
capacities and account for embeddedness – will 
ultimately prove unable to achieve sustainability. As 
long as bioeconomy projects, regardless of their 
technical manifestation, are unable to maintain the 
reproductive conditions of biomass production, 
even a bio-based economy cannot be sustainable. 
We find that a sustainable bioeconomy needs to be 
a (re)productive bioeconomy, with innovations that 
are guided by and oriented toward care and 
precaution.Notes
 1. The German term Vorsorge  translates to precaution 
and to caring for.
 2. Tractors that contain built-in sensors that stream 
data, for example, about soil and crop conditions, to 
cloud-based data-collection infrastructures.
 3. In the case of forestry, for example, the framework 
could be used to assess the sustainability shortcom -
ings or potentials of digital applications such as 
LiDAR imaging for forest inventories or satellite-  
based data for planning forestry roads, which might 
have complex effects beyond the forestry firm.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
ORCID
Sarah Hackfort  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6678-8759
Anna Saave  http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4922-1501
References
Adam, B. 2013 . “Sustainability through a Temporal Lens: 
Time, Future, Process. ” In Netzwerk Vorsorgendes 
Wirtschaften (Network of Caring Economy),   Edited by 
Wege Vorsorgenden Wirtschaftens (Ways of Caring 
Economy),  115–132. Marburg: Metropolis-Verlag.
Backhouse, M. 2021 . “Global Inequalities and Extractive 
Knowledge Production in the Bioeconomy. ” In 
Bioeconomy and Global Inequalities: Socio-Ecological 
Perspectives on Biomass Sourcing and Production , edited 
by M. Backhouse, R. Lehmann, K. Lorenzen, M. 
Lühmann, J. Puder, F. Rodríguez, and A. Tittor, 25–44. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan
Backhouse, M., R. Lehmann, K. Lorenzen, M. Lühmann, J. 
Puder, F. Rodríguez, and A. Tittor, Eds. 2021 . Bioeconomy 
and Global Inequalities: Socio-Ecological Perspectives on 
Biomass Sourcing and Production . London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-68944-5 .
Barca, S. 2020 . Forces of Reproduction: Notes for a Counter-  
Hegemonic Anthropocene . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Biesecker, A, and S. Hofmeister, Eds. 2006 . Die 
Neuerfindung Des Ökonomischen: Ein (Re)Produktions-
theoretischer Beitrag Zur Sozial-Ökologischen Forschung 
(The Reinvention of the Economic: A (Re)Production-  
Theoretical Contribution to Socio- Ecological Research) . 
München: Oekom-Verlag.
Biesecker, A., and S. Hofmeister. 2010 . “Focus: (Re)
Productivity. Sustainable Relations Both between Society 
and Nature and between the Genders. ” Ecological 
Economics  69 (8): 1703–1711. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.  
2010.03.025 .
Biesecker, A., and S. Hofmeister. 2013 . “(Re)Produktivität 
Als Kategorie Vorsorgenden Wirtschaftens ((Re)
Productivity as a Category of Caring Economy). ” In 
Netzwerk Vorsorgendes Wirtschaften (Network of Caring 
Economy),  Edited by Wege Vorsorgenden Wirtschaftens   
(Ways of Caring Economy),   137–158. Marburg: 
Metropolis-Verlag.
12 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF), 
and Bundesministerium für Ernährung und 
Landwirtschaft (BMEL). 2020 . Nationale Bioökonomi -
estrategie: Bundesministerium Für Bildung Und Forschung 
(BMBF) Und Bundesministerium Für Ernährung Und 
Landwirtschaft (National Bioeconomy Strategy: Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research and Federal Ministry 
of Food and Agriculture).  Berlin: BMBF and BMEL.
Boyer, M., F. Kusche, S. Hackfort, L. Prause, and F. 
Engelbrecht-Bock. 2022 . “The Making of Sustainability: 
Ideological Strategies, the Materiality of Nature, and 
Biomass Use in the Bioeconomy. ” Sustainability Science  
18 (2): 675–688. doi: 10.1007/s11625-022-01254-4 .
Bronson, K, Ed. 2022 . The Immaculate Conception of Data: 
Agribusiness, Activists, and Their Shared Politics of the 
Future . Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Brüll, A. 2020 . “Die Zwei Naturen Der Biomasse–Eine 
Komplementäre Perspektive Für (Re) Generative 
Landschaften (The Two Natures of Biomass – A 
Complementary Perspective for (Re)Generative 
Landscapes). ” In Nachhaltigkeit (Re)Produktiv Denken: 
Pfade Kritischer Sozial-Ökologischer Wissenschaft  
(Thinking Sustainability (Re)Productively: Paths of 
Critical Socio-Ecological Science) , edited by T. Mölders, 
A. Thiem, C. Katz, 92–102. Leverkusen: Verlag Babara 
Budrich.
Campbell, N. 2009 . “Reconstructing Science and 
Technology Studies: Views from Feminist Standpoint 
Th e o r y.”  Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies  30 (1): 
1–29. https://www.jstor.org/stable/40388704 . doi: 10.1353/
fro.0.0033 .
Clapp, J., and S. Ruder. 2020 . “Precision Technologies for 
Agriculture: Digital Farming, Gene-Edited Crops, and 
the Politics of Sustainability. ” Global Environmental 
Politics  20 (3): 49–69. doi: 10.1162/glep_a_00566 .
Clapp, J. 2021 . “Explaining Growing Glyphosate Use: The 
Political Economy of Herbicide-Dependent Agriculture. ” 
Global Environmental Change  67: 102239. doi: 10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2021.102239 .
Comi, M. 2020 . “The Distributed Farmer: Rethinking US 
Midwestern Precision Agriculture Techniques. ” 
Environmental Sociology  6 (4): 403–415. doi: 10.1080/232
51042.2020.1794426 .
European Commission 2018 . A Sustainable Bioeconomy for 
Europe: Strengthening the Connection between Economy, 
Society and the Environment . Brussels: Publications 
Office. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?
uri=CELEX%3A52018DC0673 .
Eversberg, D., P . Koch, R. Lehmann, A. Saltelli, S. 
Ramcilovic-Suominen, and Z. Kovacic. 2023 . “The More 
Things Change, the More They Stay the Same: Promises 
of Bioeconomy and the Economy of Promises. ” 
Sustainability Science  18 (2): 557–568. doi: 10.1007/
s11625-023-01321-4 .
Fraser, A. 2021 . “‘Y ou Can’t Eat Data’? Moving Beyond the 
Misconfigured Innovations of Smart Farming. ” Journal 
of Rural Studies  91: 200–207. doi: 10.1016/j.jrur -
stud.2021.06.010 .
Friedrich, B., S. Hackfort, M. Boyer, and D. Gottschlich. 
2019 . “Conflicts over GMOs and Their Contribution to 
Food Democracy. ” Politics and Governance  7 (4): 165–
177. doi: 10.17645/pag.v7i4.2082 .
Gottschlich, D., S. Roth, U. Röhr, S. Hackfort, D. Segebart, 
C. König, and A. Härtel. 2014 . “Nachhaltiges 
Wirtschaften im Spannungsfeld von Gender, Care und Green Economy Debatten – Schnittstellen – blinde 
Flecken (Sustainable Business in Tension between 
Gender and Care and Green Economy Debates – 
Interfaces – Blind Spots. ” CaGE Texts, No. 1. Berlin: 
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung. https://
www.genanet.de/fileadmin/user_upload/dokumente/
Care_Gender_Green_Economy/CaGE-Texte_1-2014.pdf
Gottschlich, D., and L. Bellina. 2017 . “Environmental 
Justice and Care: Critical Emancipatory Contributions 
to Sustainability Discourse. ” Agriculture and Human 
Values  34 (4): 941–953. doi: 10.1007/s10460-016-9761-9 .
Gottschlich, D., and C. Katz. 2020 . “Caring with Nature/s: 
Zur Transformativen Bedeutung Von Care in More than 
Human Worlds (Caring with Nature/s: On the 
Transformative Meaning of Care in More than Human 
Worlds). ” Gender < ed > Thoughts. ” Working Paper Series 
1: 1–29. doi: 10.3249/2509-8179-GTG-11 .
Grzanka, P ., J. Brian, and R. Bhatia. 2023 . “Intersectionality 
and Science and Technology Studies. ” Science, 
Technology, & Human Values.  doi: 10.1177/016224  
39231201707 .
Groves, C. 2015 . “Logic of Choice or Logic of Care? 
Uncertainty, Technological Mediation and Responsible 
Innovation. ” NanoEthics  9 (3): 321–333. doi: 10.1007/
s11569-015-0238-x .
Hackfort, S. 2021 . “Patterns of Inequalities in Digital 
Agriculture: A Systematic Literature Review. ” 
Sustainability  13 (22): 12345. doi: 10.3390/su132212345 .
Hackfort, S. 2023 . “Unlocking Sustainability? The Power of 
Corporate Lock-Ins and How They Shape Digital 
Agriculture in Germany. ” Journal of Rural Studies  101: 
103065. doi: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2023.103065 .
Hackfort, S., S. Marquis, and K. Bronson. 2024 . “Harvesting 
Value: Corporate Strategies of Data Assetization in 
Agriculture and Their Socio-Ecological Implications. ” 
Big Data & Society  11 (1): 1–15. doi: 10.1177/205395172  
41234279 .
Hackfort, S. 2024 . “Democratization through Precision 
Technologies? Unveiling Power, Participation, and 
Property Rights in the Agricultural Bioeconomy. ” 
Frontiers in Political Science  6: 1363044. doi: 10.3389/
fpos.2024.1363044 .
Haraway, D. 1988 . “Situated Knowledges: The Science 
Question in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial 
Perspective. ” Feminist Studies  14 (3): 575–599. doi:  
10.2307/3178066 .
Harcourt, W ., and I. Nelson, Eds. 2015 . Practising Feminist 
Political Ecologies: Moving Beyond the “Green Economy. ”  
London: Zed Books. 
Hawkins, R., and I. Nelson. 2022. “Where Are Rooted 
Networks in Digital Political Ecologies?” Frontiers in Human 
Dynamics  4 (4): 89387. doi: 10.3389/fhumd.2022.989387 .
Heimstädt, C. 2023 . “Making Plant Pathology 
Algorithmically Recognizable. ” Agriculture and Human 
Values  40 (3): 865–878. doi: 10.1007/s10460-023-10419-5 .
Kehl, C., R. Meyer, and S. Steiger. 2021 . Digitalisierung der 
Landwirtschaft: gesellschaftliche Voraussetzungen, 
Rahmenbedingungen und Effekte. Teil II des Endberichts 
zum TA-Projekt  (Digitalization of Agriculture: Societal 
Prerequisites, Framework Conditions and Effects. Part II 
of the Final Report on the TA Project.) . Berlin: Büro für 
Technikfolgen – Abschätzung beim Deutschen 
Bundestag. doi: 10.5445/IR/1000142951 .
Kliem, L., J. Wagner, C. Olk, L. Keßler, S. Lange, T. 
Krachunova, and S. Bellingrath-Kimura. 2022 . 
SuSTAINAbILIT y: SCIENCE , PRACTICE  AND  POLIC y 13
“Digitalisierung Der Landwirtschaft – Chancen Und 
Risiken Für Den Natur- Und Umweltschutz. ” In 
Schriftenreihe Des IÖW (Digitalization of Agriculture – 
Opportunities and Risks for Nature Conservation and 
Environmental Protection) . Berlin: IÖW . https://www.
ioew.de/fileadmin/user_upload/BILDER_und_
Downloaddateien/Publikationen/Schriftenreihen/IOEW_
SR_222__Digialisierung_der_Landwirtschaft.pdf .
Lajoie-O’Malley, A., K. Bronson, S. van der Burg, and L. 
Klerkx. 2020 . “The Future (s) of Digital Agriculture and 
Sustainable Food Systems: An Analysis of High-Level 
Policy Documents. ” Ecosystem Services  45: 101183. 
doi:10.1016/j.ecoser.2020.101183 .
Lühmann, M., and T. Vogelpohl. 2023 . “The Bioeconomy in 
Germany: A Failing Political Project?” Ecological Economics  
207: 107783. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107783 .
Martin, A., N. Myers, and A. Viseu. 2015 . “The Politics of 
Care in Technoscience. ” Social Studies of Science  45 (5): 
625–641. doi: 10.1177/0306312715602073 .
Mies, M., V . Bennholdt-Thomsen, and C. von Werlhof. 
1988 . Women: The Last Colony . New Delhi: Kali for 
Women.
Miles, C. 2019 . “The Combine Will Tell the Truth: On 
Precision Agriculture and Algorithmic Rationality. ” Big 
Data & Society  6 (1): 205395171984944. doi: 10.1177/  
2053951719849444 .
Montenegro de Wit, M. 2021 . “Can Agroecology and 
CRISPR Mix? The Politics of Complementarity and 
Moving toward Technology Sovereignty. ” Agriculture 
and Human Values  39 (2): 733–755. doi: 10.1007/
s10460-021-10284-0 .
Montenegro de Wit, M., and M. Canfield. 2023 . “Feeding 
the World, Byte by Byte’: Emergent Imaginaries of Data 
Productivism. ” The Journal of Peasant Studies  51 (2): 
381–420. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2023.2232997 .
Mölders, T. 2019 . “Rethinking Gender: Feminist 
Perspectives on Sustainable Development Goals in the 
Light of (Re)Productivity. ” GAIA  28 (2): 95–99. 
doi:10.14512/gaia.28.2.6 .
Nelson, I., H. Faxon, and M.-H. Ehlers. 2024 . “Feminist 
Political Ecologies of Agrarian Technologies: Knowing 
the Digital Differently. ” The Journal of Peasant Studies:  
1–28. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2024.2308637 .
Oksala, J. 2018 . “Feminism, Capitalism, and Ecology. ” 
Hypatia  33 (2): 216–234. doi: 10.1111/hypa.12395 .
Perkins, P . 2007 . “Feminist Ecological Economics and 
Sustainability. ” Journal of Bioeconomics  9 (3): 227–244. 
doi:10.1007/s10818-007-9028-z .
Plumwood, V . 1991 . “Nature, Self, and Gender: Feminism, 
Environmental Philosophy, and the Critique of 
Rationalism. ” Hypatia  6 (1): 3–27. doi: 10.1111/  
j.1527-2001.1991.tb00206.x .
Preston, C., and F. Wickson. 2016 . “Broadening the Lens 
for the Governance of Emerging Technologies: Care 
Ethics and Agricultural Biotechnology. ” Technology in 
Society  45: 48–57. doi: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2016.03.001 .
Puder, J., and A. Tittor. 2023 . “Bioeconomy as a Promise 
of Development? The Cases of Argentina and Malaysia. ” 
Sustainability Science  18 (2): 617–631. doi: 10.1007/
s11625-022-01284-y .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2011 . “Matters of Care in 
Technoscience: Assembling Neglected Things. ” Social 
Studies of Science  41 (1): 85–106. doi: 10.1177/03063127  
10380301 .Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015 . “Making Time for Soil: 
Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care. ” Social 
Studies of Science  45 (5): 691–716. doi: 10.1177/03063127  
15599851 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2017 . Matters of Care: Speculative 
Ethics in More than Human Worlds . Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Ramcilovic-Suominen, S. 2023 . “Envisioning Just Transfor -
mations In and Beyond the EU Bioeconomy: Inspirations 
from Decolonial Environmental Justice and Degrowth. ” 
Sustainability Science  18 (2): 707–722. doi: 10.1007/  
s11625-022-01091-5 .
Röhr, U., and I. Weller. 2021 . “Zum Umgehen Von Und 
Umgang Mit Ungleichheiten in Der Klimapolitik Und 
Der Forschung Für Eine Klimafreundlichere Gestaltung 
Des Alltags (On Dealing with Inequalities in Climate 
Policy and Research to Make Everyday Life More 
Climate-Friendly). ” ZDfm – Zeitschrift Für 
Diversitätsforschung Und -Management  6 (1): 23–38. 
doi:10.3224/zdfm.v6i1.03 .
Saave, A. 2022 . Einverleiben Und Externalisieren: Zur 
Innen-Außen-Beziehung Der Kapitalistischen 
Produktionsweise (Incorporating and Externalizing: On 
the Inside-Outside Relationship of the Capitalist Mode of 
Production).  Bielefeld: transcript-Verlag.
Saave, A. 2023 . “Ecofeminism Now. ” In Transform! 
Yearbook 2022: Left Strategies for the Covid Pandemic 
and Its Aftermath Left , 335–350. Dublin: Merlin Press.
Saave, A., C. Brinckmann, and S. Hackfort. 2024.  
“Feminist Perspectives on the Bioeconomy. ”  Economists 
for Future . https://www.econ4future.org/post/feminist-  
perspectives-on-the-bioeconomy .
Sampson, D. 2018 . “Productivism, Agroecology, and the 
Challenge of Feeding the World. ” Gastronomica  18 (4): 
41–53. doi: 10.1525/gfc.2018.18.4.41 .
Salleh, A. 1997 . Ecofeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx and 
the Postmodern . London: Zed Books.
Shiva, V . 1991 . The Violence of the Green Revolution: Third 
World Agriculture, Ecology, and Politics . London: Zed 
Books.
Stilgoe, J., R. Owen, and P . Macnaghten. 2013 . “Developing 
a Framework for Responsible Innovation. ” Research 
Policy  42 (9): 1568–1580. doi: 10.1016/j.respol.2013.05.008 .
Theoriegruppe Vorsorgendes Wirtschaften (TVW) (Theory 
Group on Caring Economy) 2000 . “Zur Theoretisch-  
Wissenschaftlichen Fundierung Vorsorgenden 
Wirtschaftens (On the Theoretical-Scientific Foundation 
of Caring Economy). ” In Vorsorgendes Wirtschaften: Auf 
Dem Weg Zu Einer Ökonomie Des Guten Lebens (A 
Caring Economy: Towards an Economy of Good Living) , 
edited by A. Biesecker, M. Mathes, S. Schön, and B. 
Scurrell, 27–70. Bielefeld: Kleine-Verlag.
Tittor, A. 2021 . “The Key Role of the Agribusiness and 
Biotechnology Sectors in Constructing the Economic 
Imaginary of the Bioeconomy in Argentina. ” Journal of 
Environmental Policy & Planning  23 (2): 213–226. doi: 1
0.1080/1523908X.2021.1893162 .
Tronto, J. 2013 . Caring Democracy: Markets, Equality, and 
Justice . New Y ork: New Y ork University Press.
Wajcman, J. 2010 . “Feminist Theories of Technology. ” 
Cambridge Journal of Economics  34 (1): 143–152. 
doi:10.1093/cje/ben057 .
Whittingham, J., and R. Wynberg. 2021 . “Is the Feminist 
Ethics of Care Framework a Useful Lens for GM Crop 
14 S. HACKFORT AND A. SAAVE
Risk Appraisal in the Global South?” Technology in 
Society  64: 101455. doi: 10.1016/j.techsoc.2020.101455 .
Wichterich, C. 2015 . “Contesting Green Growth, 
Connecting Care, Commons and Enough. ” In Practising 
Feminist Political Ecologies: Moving Beyond the “Green 
Economy , edited by W . Harcourt and I. Nelson, 67–101. 
London: Zed Books.Wickson, F., Preston, C., Binimelis, R., Herrero, A., Hartley, S., 
Wynberg, R., and Wynne, B. 2017. “ Addressing 
Socio-Economic and Ethical Considerations in Biotechnology 
Governance: The Potential of a New Politics of Care. ” Food 
Ethics  1 (2): 193–199. doi: 10.1007/s41055-017-0014-4
Winner, L. 1980 . “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus  
109: 121–136. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20024652 .
