Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils
Introduction
ANNA KRZYWOSZYNSKA
Department of Geography, University of Shef ﬁeld, UK
GRETA MARCHESI
Department of Geography, Dartmouth College, USA
Abstract As environmental matters, soils have been an object of inquiry primarily for the
natural sciences, with social scientists and e nvironmental humaniti es scholars occupied
with the surface dramas of territory and its products. The invisibility of soils in much of pub-
lic and intellectual life speaks not only to the literal invisibility of their subterranean ele-ments but also to their taken-for-granted effectiveness as the material infrastructure of
societies. Today ’s crisis of soil ecosystems calls for an urgent examination and improvement
of human-soil relations. This is both an intellectual and a practical project. The authors be-lieve that a crucial ﬁrst step toward more just and sustainable human-soil relations is a criti-
cal re ﬂection around soil knowledge practices and their onto-political effects. In this introduc-
tion, they open the ﬁeld for such re ﬂection by denaturalizing the category soil, discussing its
complex materialities, its multiple scales, and the diversity of existing soil ontologies and
epistemologies. In so doing they argue for a relational materiality approach to the study of
soils. The authors place this relational materiality approach within a practical, political, andethical project of re-embedding societies in soils and lands. Finally, they indicate emerging
arenas of inquiry where a relational materiality approach to soils is needed.
Keywords soil, relational materiality, ontological politics, Anthropocene, environmental ethics
Iw o u l dn o td a r e ,
now, to say I knew anything of land. It has no master;only people who strive to learn and understandthe minutes of it, and the hours. The earth moves fasterthan we can comprehend, so seek a segment, ﬁnd a strand
of it that you can love.
—Adam Horovitz, “I Believed I Understood the Land, ”from the collection The Soil Never
Sleeps
Environmental Humanities 12:1 (May 2020)
DOI 10.1215/22011919-8142297 © 2020 Anna Krzywoszynska and Greta Marchesi
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

Soil, the Forgotten Element
Soils are the most important thing that we rarely think about. Within the social sci-
ences and humanities, soils (as opposed to land) have attracted little attention in
comparison with burgeoning literatures on for example water, forests, or biodiversity.1
In contrast with these, until very recently soils were predominantly approached asenvironmental matters, an object of inquiry primarily for the natural sciences, with so-
cial scientists and humanities scholars occupied with the surface dramas related to ter-
ritory, water, minerals, and crops.
2The relative invisibility of soils both in academic and
public life speaks not only to the literal invisibility of their subterranean elements, butalso to their taken-for-granted effectiveness as the material infrastructure of social life.
3
In a time of anthropogenic ecological destruction and linked societal crises, we ur-
gently need greater attention to soil and land from all quarters. Soils are indispensable
to terrestrial socioecologies as they participate in and drive nearly all biological and
chemical processes that make the Earth ’s non-aquatic surface habitable.4The degrada-
tion of soil ecosystems everywhere through pollution with chemicals and plastics, sali-
nation, sealing, creeping erosion, and loss of organic matter illustrates a very real break-
down of the crucial relation between humans and soils.5We agree with Shiva that there
is no alternative for human ﬂourishing then to reconstruct this relation in a socioeco-
logically sustainable way.6Bringing more attention to human-soil interactions, and
building sustainable soil futures, are, we believe, important intellectual and practical
tasks for social sciences and environmental humanities alike.
We are therefore delighted to present this special section ’s collection of articles,
which illustrate and critically engage diverse forms of human-soil relations. We believe
that the crucial ﬁrst step toward a more just and indeed sustainable human-soil rela-
tions is a critical re ﬂection around soil knowledge practices and their onto-political ef-
fects. In this introductory essay, we thus seek to denaturalizee the category soil bybrieﬂy discussing its complex materialities, its multiple scales, and the diversity of soil
1. Notable exceptions include the authors whose work we review in this essay. Other exceptions include
work in political ecology on soil erosion (e.g., Blaikie, The Political Economy of Soil Erosion in Developing Coun-
tries) and environmental history (e.g., McNeill and Winiwarter, Soils and Societies , and McNeill and Winiwarter,
“Breaking the Sod ”), especially work on the dust bowl (e.g., Worster, Dust Bowl ). See also the recent collection
by Salazar et. al. Thinking with Soils , which resonates strongly with this special section.
2. For a review of surface approaches to the question of soils, see Krzywoszynska, “Caring for Soil Life in
the Anthropocene. ”
3. Puig de la Bellacasa discusses soil as infrastructure in “Encountering Bioinfrastructure. ”
4. Wall notes there is now a wide appreciation in natural sciences that soils are a foundation of human and
ecological survival in Soil Ecology and Ecosystem Services . Lin similarly argues that soils create a life-sustaining
environment thanks to their functioning as a “geomembrane across which water and solutes, as well as energy,
solids, and organisms, are actively exchanged among the atmosphere, the biosphere, the hydrosphere, and the
lithosphere ”in“A New Worldview of Soils, ”1832 –33. See also Hillel, Out of the Earth .
5. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “Status of the World ’s Soil Resources. ”
6. Shiva, Soil not Oil.Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 191Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

ontologies and epistemologies.7In so doing, we argue for a relational materiality ap-
proach to the study of soils. We place this relational materiality approach within a prac-
tical, political, and ethical project of re-embedding societies in soils and lands. Finally,
we indicate some emerging arenas of inquiry where a relational materiality approach
to soils is needed. We then present an oveview of the essays in this special section and
offer some concluding remarks.
The Diversity of Soil Epistemo logies and Soil Ontologies
Soil, or the “ecstatic skin of the earth, ”as the arborist Logan calls it, is made through
interactions between geological, biological, and social processes.8The materials and
organisms in soil are so tightly coconstituted that there are no obvious ways of distin-
guishing where one entity ends and another begins. Bring to mind the tip of a tree root,with its complex associations of fungal hyphae, bacterial colonies, roots of other plants,
with its immersion and participation in hydrological, atmospheric, and mineral media.
Where does a tree root end and a soil begin? The answer is far from given, and where
the cuts are made has onto-political effects (Barad 2007). Soils ’textural, chemical, and
biological diversity is astounding; for example, it is estimated that only 1 percent of soil
microorganism species have been identi ﬁed.
9Soils ’complex materialities matter at a
number of scales, from the micro processes at the scale of individual soil aggregates tothe hydrological processes within watersheds to global scale interactions between
soils, atmospheres, and oceans. How humanity interacts with soils thus has similarly
multiple scalar implications.
10
Soils ’great material and scalar complexity further interacts with a diversity of soil
knowledge and practice systems. The ways communities conceive soil natures is notdetermined but differs between contexts, emerging in dialogue with deeply held social
and cultural concerns. Studies in ethnopedology have amply illustrated the great vari-
ety of soil knowledge and classi ﬁcation systems and the numerous ways in which soils
are brought into social relations.
11For example, the indigenous Purepecha communities
of central Mexico treat soil as a dynamic subject that moves and behaves. Their rela-
tions with land are not based on a management of an inert asset but unfold as a dy-
namic relationship in which the needs of the land are contextually responded to.12For
Colombian smallholders in the Amazon, growing crops implies cultivating a place-
speci ﬁc sensibility to the taste, smell, and touch of the earth.13
7. Throughout the article, where stylistically appropriate, we refer to soils as a plural noun. This re ﬂects our
commitment to stressing the diversity of soil materialities; this convention is something we further share with
many soil scientists.
8. Logan, Dirt.
9. Orgiazzi, Bardgett and Barrios, Global Soil Biodiversity Atlas .
10. Schulte et al., “Making the Most of our Land. ”
11. See, e.g., Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, “Ethnopedology. ”
12. Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, “Land Moves and Behaves. ”
13. Lyons, “Soil Science. ”192 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

The diverse ways in which knowledge, meaning, and ethics regarding soils inter-
weave in modern industrial farming in the so-called West has been less explored.14
However, even in this context Wahlhütter and colleagues found that for Austrian farm-ers, soil qualities are a manifestation of their own moral rectitude and cultural capital.
In her work on sustainable soil management in England, Krzywoszynska found that not
tilling the soil demands new forms of “good farmer ”identity. Similarly, in Switzerland
Schneider and colleagues found that soil aesthetics play a key role in farmers ’percep-
tions and communication of good soil management practice.
15As industrial manage-
ment techniques are reconsidered, new ways of knowing develop alongside new forms
of practice in the ﬁeld.
This diversity of soil epistemologies and ontologies is not reserved to grower com-
munities. For soil scientists, the de ﬁnition of what a soil is has changed historically and
continues to be debated.16Hartemink ’s fascinating review of the changing de ﬁnitions of
soil since the nineteenth century highlights the context-dependence of soil epistemolo-
gies and ontologies, with new conceptions of and investigative practices emerging in
relation to particular technological and political developments in soil sciences. For
example, the rise of centralized land governance generated a new need for soil mapping
and classi ﬁcation.17Hartemink indicates that today, multiple, discipline-speci ﬁcd eﬁni-
tions of soil coexist.18Various scienti ﬁcd eﬁnitions of soil can therefore be seen as cul-
turally, contextually, and historically speci ﬁc ways of making sense of soil matters,
although such a perspective continues to be resisted by many soil scientists.19The appli-
cability of the powerful certi ﬁed soil knowledge systems, developed largely in Euro-
Asia, to non-Western geographical contexts is starting to be contested as they clash
with locally desirable socioecologies.20As Lyons reports, a critical Colombian farmer
ironically referred to industrialized land management strategies as an agriculture of
death, while India ’s leader of Zero Budget Natural Farming Palekar urges his followers
to renounce Western agronomic science as based on the lies of the father of chemical
agronomy “Liebig —Lie-Big. ”21In Indonesia, the divergent expertise of nonmainstream
knowledge producers is being used to legitimize the ongoing destruction of peatlands
for palm oil production, contrary to the advice from the scienti ﬁc mainstream.22
14. Hall, “The West and the Rest. ”
15. Wahlhütter, Vogl, and Eberhart, “Soil As a Key Criteria ”; Krzywoszynska, “Making Knowledge and
Meaning ”; Schneider et al., “Soil Conservation in Swiss Agriculture. ”
16. For insights into the complex history and contested present of soil science, see the collection by War-
kentin et al., Footprints in the Soil .
17. For an interesting discussion of the relaitons between soil mapping and land governance in the con-
text of racist land politics, see Van Sant, “The Long-Time Requirements of the Nation. ”
18. Hartemink, “The De ﬁnition of Soil since the Early 1800s. ”
19. Krzywoszynska has had personal experience of such resistance during debates she had at the 21st
World Congress of Soil Science in Rio, August 2018; see also Engel-Di Mauro, Ecology, Soils and the Left.
20. E.g., Richelle et. al, “Looking for a Dialogue ”; Lyons, “Soil Science. ”
21. Lyons, “Soil Science ”; Münster, “Gut and Soil. ”
22. Goldstein, “Knowing the Subterrean. ”Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 193Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

Toward a Relational Materiality of Soils
These contested knowledge politics of soils indicate an urgent need for more nuanced
and contextual understandings of human-soil relations, both within natural sciences
and in social sciences and environmental humanities. In this collection, we call for a
relational materiality approach to the study of soils across disciplines. We call for
forms of soil investigation and action that acknowledge symmetrically the emergent
biophysical agency of soil ecosystems, their sociocultural constitution, and the dynamicinteractions between those factors. Intellectual and practical engagements with soils
need to go beyond the surface perspective, which has manifested in soils being ap-
proached primarily as land and landscape in social sciences and humanities.
23We are
calling here for an understanding of soils as dynamic ecologies in the becoming of
which human beings are implicated, with whom they are shaped, and on which theydepend. Such a relational approach to soils requires attending to relations rather than
predetermined essences in conceptualizing the constitutions of soils as sociobiophysi-
cal objects, and relations between soils and humans.
At the heart of this research agenda are soils ’ontological politics —the question
of what soil realities get enacted, and which get silenced or never come into being.
24
As critical scholars pursuing socioecological justice, our task is to remain attentive toand critically engaged with such emerging soil ontologies, the knowledge politics thatunderpin them, and their world-making consequences.
This call to soil relationality resonates with the broad relationality project within
social sciences and environmental humanities, a shared commitment to challenging
and undoing the analytical separation between nature and humanity.
25We argue that
taking relationality seriously has a particular importance in the case of soils, as buildingsustainable soil relationalities may open a route toward a practical and life-restoring
onto-politics across scales. Negating the relationality of soils continues to enable wide-
spread destruction of socioecosystems, pushing vital soil ecologies and the populations
of humans and non-humans who depend on and develop with them beyond recovery.
This surface perspective on soils can be read as a version of the myth of globe-spanning
23. Engel Di-Mauro in “Learning Dialectics to Grow Better Soils Knowledge ”argues that there is a lack of a
relational perspective on soils in natural sciences, both through a lack of re ﬂexivity about conditions of knowl-
edge production, and through a down-playing of relational processes of soil formation and destruction in favourof static categories. His proposed relational approach to soils is informed by materialist dialectics, and seeks to
unite socio- and biophysical relationalities. For a further critique of static and surface ontologies of soils from a
political ecology angle, see Münster and Poerting, “Land as Resource, Soil, and Landscape, ”and from a practi-
tioner angle, see Krzywoszynska et. al. “To Know, to Dwell, to Care. ”
24. Mol, “Ontological Politics. ”
25. Our thiking has been particularly in ﬂuenced by the work of Barad on intra-action in Meeting the Uni-
verse Halfway , Haraway ’s worlding in Where Species Meet , Moore ’s double internality in Capitalism in the Web
of Life , Latour ’s actor-networks in Reassembling the Social , and Swyngedouw ’s socionatures in “Modernity and
Hybridity. ”194 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

universality Latour discusses in Down to Earth . He argues that as the climatic changes of
the Anthropo(Capitalo)scene shatter universalist illusions, populations ﬁnd themselves
faced with the task of returning to soil in order to survive and to thrive. However, he ar-
gues, it is wrong to talk of a return as the soil/land which could support us acquires new
characteristics, pulling us into an inextricable relationality with it. This soil-as-attractor
“inherits materiality, heterogeneity, thickness, dust, humus, the succession of layers,
strata, the attentive care that it requires. . . . The ground, the soil, in this sense, cannot
be appropriated. One belongs to it; it belongs to no one. ”26
This need to create new forms of dwelling —of place-speci ﬁc knowledgeable action
that would bring together the above- and belowground and human and ecological
dynamics —suggests to us a shift from the governance of land to the governance of soil,
not as the top-down management of a passive surface for human intentionality to playout on but as a dynamic process of re-inhabiting diverse socioecologies.
27We agree with
Latour ’s contention that humanity needs to land, and that for this landing to be suc-
cessful, social and ecological relations need to come together in particular places. This
coupling requires a valorization of local knowledge systems, land justice, and commu-
nal participation in socioecologically sustainable land use or, rather, dwelling. We be-
lieve a rebuilding of socioecological relations from the ground up is crucial within and
beyond the humanities and social sciences. We hope this project will be an opportunityto foster a critical interdisciplinarity of soils, connecting excellent research on land jus-
tice and land governance with qualitative methodologies and important natural science
inquiries into dynamic soil properties.
28We invite a broad opening of the matter of soils,
investigating the processes through which soils become or fail to become objects of spe-
ciﬁc epistemological, ontological, and ethical concern. Moreover, we advocate interven-
ing in these processes through both critique and active involvement, as both an urgent
and a hopeful task.
At the same time, this work brings the study of soils to emergent explorations of
the unstable boundary between the over- and underground. Stuart Elden, for example,
has called for critical considerations of height and depth as well as area in analyses of
borders and security.29These questions have been developed by scholars like Stephen
Graham in relation to the built environment; Philip Steinberg and Kimberley Peters inthe realm of oceanic geographies; and political ecologist Jenny Goldstein in her studies
26. Latour, Down to Earth , 92.
27. On dwelling as knowledgeable action see Ingold, The Perception of the Environment . For an elabora-
tion of the concept of dwelling in relation to soil knowledge see Krzywoszynska, Banwart, and Blacker, “To
Know, to Dwell, to Care. ”
28. A good example is the work by Stocking and Murnaghan on conceptualizing, measuring, and acting
on land degradation by starting from the perspective of subsistence farmers in A Handbook for the Field Assess-
ment of Land Degradation.
29. Elden, “Secure the Volume. ”Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 195Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

of satellites in peat forest con ﬂicts.30Robert MacFarlane ’sUnderland illuminates emergent
confrontations with the subterranean, exploring the literal upending of human under-
standings of our planet in a moment of deep ecological change. Analyses of the social
life of soils are essential to such complex understandings of territory in its broadest
aspects.
In the following section, we point to some important areas of soil-human relations
that invite relational materiality approaches. Overall, we suggest that scholars of soils ’
relational materiality critically investigate the processes through which unjust and
destructive human-soil relations are created and reproduced. We identify the processes
of capital investment, governance, and quanti ﬁcation as crucial for the emergence of
particular soil relational materialities, calling for further scholarly attention. We further
argue that researchers should document and valorize processes that give rise to soci-oecologically sustainable human-soil dynamics. We also call for a greater experimental
engagement with soil sense-abilities to develop new processes of sensing and making
sense of soils. We see all of these arenas as ripe for and necessitating interdisciplinary
collaboration.
Soil Relational Materiality: Toward a Research Agenda
A crucial area for investigation in human-soil relations today is the role that capitalplays in bringing particular soil relational materialities into being.
31One signi ﬁcant
area is the rising attention to soils as repositories of exploitable and potentially modi ﬁ-
able genetic material. Soils ’incredible biodiversity is increasingly explored through new
metagenomics technologies, ﬂooding researchers with data of potential commercial
value. As one soil scientist told us, “Every time we sequence bulk genome from soil we
discover thousands of new species of bacteria. ”32For some scientists, the potential of
soil microbiome modi ﬁcation/engineering promises to ﬁnally overcome the tension be-
tween productivist and ecological objectives in farming, bringing about a new era of
microbiome-based agro-ecology.33For individual farmers, metagenomics analysis may
offer new ways of engaging with soil ecologies beyond nutrient levels and pathogen
loads.34The political economies and political ecologies of soil microbiopolitics —the
contestations around the appropriate ways of relating to microbial entities in humanprojects —will be a crucial arena for future research.
35More than that, projects that
30. Graham, Vertical ; Steinberg and Peters, “Wet Ontologies, Fluid Spaces ”; Goldstein, “The Volumetric
Political Forest. ”
31. For a relational materiality discussion of soil resource-making see Krzywoszynska, “Nonhuman Labor
and the Making of Resources: Making Soils a Resource through Microbial Labor, ”in this issue.
32. Prof. Jonathan Adams, presentation at “Dirt Science: An Introduction to Soil Systems, ”26 September
2017, Cran ﬁeld University.
33. Granjou and Philips, “Living and Labouring Soils. ”
34. See, e.g., the Big Soil Community initiative in the UK ( info.fera.co.uk/bigsoilcommunity/ ) and forth-
coming publications on this topic by Outhwaite and Krzywoszynska.
35. Paxson, “Post-Pasteurian Cultures. ”196 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

investigate soil microbiome materialities and agencies as emergent from, relational to,
and acting upon such microbiopolitical concerns are needed.36
As the urgency to act on (or be seen to act on) climate change becomes more acute
in the policy and business arenas, processes of governance are giving rise to particular
forms of soil relations. Here, the capacities of certain soils as potential carbon capture
mechanisms are being linked with land management practices (such as farming sys-
tems or environmental management) so as to increase stocks of soil organic carbon.37
Such carbon-driven land-use change is being heavily promoted by global and increas-
ingly national policy makers, supranational bodies such as the World Bank, and in ﬂuen-
tial campaign groups.38Perhaps the most notable campaign is the 4/1000, which is call-
ing for action at all levels to increase soil carbon stocks by 0.4 percent annually in order
to counteract the effects of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions.39This emergent
carbon ontology of soils, in which soils are primarily understood through their capacity
to hold on to atmospheric carbon, resituates local soils as global climatic and ecological
actors. This impacts local land management strategies, which are intimately linked
with livelihoods and well-being in ways that are easily left unaccounted for in globally
scaled assessments of carbon capture, creating problematic tensions between carbon
accounting logics and local systems of soil knowledge and valuation.40The ways in
which the carbon ontology of soils may be developed and used to pursue oppressive or,alternately, just human-land relations is another crucial area for greater investigation.
Beyond soil carbon and metagenomics, new relational materialities of soils are
coming into being in the context of projects that seek to account for and ascribe new value
tosoils in ways that would make them compatible with policy and business frame-
works.
41Crucial to these processes are the performative effects of soil quali ﬁcation
through soil metrics and soil assessment, and their contested knowledge politics. The
relational dynamics between soil properties (measured soil characteristics) and soil
quality (situated judgements about the value of those characteristics) performed in
36. On methods and approaches for studying human-microbiome relations see Evans et al., “Microbial
Multiplicity. ”
37. The negative contribution of soils to climate change from melting permafrost soils releasing methane is
more rarely discussed.
38. See, e.g., World Bank, Carbon Sequestration in Agriculture ; Lefèvre et al., Soil Organic Carbon .
39.www.4p1000.org/ ; the initiative is both extremely in ﬂuential and hotly contested in the scienti ﬁc com-
munity, see, e.g., Minasny et al., “Soil Carbon 4 per Mille, ”and the subsequent debate in the journal Geoderma .
40. These tensions are explored by Brockett in relation to wet soil management in the UK in her PhD the-
sis, “An Interdisciplinary Approach to Mapping Soil Carbon. ”The trade-offs between carbon storage and other
soil functions are explored by O ’Sullivan et al., “Functional Land Management for Managing Soil Functions. ”In-
gram et al. note the resistance to what we are calling the carbon ontology of soils in European farming communi-ties in “Communicating Carbon Soil Science to Farmers. ”
41. See, e.g., Davies, “The Business Case for Soils, ”where she argues for a valuation of soils in supply
chains. In policy, see UK ’s Department of Food and Rural Affair ’sOur Green Future , which promises a soil health
index as a new policy mechanism.Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 197Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

practices of soil assessment always imply desired land uses. However, these ultimately
political decisions are often obscured by the seeming value-neutrality of scienti ﬁc prac-
tices.42As Engel-Di Mauro comments in relation to certain existing scienti ﬁc soil quality
deﬁnitions:
There are many problems with these views on soil quality and they largely stem from
subsuming political questions under external biophysical processes [emphasis added]. There is
no relational understanding (high soil quality for one species can be poor soil quality foranother), no discussion of the social context of soil quality knowledge production, noconsideration for the possibility of contradictions between human species-speci ﬁc
needs (or even those of other species) and overall biomass productivity, no explicationabout what count as legitimate uses of soil (who is to decide on land use and manage-ment, for instance), no regard for con ﬂicting soil uses, and no recognition of boundaries
as socially constructed rather than given.
43
The importance of these processes of soil quanti ﬁcation to the realities of on-the-
ground land use, including planning, practice, dwelling, and habitation, cannot be over-
stated, as they may become oppressive instruments of governmentality and eco-
governmentality.
The dominance of particular scienti ﬁc framings in relation to practices of soil valu-
ation and land use and their frequent implicit (or explicit) support of socioecologically
destructive land use practices under capitalism make the study of non-mainstream/
non-certi ﬁed soil knowledges a particularly important point for critical intervention.44
Due to the dominance of natural science framings of soils, other languages, sensibili-
ties, and practices of relating to soils have become dormant or even disappeared. There
is therefore an opportunity and a need to experiment with a variety of tools for making
soils senseable —available to the senses and to sense-making of humans —in order to
forge new attachments and explore other relationalities. Future research into non-
mainstream soil knowledges should consider both a valorization of existing soil knowl-
edge systems and an experimentation with new forms of building human-soil relation-
alities.45
Although not discussed speci ﬁcally in those terms, the mutual tuning of human
and earthworm bodies described by Bertoni is a good example.46Bertoni argues that fol-
lowing processes rather than simply following entities demands a radical recognition of
modes of relating fundamental to those entities; in the case of earthworms, eating
42. Susanne Friedberg ’s work on the politics of metrics is relevant here. See, for example, Friedberg,
“Footprint Technopolitics. ”
43. Engel-Di Mauro , Ecology, Soils, and the Left , 47; our emphasis.
44. On the relationship between capitalist land use and local agrarian knowledge see Schneider and
McMichael, “Deepening, and Repairing, the Metabolic Rift, ”480.
45. See, e.g., Bawaka Country et al., “Working with and Learning from Country. ”
46. Bertoni, “Soil and Worm. ”198 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

emerges as a key mode of relationality. What other modes of co-being may emerge as
we follow soil entities and soil processes, with the aid of science, technology, and art-
enhanced apparatuses?47How may those processes of creation/discovery be made sig-
niﬁcant for localized practices of building sustainable human-soil relations? These
experiments could, for example, aim to make meaningful connections between valued
surface manifestations of soil ’s capacities —plant and animal growth, landscape beauty,
habitation —with the invisible dynamics of soils, both through artistic interventions and
by embedding attentiveness to soils into everyday practices of land use. We see a role
for scienti ﬁc inquiry in developing knowledge tools and practices that would empower
and enable various soil workers, soil users, soil citizens —what we could call soil publics —
to explore their soil relationalities. Such sense-abilities should make the best of scienti ﬁc
forms of soil investigation while opening up techno-scienti ﬁc tools and practices to
such publics. There is a huge role here for re ﬂexive forms of scienti ﬁc soil inquiry, and
for a close collaboration between soil sciences and soil publics in order to enhance
the sense-ability of soil-relating humans to soils; to open up and multiply conversations
about what desirable soil relational materialities may look like; and to prevent the inad-
vertent obfuscation of ultimately socioecologically destructive ontologies.
This Collection
In this collection of articles we aim to take the ﬁrst steps toward a productive and radi-
cal opening up of soil materialities. As noted, we see engaging critically with soil knowl-
edge practices and politics as the crucial ﬁrst step toward the opening up of soils ’
natures. As a result, the essays collected here engage primarily with the rise and con-
testations of the modern and Western soil ontologies whose practical and conceptualdominance continues to challenge efforts at developing more diverse and socioecologi-
cally just human-soil relations. The essays in particular focus on the power of institu-
tionalized knowledge and of capital in their shaping and upholding of particular rela-
tional materialities of soils. These powers and their contestations matter in complex
ways to the emergence, shaping, and silencing of soils ’qualities and capacities.
A person whose work has came to symbolize a radical shift in human-soil rela-
tions is Justus Von Liebig, a nineteenth-century German chemist and the so-called fa-ther of modern agricultural science. His work on plant growth was revolutionary in
that it drastically simpli ﬁed the question of how to enhance yields to the interactions
between plants and chemicals. Removing a preoccupation with soils as complex and
heterogenous living systems, Liebig ’s ideas gave rise to a powerful and persisting ontol-
ogy of soil as an inert repository of plant nutrients. This, Greta Marchesi argues in heressay, laid the foundation of a geographically universalizing agronomic science, which
47. Such potential for forging animated as opposed to passive imaginaries of soils through scienti ﬁca n d
artistic visualisation is explored by Puig de la Bellacasa in “Re-animating Soils. ”Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 199Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

could in turn support the geographical expansion and intensi ﬁcation of capitalism in
the same period. Leibig ’s contribution to the creation of the chemical ontology of soils,
she shows, was therefore crucial to the emergence of the new capitalist ecological re-
gime. What enabled Leibig ’s vision to became so ﬁrmly embedded in today ’s soil espite-
mologies and ontologies, she further illustrates, was his commitment to the profession-
alization and institutionalization of soil knowledge. This double coupling of the
chemical ontology of soils with the operations of capital, and with the professionaliza-tion of agrarian soil knowledge, continues to uphold the metabolic and epistemic rift
between soils and soil publics.
48
Anna Krzywoszynska ’s essay further explores the continued cocreation of agrar-
ian capitalism and soil ontologies through a focus on the changing character of soil
labor. Inspired by new scienti ﬁc perspectives on soils that increasingly stress their living
component, especially soil microbes, farming communities are similarly attending to
soil biota. This attentiveness is producing a practical and conceptual shift in the way
that human-soil relations are imagined and performed in modern, conventional farm-
ing, as the capacities of soil biota become valorized and responded to in a number of
ways. However, Krzywoszynska argues, these emerging human-living soil relations also
reproduce the established logic of improvement, that is a material transformation of
soils in line with the demands of agrarian capitalism. While the nature of soil labormay be changing from the human labor of farmers and tractors and chemicals to the
nonhuman labor of soil biota, the objectives of this labor, and so the ontological
assumptions around what (and whom) soils are for, remain largely unchallenged. The
capacities of soil biota as geo-forming actors, Krzywoszynska further suggests, may fur-
ther result in soil biota becoming agents of a wider improvement of nature beyond thespaces of food production.
Whereas Anna Krzywoszynska ’s essay explores the emergence of new relational
materalities of agrarian soils, Germain Meulemans looks at the changing materiality of
soils in the urban context. Engaging with the history of modern urbanism, he argues
that a conceptual and practical disappearance of soils —their backgrounding —was cen-
tral to the emergence of a modern city. The sealing and waterproo ﬁng of soils with
man-made materials such as asphalt and concrete made soils both invisible to urbandwellers, and made a preoccupation with urban soils an exclusive responsibility of spe-
cialists. He further shows that current experiments with urban soils amongst engi-
neers, while in keeping with established objectives of technocratic urbanism, are also
producing a dynamic relationship between soils and humans that goes against their
usual representations as static resources as soils become the very object of infrastruc-ture engineering rather that something that only underpins it. These trends go against
the typical exclusion of humans as agents of pedogenesis (soil making), and invite new
ontologies of soils as products of human and non-human processes. As in Krzywoszyn-
ska’s essay, Meulemans also notes, however, that these new capacities of soils as dynamic
48. See also Schneider and McMichael, “Deepening, and Repairing, the Metabolic Rift. ”200 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

and changeable seem to bolster rather than challenge anthropocentrism in human-soil
relations, extending the modernization project underground.
What principles may guide us in challenging these historic and contemporary sep-
arations between humans and soils, and in developing practices of soil connection and
soil care? In her essay, Anne O ’Brien argues that soil imaginaries are key to the forma-
tion of caring and respectful soil relationalities, as through these imaginaries “new
dimensions of soil ﬂourishing become evident, and the distress of soil ecosystems is
rendered ethically acknowledgable. ”To enable this, she introduces the concept of soil
integrity, understood in a processual mode as “a property of interspecies relationships
between plants, microbes, and invertebrates. ”Whereas body metaphors used in farm-
ing and scienti ﬁc discourses in relation to soils make room for and elicit affective
engagements with soils as vulnerable and living, O ’Brien suggests integrity can be pro-
ductively divorced from notions of bodily boundedness and individualism. Integrity of
soils as relations, as meshworks and food-webs expressing their diverse capabilities,
makes it possible to speak of justice in relation to soils. O ’Brien ’s essay further points
to the need for greater attentiveness to soils ’teleologies and for more-than-scienti ﬁc
descriptions of soil engagements so as to create “a compelling aesthetic vision of shared
conviviality across species. ”
Concluding Remarks
Engaging with soils as crucial, ethical, and relational materialities grounds in a very
practical way the sometimes abstract critiques of nature-culture dualisms, and the calls
for a greater recognition of the material embeddedness of societies. The unique nature of
soils as both ecology and land demands deeply socioecological approaches to sustain-ability. As this introduction and the collected essays explore, due to soils ’holistic nature
the political decisions about land use are inseparable from strategies for socioecological
survival. We see reconnecting with soils as part of a broader project of conceptually and
practically responding to the inescapable relationality of human life, a relationality that
includes humans and nonhumans. Our relation to land is deep; our roots are deep in
the soil, simultaneously culturally and materially. Caring for and about soils is thus
not external. Caring for soils is about caring for particular ways of being human.
ANNA KRZYWOSZYNSKA is a faculty research fellow at the Department of Geography, University
of Shef ﬁeld, and an associate director of the University of Shef ﬁeld’s Institute for Sustainable
Food. Her work investigates how environmental knowledges and ethics are made, communicated,and contested in spaces of food production. Her current work explores the onto-political implica-
tions of new soil relationalities. She is the founder of the Soil Care Network ( soilcarenetwork.com ).
GRETA MARCHESI is a postdoctoral fellow in the Geography Department at Dartmouth College.
She is a critical human geographer with a focus on the global politics of environmental expertise.
Her work draws on political ecology, political economy, critical development studies, and science
and technology studies to ask how battles for environmental resources are also contests overideas, particularly in periods of social and environmental transition.Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 201Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

Acknowledgments
This special issue grows out of the generous interdisciplinary conversations that took place dur-ing a unique soils workshop, “Rediscovering Soils: Knowledge and Care in the World of Soils ”
(soilcarenetwork.com/workshop-1 ), that was held at the University of Shef ﬁeld in June 2017. We
would like to thank again all of the participants and to celebrate their ongoing intellectual involve-ment through the Soil Care Network. Many thanks to Salvatore Engel-Di Mauro for his challenge and
support in developing our ideas and to the editorial board of Environmental Humanities , including
Thom van Dooreen, Elizabeth DeLougherey, Astrida Neimanis, and Jamie Lorimer. Dr Krzywoszyn-ska’s work on this issue was supported by a Leverhulme Early Career Fellowship.
References
Barad, Karen. Meeting the Universe Halfway . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007.
Barrera-Bassols, Narciso, and Alfred Zinck. “‘Land Moves and Behaves ’: Indigenous Discourse on Sus-
tainable Land Management in Pichataro, Patzcuaro Basin, Mexico. ”Geogra ﬁska Annaler: Series A,
Physical Geography 85, nos. 3 –4 (2003): 229 –45.
Barrera-Bassols, Narciso, and J. A. Zinck. “Ethnopedology: A Worldwide View on the Soil Knowledge
of Local People. ”Geoderma 111, nos. 3 –4( 2 0 0 3 ) :1 7 1 –95.
Bertoni, Filippo. “Soil and Worm: On Eating as Relating. ”S c i e n c ea sC u l t u r e 22, no. 1 (2013): 61 –85.
Blaikie, Piers. The Political Economy of Soil Erosion in Developing Countries . London: Routledge, 1985.
Brockett, Beth. “An Interdisciplinary Approach to Mapping Soil Carbon. ”PhD diss., Lancaster Univer-
sity, 2016.
Davies, Jessica. “The Business Case for Soil. ”Nature 543, no. 7645 (2017): 309 –11.
Elden, Stuart. “Secure the Volume: Vertical Geopolitics and the Depth of Power. ”Political Geography 34
(2013): 35 –51.
Evans, J., E. Szymanski, A. Krzywoszynska, C. McLeod, and A. Sexton. “Microbial Multiplicity: Working
with ‘the Microbe ’in Critical Microbe Studies. ”Unpublished manuscript, n.d.
Freidberg, Susanne. “Footprint Technopolitics. ”Geoforum 55 (2014): 178 –89. doi.org/10.1016/j.geofo-
rum.2014.06.009.
Goldstein, Jenny E. “Knowing the Subterranean: Land Grabbing, Oil Palm, and Divergent Expertise in
Indonesia ’sP e a tS o i l . ”Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 48, no. 4 (2016): 754 –70.
Goldstein, Jenny E. “The Volumetric Political Forest: Territory, Satellite Fire Mapping, and Indonesia ’s
Burning Peatland. ”Antipode , October 10, 2019.
Graham, Stephen. Vertical: The City From Satellites to Bunkers . London: Verso, 2016.
Granjou, Céline, and Catherine Phillips. “Living and Labouring Soils: Metagenomic Ecology and a
New Agricultural Revolution? ”BioSocieties 14, no. 3 (2018): 393 –415.
Hall, Stuart. “The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power. ”InFormations of Modernity ,e d i t e db yS t u -
art Hall and Bram Gieben, 85 –93. Oxford, UK: Polity Press, 1992.
Hartemink, A. E. “The De ﬁnition of Soil since the Early 1800s. ”InAdvances in Agronomy , vol. 137,
edited by Donald L. Sparks, 73 –126. New York: Academic Press, 2016.
Her Majesty ’s Government. “A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the Environment. ”2018.
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government /uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ ﬁle
/693158/25-year-environment-plan.pdf (accessed January 17, 2020).
Hillel, Daniel. Out of the Earth: Civilization and the Life of the Soil . Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992.
Ingold, Tim. The Perception of the Environment: Essays on Livelihood, Dwelling, and Skill . Abington, UK:
Routledge, 2000.
Ingram, Julie, Jane Mills, Camilla Dibari, Roberto Ferrise, Bhim Bahadur Ghaley, Jens Grønbech Han-
sen, Ana Iglesias, Zbigniew Karaczun, Alistair McVittie, and Paolo Merante. “Communicating
Soil Carbon Science to Farmers. ”Journal of Rural Studies 48 (2016): 115 –28.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2015. “Status of the World ’sS o i lR e s o u r c e s .
Main Report. ”2015. www.fao.org/3/a-i5199e.pdf .202 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

Krzywoszynska, Anna. “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role of Attentiveness in More-
Than-Human Ethics. ”Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 44, no. 4 (2019): 661 –75.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. “Making Knowledge and Meaning in Communities of Practice: What Role May
Science Play? The Case of Sustainable Soil Management in England. ”Soil Use and Management
35, no. 1 (2019): 160 –68.
Krzywoszynska, Anna, S. Banwart, and D. Blacker. “To Know, to Dwell, to Care: Towards an Action-
able, Place-Based Knowledge of Soils. ”InThinking with Soil. Material Politics and Social Theory ,
edited by Juan Francisco Salazar, Céline Granjou, Matthew Kearnes, Anna Krzywoszynska, andManuel Tironi. London: Bloomsbury, 2020.
Latour, Bruno. Down to Earth: Politics in the New Climatic Regime . London: John Wiley and Sons, 2018.
Lefèvre, Clara, Fatma Rekik, Viridiana Alcantara, and Liesl Wiese. Soil Organic Carbon: The Hidden Po-
tential . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017.
Lin, Henry. “A New Worldview of Soils. ”Soil Science Society of America Journal 78 (2014):1831 –1844.
Logan, William Bryant. Dirt: The Ecstatic Skin of the Earth . New York: W. W. Norton, 2007.
Lyons, Kristina Marie. 2014. “Soil Science, Development, and the ‘Elusive Nature ’of Colombia ’sA m a -
zonian Plains. ”Journal of Latin American and Caribbean Anthropology 19, no. 2 (2014): 212 –36.
Lyons, Kristina Marie. 2016. “Decomposition as Life Politics: Soils, Selva, and Small Farmers under
the Gun of the US –Colombia War on Drugs. ”Cultural Anthropology 31, no. 1 (2016): 56 –81.
Macfarlane, Robert. Underland: A Deep Time Journey . London: Hamish Hamilton, 2019.
McNeill, John, and Verena Winiwarter. “Breaking the Sod: Humankind, History, and Soil. ”Science 304,
no. 5677 (2004):1627 –29.
McNeill, John Robert, and Verena Winiwarter. Soils and Societies: Perspectives from Environmental His-
tory: Cambridge, UK: White Horse Press, 2010.
Minasny, Budiman, Brendan P Malone, Alex B. McBratney, Denis A. Angers, Dominique Arrouays,
Adam Chambers, Vincent Chaplot, Zueng-Sang Chen, Kun Cheng, and Bhabani S. Das. “Soil
Carbon 4 per Mille. ”Geoderma 292 (2017): 59 –86.
Mol, Annemarie. “Ontological Politics. A Word and Some Questions. ”
Sociological Review 47 (1999): 74 –
89.
Münster, D. 2017. “Gut and Soil: Multispecies Belonging and Specter of Nativism in Zero Budget Natu-
ral Farming. ”Presentations from “Rediscovering Soils: Knowledge and Care in the Worlds of
Soil”Workshop, University of Shef ﬁeld, June 19 –21, 2017. www.soilcarenetwork.com/presentations .
Münster, Daniel, and Julia Poerting. “Land as Resource, Soil and Landscape: Materiality, Relationality
and New Agrarian Questions in Political Ecology. ”Geographica Helvetica 71, no. 4 (2016): 245 –57.
O’Sullivan, Lilian, Rachewl E. Creamer, Reamonn M. Fealy, Gary J. Lanigan, I. Simo, Owen Fenton, J.
Carfrae, and Rogier P. O. Schulte. “Functional Land Management for Managing Soil Functions:
A Case-Study of the Trade-off between Primary Productivity and Carbon Storage in Response
to the Intervention of Drainage Systems in Ireland. ”Land Use Policy 47 (2015): 42 –54.
Paxson, Heather. “Post-Pasteurian Cultures: The Microbiopolitics of Raw-Milk Cheese in the United
States. ”Cultural Anthropology 27, no. 1 (2012): 15 –47.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. “Re-animating Soils: Transforming Human-Soil Affections through Sci-
ence, Culture, and Community. ”Sociological Review 67, no. 2 (2019): 391 –407. doi.org/10.1177/
0038026119830601.
Puig de la Bellacasa, María. “Encountering Bioinfrastructure: Ecological Struggles and the Sciences of
Soil. ”Social Epistemology 28, no. 1 (2014): 26 –40.
Richelle, Lola, Marjolein Visser, Laurent Bock, Peter Walpole, François Mialhe, Gilles Colinet, and Nic-
olas Dendoncker. “Looking for a Dialogue between Farmers and Scienti ﬁc Soil Knowledge:
Learnings from an Ethno-Geomorphopedological Study in a Philippines Upland Village. ”Agroe-
cology and Sustainable Food Systems 42, no. 1 (2018): 2 –27.
Salazar, Juan Francisco, Céline Granjou, Matthew Kearnes, Anna Krzywoszynska, and Manuel Tironi,
eds. Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social Theory . London: Bloomsbury, 2020.Krzywoszynska and Marchesi / Relational Materiality of Soils 203Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

Schneider, Flurina, Thomas Ledermann, Patricia Fry, and Stephan Rist. “Soil Conservation in Swiss
Agriculture —Approaching Abstract and Symbolic Meanings in Farmers ’Life-Worlds. ”Land Use
Policy 27, no. 2 (2010): 332 –39.
Schneider, Mindi, and Philip McMichael. “Deepening, and Repairing, the Metabolic Rift. ”Journal of
Peasant Studies 37, no. 3 (2010): 461 –84.
Shiva, Vandana. Soil Not Oil: Environmental Justice in a Time of Climate Crisis . Berkeley, CA: North Atlan-
tic Books, 2008.
Steinberg, Philip, and Kimberley Peters. “Wet Ontologies, Fluid Spaces: Giving Depth to Volume
through Oceanic Thinking. ”Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 33, no. 2 (2015): 247 –64.
Stocking, Michael A., and Niamh Murnaghan. A Handbook for the Field Assessment of Land Degradation .
London: Routledge, 2013.
Swyngedouw, Erik. “Modernity and Hybridity: Nature, Regeneracionismo, and the Production of
the Spanish Waterscape, 1890 –1930. ”Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89, no. 3
(1999): 443 –65.
Van Sant, Levi. “‘The Long-Time Requirements of the Nation ’: The U.S. Cooperative Soil Survey and
the Political Ecologies of Improvement. ”Antipode , November 13, 2018. doi.org/10.1111/anti
.12460.
Wahlhütter, S., Christian Reinhard Vogl, and H. Eberhart. “Soil as a Key Criteria in the Construction of
Farmers ’Identities: The Example of Farming in the Austrian Province of Burgenland. ”Geo-
derma 269 (2016): 39 –53.
Wall, Diana H. “Introduction. ”InSoil Ecology and Ecosystem Services , edited by Diana H. Wall, 1 –4. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Warkentin, Benno P. Footprints in the Soil: People and Ideas in Soil History . New York: Elsevier, 2006.
Worster, Donald. Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930s . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.204 Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/190/806235/190krzywoszynska.pdf by CEFET-RJ user on 28 May 2025

