Unearthing care: Rooting
alternative agricultural practices
in Norway and Costa Rica
Isabelle Hugøy
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Abstract
This article contributes to the growing literature on human-soil relations by exp loring how care for agri-
cultural soils unfolds among farmers who engage with a lternative agricultural p ractices across different
productions and sites in Norway and Costa Rica. Th ese farmers approach soil as a living being and
seek to approach care with macro- and microorgani sms in response to soil challenges and economic
instabilities. The article follows recent literature on soil care in showing how agricultural practices chal-lenge the dominant approach to soils as passive. How ever, the article argues the necessity of expanding
on existing notions of care. This, I argue, involves ethnographically “unearthing ”care: unpacking and situ-
ating a diversity of soil care practices, their human and other-than-human enta nglements, and how these
relations are conditioned by environmental, genealogical, sociocultural, temporal, epistemic, economic,
and political mechanisms within and beyond the farm. Considering these variables is essential to keep
soil care in the emerging literature from following a romanticizing path toward abstract individualism.
Keywords
Soil, care, agriculture, regenerative, sustainable
Introduction
This article deals with approaches to soil care by farmers in Norway and Costa Rica. Exploring howfarmers relate to, experience, perceive, know, learn to know, and work with agricultural soils,it focuses particularly on farmers who embrace alternative approaches that collaborate with
more-than-human beings in response to soil-related challenges. Alternative approaches challenge the con-
ventional model and include divergent and congruent practices applied by farmers who identify with eitherRegenerative, Conservation, or Sustainable Agricult ure respectively. Common among alternative farmers
is their quest to seek knowledge about soil and subsequ ent attempts to stimulate ecosystem processes that
allow soil organisms to perform their “natural task. ”By focusing on farmers ’dealings with soil biology in
Corresponding author:
Isabelle Hugøy, Department of Social Anthropology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.Email: Isabelle.hugoy@uib.noArticle
EPE: Nature and Space
2024, Vol. 7(4) 1711 –1734
© The Author(s) 2024
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/25148486241245012
journals.sagepub.com/home/ene

particular, the article analyzes how farmers, to diffe rent degrees, challenge the hegemonic agro-industrial
model ’s chemical orientation toward soil fertility and passive treatment of soils; further, it contributes with
a comparative intervention to the growing human-soil literature that challenge dominant approaches to soil
(Evans, 2022; Krzywoszynska and Marchesi, 2020; Münster, 2021; Salazar et al., 2020; Swidler, 2009).However, the article also contends that it is necessary to expand on and unearth prevailing notions of care.
Ethnographically unearthing care , that is, unpacking, expanding, and situating a diversity of soil
care practices in two very different contexts is crucial for three reasons. First, soil care, like that ofsoil degradation, is neither socially (nor culturally, I would add) nor politically neutral (Blaikie,
1985; Engel-Di Mauro, 2014; Malone and McClintock, 2023), but permeates conceptions of
what care is, how to care, and who to care for. Second, despite being implicitly framed as “uncar-
ing”(Kallio and LaFleur, 2023; Krzywoszynska, 2019; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017), I show that
conventional farmers also practice soil care, but differently. Third, care is differently conditioned
depending on a variety of circumstances.
In short, I argue that unearthing care involves situating soil care practices, their human and
other-than-human entanglements, and the dimensions that condition these relations: environmental,
genealogical, sociocultural, temporal, epistemic, economic, and political mechanisms within andbeyond the farm. Further, I dispute claims that raised awareness of soil and other ecologies as
alive will lead to more knowledge, action, and hence more sustainable human-environment rela-
tions (Kallio and LaFleur, 2023; Krzywoszynska et al., 2020; O ’Brien, 2020; Tsing, 2015).
Rather, I call for analytical attention also to the mechanisms that condition care. Overall, the
article contributes to environmental anthropology by showing how soil care unfolds and extends
beyond multispecies relations of ecology to consider the dimensions that condition these relations.
The article is based on 12 months of ethnographic ﬁeldwork in 2021 and 2022 among farmers in
three different productions and geographical sites: dairy farmers in Jæren
1, southwest Norway;
grain producers in Østfold, southeast Norway; and coffee farmers in Turrialba, Costa Rica. In2023, I conducted brief follow-up visits in Turrialba. This article engages with farmers in
Østfold and Turrialba where alternative agricultural practices are emerging. The comparison of
Norway and Costa Rica is interesting for several reasons, among them is the tendency in inter-national public and policy discourse to describe the countries as socioeconomic or environmental
models to follow. Yet, it was travel restrictions in 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic that led to
the inclusion of Norway as a comparative case to Costa Rica, a practical choice that later revealedcongruent human-soil relations despite numerous differences. Given the very different conditions
that make such a comparison interesting, what has stimulated the emergence of alternative forms
of soil care? How does soil care unfold in these two different contexts? To what extent is soilcare conditioned by different contexts?
The article begins with a review of human-soil literature followed by a brief account of the
ethnographic contexts in Norway and in Costa Rica. The subsequent section engages withfarmers ’experience of soil challenges before showing how their alternative practices challenge
the established dominant model through engagement of sensorial and bodily registers, dedication
of time for soil, and caretaking together with other humans as well as soil macro and microbiology.The increasing attention to soil care in the literature is narrow and at risk of following a romanti-
cized path toward abstract individualism. Therefore, the ﬁnal sections highlight the need to expand
notions of care by analyzing how soil care unfolds and extends beyond multispecies relations ofecology to consider its conditioning by the many dimensions of care.
Regenerating human-soil research
Soil has for some time been largely undertheorized and treated as a backdrop in social sciences and
humanities (Salazar et al., 2020; Swidler, 2009). Despite investigations into the social causes of soil1712 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
erosion (Blaikie, 1985) and a debunking of the socio-economic dimensions of land degradation in
geography (Blaikie and Brook ﬁeld, 1987), in addition to ethno-pedologists and anthropologists ’
research on different indigenous soil classi ﬁcation systems and the role that indigenous knowledge
plays in soil management (Barrera-Bassols and Zinck, 2003; Krogh and Paarup-Laursen, 1997;Posey, 1985; Turner, 1993), scholarship has predominantly approached soil as inert. (In)attention
to soil has typically been disguised as land —a natural surface that can be acted upon or a resource
that can be adapted to, owned, exploited, and governed. Some connect this passive treatment ofsoils to the predominance of soil physics and soil chemistry in soil science (Puig de la
Bellacasa, 2017) during the latter half of the twentieth century and the accompanied reductive
understanding of soil fertility that has treated soil as a medium which absorbs nutrients that cultivarsrequire to grow (Granjou and Meulemans, 2023). This chemical and “modern ”conceptualization of
soil fertility is typically attributed to the German chemist, Baron Justus von Liebig, whose work was
central in the anti-organic campaign in agricultural science from the 1920s onwards and whicheventually replaced and silenced bacteriological conceptualizations (Uekoetter, 2006), supporting
ideas of soil as a medium of growth. This changed, however, at the turn of the twenty- ﬁrst
century with an ecological orientation in soil sciences (Granjou and Meulemans, 2023), leadingto a reemergence of bacteriological understandings, ideas of soil as a living ecosystem (Wall
et al., 2004), and an emphasis on relations and interactions between soil organisms and chemical
and physical processes (Lavelle and Spain, 2001).
While the human role in soil processes has been a source of debate in soil sciences, it is not until
recently that human activity has been considered integral to pedogenesis (Richter et al., 2011),
leading to a shift in soil models from natural bodies to incorporate the human impact on acceleratedsoil change (Richter and Yaalon, 2012). These developments in combination with technological
advances in metagenomics (Paul, 2015) and climatic and environmental alterations have arguably
inﬂuenced a renewed focus on human-soil entanglements (Granjou and Meulemans, 2023;
McElwee, 2021) and a turn to more relational and (new) materialist understandings in social
sciences and humanities. In anthropology, the “ontological turn ”(Graeber, 2015) shifts questions
from perspectives on the same world to inquiries on alterity, multiple worlds, and being that sub-sequently challenge and seek to dissolve nature-society dichotomies, together with the idea of
nature as a biophysical reality, such as soil (see Latour, 1999). This is re ﬂected in the growing lit-
erature on human-soil relations in related disciplines that celebrates soil liveliness (Puig de laBellacasa, 2019) and that shifts focus from sociocultural meanings and knowledge of soils to inquir-
ies of soils ’own biophysical agency (Granjou and Meulemans, 2023) and their world-making
effects in the Anthropocene.
With contemporary global climatic, environmental, and soil urgencies comes particular attention
to how macro- and microorganism lives and deaths are intimately entangled with human social, cul-
tural, political, and economic forces (Hendy et al., 2021; Kirksey and Helmreich, 2010; Lorimer,2020; Tsing, 2015), leading to debate about ethical and (un)sustainable relations with macro and
micro species (Haraway, 2008; Hird, 2009; Münster et al., 2021; Schroer et al., 2021; Tsing,
2015). A central part of this ethical endeavor for scholars working on human-soil relations insocial science and humanities, and to which this article contributes, is to raise public and political
awareness about ethical doings in human and more-than-human encounters —with animals, culti-
vars, soil organisms, and their interrelated entities —in hopes of stimulating more attentiveness
and more ethical human-soil relations.
Practicing attentiveness —that is, tuning in to, and cultivating, the arts of noticing (Tsing, 2015)
the needs of other human or nonhuman beings —is inseparable from care practices
(Krzywoszynska, 2019). Relational approaches (Krzywoszynska and Marchesi, 2020) in soil
care literature focus on care as an embodied practice (West et al., 2018) of relating and is inspired
by new materialisms approaches (Barad, 2007; Bennett, 2010; Latour, 2004), multispeciesHugøy 1713
ethnography (Haraway, 2008), and feminist research that challenge care as an idea that is guided by
normative moral dispositions and typically associated with women (Clement, 1996; Robinson,
1999; Tronto, 1993). Fisher and Tronto suggest that care is “a species activity that includes every-
thing we do to maintain, continue, and repair ‘our world ’so that we can live in it as well as possible ”
(1990: 40). While feminist ethics scholars mainly focus on human relations of care, Puig de la
Bellacasa (2017) draws on Fisher and Tronto ’s open de ﬁnition to extend care to more-than-human
beings. Her eco-social understanding of care is also found in soil care literature that to differentdegrees implies nonhuman care agency. Challenging binaries such as nature and society, living
and inert, biotic, and abiotic, the literature does so often through the compost metaphor, which
points to human and nonhuman “togetherness ”and how such components “become with each
other”(Granjou and Meulemans, 2023: 5) through their agentive effects. Care as a form of (prac-
tical) relating manifests through care networks (Krzywoszynska, 2019; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017)
of wormy collaborations (Abrahamsson and Bertoni, 2014; Meulemans, 2020a), making ﬁsh
hydrolysate (Evans, 2022), through acts of decomposition (Lyons, 2020; Kallio and LaFleur,
2023), reclaiming practices (Meulemans, 2020b), or making of ferment as a form of resistance
(Münster, 2021). Common among these works is the emphasis on collective human and nonhumancaretaking of a broken world and its regeneration through the inclusion and stimulation of some
microbes, species, and/or matters with the exclusion of others. This suggests that “good”care prac-
tices always depend on the relations (and networks) in which care is situated and unfolds. The logicof care (Mol, 2008) in these networks further depends on the needs of the primary subject/object of
care (Krzywoszynska, 2019) and the associated responsibility of taking care of these
(Krzywoszynska, 2023). This article contributes to this literature with a comparative outlook onhuman-soil relations, and does so by expanding narrow conceptualizations of care —that tend
toward abstract individualism —to discuss the conditioning of care in two very different contexts.
Contextualizing the sites
In 2019, Norway and Costa Rica rati ﬁed plans to decarbonize the agricultural sector2, which is
dominated in both countries by a conventional model that: is based in a chemical approach tosoil fertility, promotes monocultures, and relies on agrochemical inputs. These plans coincided
with the European Union ’s launch of the “Green Deal ”that will affect farming not only in
Norway, but also Costa Rica which exports coffee to European markets. Whereas agriculturalland is estimated at 35.5% of Costa Rica ’s total land area,
3in Norway it constitutes only 3% of
which only 1% is suitable for cultivating grain for human consumption4. Norwegian agriculture
is heavily regulated by the state through legislation and economic incentives (Forbord et al.,2014) in addition to formal and informal governance and institutions that are strongly communal
(Almås, 2002). Since 1950, Norwegian farmers have enjoyed economic predictability and state sub-
sidies through the annual agricultural settlement, which is based on negotiations between twofarming organizations ( Norges Bondelag andNorges Bonde- og Småbrukarlag ) and the govern-
ment. Although the Costa Rican coffee industry is heavily regulated (Pratt and Harner, 1997),
coffee producers do not receive state subsidies. Where the annual agricultural settlement providesan outlook on Norwegian farmers ’economic opportunities in the coming year, tico(Costa Rican)
coffee farmers are vulnerable to volatile international coffee prices following the collapse of the
International Coffee Agreement in 1989, deregulation (Babin, 2015; Ponte, 2002), and the subse-quent coffee crisis in 2001 (Vogt, 2019).
Small-scale farmers with fewer than 5 hectares of cultivated coffee constitute 92% of Costa
Rica’s coffee producers
5, and while small farms are fragmenting, most land is owned by the pro-
ducers themselves (OECD, 2017). Conversely, the average size of Norwegian farms is expanding
—24.9 hectares in 2018 (Knutsen, 2020) —in tandem with more leased land, which in 20191714 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
constituted 46% of the total area in production in 2019 (Løvberget and Rognstad, 2021). The man-
agement of Norwegian farms is mechanized and industrialized in contrast to the dependency on
manual labor in coffee farming in Costa Rica. Compared to Østfold ’s relatively ﬂat landscape,
Turrialba coffee farms are situated between 500 to 1300 meters above sea level and approximately58% of the terrain has slopes greater than 30°; this uneven topography makes mechanization of har-
vesting impossible, meaning that production costs cannot be reduced and making smallholders
extremely susceptible to decreases in coffee prices (Avelino et al., 2015: 308). Adding to this eco-nomic vulnerability, turrialbeño coffee farmers receive a lower price than other coffee regions in
Costa Rica. A humid tropical climate persists in Turrialba, with an average annual precipitation
of 2619 mm and an average annual temperature of 21.7°C (Viguera et al., 2019: 335), contrastingØstfold ’s average annual precipitation between 700 to 900 mm and approximate average annual
temperature of 6°C.
6Despite these differences, alternative practices are emerging in both areas
in response to soil challenges that farmers connect to “modern agriculture ”. Alternative farmers
challenge, to varying degrees, the hegemonic mode of practicing agriculture and the prevailing
perception of soils as inert. This hegemonic mode has arguably developed along with an
agro-industrial model that favors ef ﬁciency and volume, is based in fossil fuel use and practices
that have emerged from the Green Revolution, including the shift from a biological to chemical
model of soil fertility (Marchesi, 2020). With these developments, soil rhythms have intensi ﬁed
and accelerated in attempts to align with the faster rhythms of production to satisfy humanneeds —and in the process have not only degraded environments and the global climate (Shiva,
2008), but also silenced soil biology needs.
Regenerative Agriculture and Conservation Agriculture are two alternative approaches that are
on the rise among grain farmers in Østfold. While farmers of both approaches refer to their practices
as being “regenerative ”, the former approach is often associated with the project
Referansegårdsprosjektet (led by an independent foundation) and the latter with Karbon Agro
(a project based in the regional Norwegian Agricultural Extension Service (NLR) of ﬁce). Both
are state-funded and seek to develop new knowledge and practices to improve (i.e., regenerate)
soil health —though in different ways as I will discuss later. The concept Regenerative
Agriculture was adopted in the early 1980s by the US-based Rodale Institute, but lost momentum
for some decades before its use increased exponentially in 2016 (Giller et al., 2021) following the
Paris COP21 summit talks exploring the potential for soil carbon sequestration. The term traveled(Gjølberg, 2010) from international contexts to become locally “domesticated ”(Knudsen, 2015) in,
for example, India (Münster, 2021), Italy, Finland (Kallio and LaFleur, 2023), and New Zealand
(Evans, 2022). Compared to Conservation Farming, many advisors in NLR considerRegenerative Agriculture (and its associated practices in Østfold)
7as the most radical alternative
to the hegemonic model. This is partly because of an experimental stance that, according
to several NLR advisors, lacks scienti ﬁc documentation, but also due to its more extensive approach
that contrasts with the more intensive and less radical stance of Conservation Agriculture. Another
unspoken source of their skepticism may be regenerative farmers ’ambition to not only reduce (as
conservation farmers aspire to do), but possibly eliminate their dependency on synthetic fertilizers(see Table 1). This can be considered an attack on the hegemonic conventional model that under-
pins the powerful vertically integrated agro-industrial food system on national and international
scales. While NLR receives state funding in addition to income from member farmers, the organ-ization also receives funding for research from the synthetic fertilizer producer, Yara —a corpor-
ation with 36.21% Norwegian state ownership and a goal of generating the highest possible
revenue (Statens eierrapport, 2022). This suggests that economic and political agendas in ﬂuence
soil management and care.
Compared to my ﬁrstﬁeldwork in Turrialba in 2015, I noticed upon my return in 2022 the
sudden prevalence of “good agricultural practices ”(buenas prácticas agrícolas ) in talks organizedHugøy 1715
Table 1. Agricultural approaches applied in ﬁeld sites.
Approach Site Focus Practices
Conventional
AgricultureØstfold Conventional. Monocultures of grain cultivars in growth season. Soil tillage in autumn is widespread
(bare soils throughout winter).
Use of: Synthetic fertilizer (some also apply animal manure). Pesticides (herbicides,insecticides, fungicides, and the like).
T urrialba Conventional. Monocultures of coffee cultivars, but also one or more types of shade trees, may
include cultivars for own consumption.
Use of: Synthetic fertilizer (and organic matter on farm), herbicides and/or manualtechniques for weed removal, other pesticides (but varies).
Regenerative
AgricultureØstfold Practiced within conventional and
organic
∗approaches.
(∗organic excludes
use of agrochemicals).Reduction or elimination of: synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, soil tillage (or use of
alternative tillage methods).
Use of: Bioinputs (ferment, microbial carbonized compost, compost tea andextract), a large diversity of cover crops between the main crops, aims to integrate
animals (e.g., holistic grazing).
Method to terminate plant growth: Surface composting: A mechanical imitation ofwhat occurs within the cow ’s rumen: homebrewed ferment pre-digests the freshly
cut green plant material and is intended to make its protein compatible to that ofsoil.
Sowing: On bare soils by using traditional sowing machines.
Conservation
Agriculture
(Karbon Agro )Østfold Only practiced from conventional
approaches during my ﬁeldwork.Reduction of synthetic fertilizers, reduction or elimination of soil tillage.
Use of: Compared to regenerative farmers, CA uses a smaller diversity of cover
crops. Typically planted after harvest.
Method to terminate plant growth: Application of herbicides, often glyphosate.
Sowing: After terminating plant growth, seeds are sown by directly drilling seeds
into the ground.
Sustainable
AgricultureT urrialba Mixes conventional and organic
approaches.Reduction or elimination of: Herbicides and other pesticides.
Use of: Bioinputs (solid and ﬂuid MM, vermicompost, bokashi, and other types of
compost). Soil surface with living (non-cultivated) plants in between coffee cultivars,shade trees, fruit trees and other cultivars.1716 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
by the regional of ﬁce of the national coffee organization, ICAFE, and in conversations with coffee
farmers. This term emerged with the inception of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action in the
coffee sector (NAMA Café) in 2015. The intention is to produce and process sustainable coffee
while lowering greenhouse gas emissions8while, according to an ICAFE technician, simultan-
eously increasing productivity and reducing costs. ICAFE activities that I attended typically
focused on two or more of these practices to stimulate farmers to make “smarter ”choices and to
shift from reliance on embodied technical know-how to technological measurements with recom-mendations based on scienti ﬁc analysis and calculations. The climate smart and productivist rea-
soning that underpins talks and recommendations given by ICAFE, however, differs from the
slightly more extensive understanding of alternative farmers that I focus on in this article, whoseek to include bioinputs and reduce or eliminate herbicide use to deal with soil challenges.
These farmers frame their approach as “sustainable. ”
Soil challenges
“It smells like basement, ”said grain farmer Erik9with his head in the hole he had just dug by jumping
on a shovel to penetrate the hard, dense clay soil that, to me, felt like walking on concrete. “This is why I
became interested in regenerative agriculture. It ’s not supposed to be like this. ”(Østfold, September
2021).
We were collecting microorganisms from a mountain forest as coffee farmer Maribel explained that these
would improve the soil on her farm which, according to her, had been “worn out ”and“sterile ”after inten-
sive use of herbicides for years. “Not even weeds wanted to grow! ”she exclaimed (Turrialba, March
2022).
Dense soil with poor water drainage is a challenge10that Erik shares with several other farmers
in Østfold where clay soils constitute about 77% of the agricultural area (Nyborg et al., 2008).Newly sown seeds risk drowning or may not sprout because clay turns into “concrete ”after rainfall,
explained Erik who, like many farmers, experiences extreme weather events more frequently.
Heavy rainfall (e.g., 2017), drought (2018), or a combination (2023) complicate farming and inten-sify soil challenges, such as compaction, hydraulic and aeolian erosion and may lead to yield loss.
This must also be understood in the context of the regional agricultural specialization policy that
was established by the Gerhardsen government in the 1950s, when farmers were economicallyincentivized to adapt their productions in areas that have favorable cultivating conditions for spe-
ciﬁc crops (Almås, 2002). Østfold is therefore a big producer of grain; however, over time the posi-
tive ripple effects of having livestock are fading, explained an NLR advisor:
When we had livestock, we cultivated grass and other crops that would both add to, and make use of, the
soil’s nutrients. But now we harvest a lot of carbohydrates, and that ’s carbon. [ …] We have a carbon
cycle for soil microorganisms, and they use organic material, carbon, as energy to decompose other
plant residues. When you have less of that [carbon], you will basically get a less stable soil that
affects structure and the qualities of the soil.
The enduring practice of draining soils of organic material in Østfold made farmer Bjørn describe his
clay soils as “dead”and“hard.”His father gave up raising livestock in favor of only growing grain in
the 1960s, but over the subsequent decades the soil grew harder. The “dead”soil becomes visible to
Bjørn during soil tillage. Like many other farmers he experiences that straw does not decompose butHugøy 1717
reappears practically unchanged during ploughing again the following autumn. This made farmers
push NLR for advice, which eventually led to the establishment of a Soil Health Group that aims
to build organic soil material, explained Bjørn, who in 2020 started practicing Conservation
Agriculture. Other farmers, ﬁnding that NLR could not help them with suf ﬁcient answers or alterna-
tives to deal with soil erosion or declined soil fertility, sought help elsewhere, like Ægir. He eventually
found his way to a soil fertility course, which all regenerative farmer interlocutors have completed,
and which is organized by a private foundation and taught by independent advisors.
Grain farmers in Østfold who follow Regenerative Agriculture or Conservation Agriculture seek
to deal with soil challenges by farming in ways that stimulate ecosystems, soil life, and build soil
carbon, thus creating soils that are more resilient to erosion, drought, and ﬂooding, while simultan-
eously reducing use of agrochemicals and diesel (thus costs) in addition to mitigating climate
change. They consider that soil challenges have been provoked by a set of standardized practices
(Scott, 1998) on highly diverse soils. Based on scienti ﬁc knowledge and technologies, such prac-
tices include monoculture, application of agrochemicals, soil tillage, and use of heavy machinery.
According to regenerative proponents, the result is modern soils that are chemically and biologic-
ally out of balance, characterized by compaction, excessive levels of nitrate, bacteria dominant,lacking fungi such as mycorrhiza, and that lay bare in autumn. The practices have arguably also
led to ecological degradation of the Oslofjord, where agriculture was the single largest source of
anthropogenic phosphorous and nitrogen contamination in 2020 (Walday et al., 2023).
Soil challenges and extreme weather events were also experienced in Turrialba where most
coffee farms are located on steep slopes prone to landslides, hydraulic and aeolian erosion that
includes the loss of topsoil and nutrients as expressed by local agronomists. Farmers tended toconnect reduced soil fertility to years of intensive use of agrochemicals, particularly herbicides,
as Maribel stated. Antonio shared her opinion describing such soils as “practically dead and
won’t give any results. ”In 2022, I learned that Antonio had stopped using herbicides four years
previously when he adjusted to “good agricultural practices ”that he claims “regenerate ”soil by
working with nature. In sum, farmers ’direct or indirect engagements with soil over time made
them aware of the need to know and care for soil in alternative ways.
Learning to care anew
While farmers did not explicitly speak about care to deal with soil challenges, my etic use of care
includes emic Tico and Norwegian terms such as: tend to/take care of ( cuidar/ta vare på ); conserve
(conservar/bevare ); regenerate ( regenerar/regenerere ); and as expressed by coffee farmer Antonio
in the following quote, protect ( proteger ) soil:
I’m in love with the earth [ la tierra ]. If I treat her with love, she ’ll always give what I sow. From the
earth I receive my daily food. If I treat her well not polluting her ,I know that she ’ll always be there.
Therefore, I need to protect her.
The quote points to the social and reciprocal relationship of a farmer with plants and soil that are
frequently talked of as living beings using human analogies (Hugøy and Ødegaard, 2021). If
Antonio shows attentiveness, love, and care for the soil, then he expects to be cared for inreturn. Care can in this sense be considered a gift (Mauss, 1995) that continually creates a social
bond entailing particular expectations that I will return to later. Antonio ’s use of “her”points to
the two grammatical genders in Spanish. Interestingly, he used the feminine word tierra instead
of the frequently used masculine synonym suelo. The need to “protect her ”connotes the gendered
macho ideal of the patriarch responsible for protecting his family and the purity of women
11.T o1718 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
protect the soil, Antonio seeks to work with nature. Anthropomorphizing plants and soil is not
unique to sustainable coffee farmers. However, their expression of working with nature is.
Grain farmers occasionally draw human-plant/soil analogies, yet biophysical perceptions
prevail. Approaching the soil as a living ecosystem was, however, pronounced among alternativeapproaches in Østfold, as expressed by Bjørn: “You work with nature instead of adding too many
external inputs [ …] which creates a dead soil. That is what we ’re trying to ﬁx now. ”The endeavor
to work with nature is intimately related to these farmers ’altered perception of soil, which has to a
large degree shifted from a passive medium of growth to a living organism: “You get this idea that
there are many other beings living in the soil that may help us, compared to what the traditional
mindset portrays. The soil is a living organism, ”said Bjørn. This quote captures the essence of alter-
native approaches in both countries —it points to attempts to work in “probiotic ”(Lorimer, 2020)
and more bacteriological ways together with animals, a diversity of plants, and macro and micro
soil beings considered bene ﬁcial.
Below I analyze practices of soil care and how they not only partly or radically challenge the
hegemonic model, but also how alternative approaches converge and diverge in Østfold and
Turrialba. Their forms of care share three common features: learning to notice soil needs byusing sensorial and bodily registers in dealings with plants and soil, making time for soil, and
taking care together with human and more-than-human beings.
Sensorial attentiveness to soil needs
The turn to more experiential immersion with soils in Østfold can be considered a reaction to not
only contemporary soil challenges but also the growing physical and experiential distance betweenfarmers and “their”soils. Compared to coffee cultivation in Costa Rica where labor is primarily
manual and technique oriented, farming in Norway is highly mechanized and technology oriented.
Norwegian farmers who practice alternative approaches learn to relate to soils in ways they previ-ously have not —engaging more direct immersion with soil through sensory and bodily knowledge
register, which arguably in ﬂuences their experience of soil as alive (Puig de la Bellacasa, 2019). One
regenerative farmer confessed that when an advi sor recommended doing spade tests to evaluate his
soil, he was ashamed to admit never having done so nor having had such a focus even though he
had grown up on a farm. In a public event, a conse rvation farmer claimed that the spade is the
farmers ’most important tool. Common to alternative appr oaches in Østfold and Turrialba is a focus
on training the senses to notice indicators in the lands cape and soil to interpret subterranean processes.
In June 2022, I accompanied a group of regenerative farmers who were taking soil samples on
their farms to evaluate the soil ’s response to newly implemented practices, such as using cover
crops ,applying ferment, and reducing application of synthetic fertilizers. In a ﬁeld that Erik
manages according to regenerative principles, one of the independent advisors inserted a shovel
into the soil surface, pressed it down forcefully, and dug up a piece of soil. The force needed dif-fered from a spade test we took at another farm later that day where the shovel sank into the soil like
a knife in soft butter. Most of us smelled the sample (Figure 1) and some of us stuck our heads into
the hole in the ground. The hint of basement contrasted with the sweet earthy scent of a sample atanother farm. We observed the grey color and structure of the clayey soil before the advisor and one
of the farmers started breaking it up into pieces. Some tried squeezing small pieces between their
ﬁngers to evaluate soil structure —it was hard. Others carefully removed plants in the sample to
check root development of cultivars as well as for the presence or absence of the desired rhizoheaths
(Figure 2). They checked for earthworms and examined the pro ﬁle of the hole to evaluate the soil ’s
structure and colors. While Erik described the soil as still “magnesium saturated and compact, ”the
soil structure was showing signs of improvement compared to 2021. He dug up and showed the
group an I-shaped chicory, the roots of which are intended to break up the dense soil. Its formHugøy 1719
contrasted with the L-shaped chicories we had dug up in 2021, which he concluded must have
encountered the hardpan that typically forms at ploughing depths. His comparison of the soil ’s
smell to that of a basement back in 2021 was an attempt to communicate tacit knowledge which
he still was learning to embody through continued spade tests. This reference became an imagethat connected personal experience (Müller 1996) from the basement to the farm where knowledge
was co-created with fellow farmers and advisors. Engaging their bodily and sensorial abilities was
a way to become attentive to soil needs in a more experience-based manner.
While taking spade tests, some of the farmers often jokingly exclaimed, “This smells good! ”or
“This feels good! ”followed by laughter, as part of the self-ironic stance which I understood as
hinting toward how they produce new knowledge in practice that quietly challenges institutionalizedforms of agronomic knowledge (see also Evans, 2022). A Karbon Agro advisor emphasized the
importance of scienti ﬁcally testing and documenting the effects of alternative practices on soil life,
yet acknowledged the dif ﬁculty of doing so:
A lot of what we [proponents of conservation agriculture] do can ’t be measured. Measuring fungi and
bacteria in soil is dif ﬁcult.
The challenge to scienti ﬁcally support their pre-conceived experiences meant that regenerative and
conservation farmers attempted to notice indicators of bacterial and fungal life, such as earthworms,rhizoheaths, or root nodules that indicate biologically ﬁxed nitrogen in spade tests.
Coffee farmers in Turrialba, familiar with the soil through more direct physical engagement, did
not do spade tests. When they dig in the soil, it is to plant different cultivars for their own consump-tion or to replace old coffee plants with new ones. They are thus able to notice the presence or
absence of “good”or“bad”organisms. Like alternative grain farmers, coffee farmers are attentive
Figure 1. Sensorial engagement during a spade test at a conventionally managed ﬁeld to compare with
regenerative ﬁelds. Photo: Isabelle Hugøy.1720 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
to plants as indicators. Antonio, who noticed that tomatoes started popping up on his farm, took
these as a “sign that the soil is regenerating. ”This, however, takes time.
Making time to take care together
Frequent spade tests are one way in which alternative farmers in Norway devote “care time ”for soil —
despite concerns of increased workload and lack of economic compensation that many farmers asso-
ciate with increased political incentives for productivity and ef ﬁciency, especially since 2014 (Meld.
St 11, [2016 –2 0 1 7 ] ) .C a r et i m ei n v o l v e sm a k i n gt i m ef o r “a range of vital practices and experiences
that remain discounted, or crushed [ …] by the productionist ethos ”(Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017: 210).
Alternative farmers challenge the faster pace that underpins the dominant agro-industrial model by
engaging in slower care practices that tune in to the rhythms, temporalities, and needs of soil andits constituents. This entails using a diversity of plants, earthworms, mycorrhiza fungi, and bacteria,
but also engaging with fellow farmers, family, and advisors.
Figure 2. Rhizoheaths. Photo: Isabelle Hugøy.Hugøy 1721
One of the ways that coffee farmers Maribel and Antonio seek to regenerate soils is by taking the
time to search for and collect mountain microorganisms (MM) in “virgin lands. ”Carlos scraped the
soil surface under a tree until a white substance became visible. “Microorganisms! This is pura
vida!”12exclaimed Carlos as he dug a piece up to show Antonio and me (Figure 3). Back at
Antonio ’s farm, we were joined by his family members and agronomist Marialurdes from the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG). She talked about bioinputs that “work with soil
life and therefore take more time ”than synthetic fertilizers. She talked about MM and the different
types of bacteria and fungi they constitute, including their important roles in decomposing organic
matter, making nutrients available for plants, and creating soil. “Now we ’re going to reproduce
them, ”she said. Marialurdes emphasized the importance of storing MM in an anaerobic place
for one month as the presence of air could lead to decay rather than growth. We gathered
around the living MM to remove any fresh leaves, roots, and rocks before blending in semolina
followed by molasses mixed with water. To check that the texture was right, Marialurdes took asample in her hand and squeezed it (Figure 4) before we pressed the lid onto a plastic barrel.
The time-consuming and uncertain nature of collecting and growing MM combined with the
subsequent making of other solid or liquid organic fertilizers (of which solid MM formed abase) contrast with the rapid temporalities and rhythms of the productionist logic that underpins
the agro-industrial model. There is no guarantee that farmers will ﬁnd MM in abundance and
growing it can fail. The slow unfolding of microbial processes and their seemingly unrulydynamic characteristics —microbes may be steered but cannot be fully controlled —contrast with
the quicker pace and arguably assured certainty of buying synthetic fertilizers in the store, applying
them, and then seeing how cultivars respond. Uncertainty also underpins regenerative farmers ’
stimulation of “microbial labor ”(Krzywoszynska, 2020) through making of ferment, compost
tea, and microbial carbonized compost, all of which are used to activate “good”microorganisms
to steer them in a regenerative direction, in the hopes that these microbial cultures (Hendy et al.,
Figure 3. Bene ﬁcial mountain microorganisms. Photo: Isabelle Hugøy.1722 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
2021) will have positive effects on soil and human health. While this time-consuming process of
making bioinputs, and potentially remaking them upon failure, may be considered “unproductive ”
in terms of time and capital, farmers in Østfold and Turrialba nevertheless considered “mistakes ”as
learning experiences —getting to know the workings of both “good”and“bad”microorganisms. In
doing so, they are engaging in microbial ethics (Hird, 2009) where they learn to include and stimu-late particular types of microbiology and exclude others in care networks (Krzywoszynska, 2019).
However, as I return to later, engaging in such ethics goes beyond individual engagements with soil
beings at the farm to include different (human) actors and social arenas.
Alternative farmers in Østfold also seek to devote time to care and seek to work ethically with
nature by imitating what is considered natural ecosystem aesthetics and processes through use of
cover crops. Cover crops sequester carbon through photosynthesis while simultaneously mitigatingsoil erosion and the need for synthetic fertilizers. Through photosynthesis, green plants absorb
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and convert it into sugars that pump through the roots into
the surrounding soil, creating root exudates (i.e., sugar substances). These sugars provide foodfor the fungal and bacterial microbiome surrounding the plants ’roots. In return, microorganisms
release nutrients which the plants absorb.
However, farmers cultivate cover crops differently. Whereas all six regenerative farmers included
in this study cultivate a large diversity of cover crops between the main crop to stimulate a “feeding ”
of a broad diversity of soil organisms, three out of four conservation farmer interlocutors cultivate
monocultures of grain and sow cover crops either shortly before or after harvest. Concerns, suchas weeds taking over for main crop, made conservation farmer Sigurd apprehensive for now:
I want maximum harvest. The 1% of Norway ’s area where we can cultivate food is where we must grow
as much food as possible and for as many as possible. However, it is tempting to consider soil [needs].
We have tried [ …] but we must learn more.
Figure 4. T esting the texture of MM before storage. Photo: Isabelle Hugøy.Hugøy 1723
The cultivation of cover crops as practiced by conservation farmers at the time of my ﬁeldwork was
partly criticized by regenerative farmers. While they applaud conservation farmers for growing
cover crops, they believe that it is not enough to cultivate them after harvesting the main crop.
The active photosynthesis that occurs in the green unripe grain cultivars halts as the grain ripensand transforms into a yellowy brown color, which means that there is no active “feeding ”of the
soil microbiology. “Cover crops are the heart of Regenerative Agriculture. It ’s worth having a
poor harvest if the cover crops are well established because they work in and with the soil untilnext season. They stimulate soil life, ”said Freyr, who along with fellow farmer, Ragnar, was par-
ticularly outspoken about sacri ﬁcing yield in favor of well-established cover crops. Regenerative
farmers ’critique of conservation farmers ’practice must be understood in light of what they consid-
ered their primary subject of care (Krzywoszynska, 2019) at any particular time. Compared to con-
servation farmers, regenerative farmers ’soil care was mainly motivated by and oriented toward
feeding soil life —at least in a slow transitional phase, which they consider would last between
three to ﬁve years. By then, they consider that soils will learn self-care and be self-sustaining.
Sigurd ’s orientation toward sustaining and increasing national food production for a growing
human population was echoed by an NLR advisor who criticized regenerative farmers ’years-long
sacriﬁce of yield: “We want to preserve yield and production while we take care of the environment
and the soil. ”This quote points not only to tensions between sustainability and productionist goals,
but also to the clash of the relatively slow pace of working with soil ecosystems and the fast-paceddemands of the agro-industry. Seen from a productionist-oriented logic and timescale, regenerative
farmers ’care time seems unproductive and less legitimate.
In other words, focusing on “feeding ”as an act of care (see also Kallio and LaFleur 2023) sug-
gests that conservation farmers ’soil care is more intensive and human-oriented compared to the
more extensive approach of regenerative farmers. Yet, the latter aspire to achieve similar harvests,
if not better, after a transitional phase when soil reaches a certain point of regeneration. What under-pins regenerative care time are short- and long-term economic calculations: while the former breaks
with the productionist ethos, the latter aligns with it. Human needs remain important in soil care,
although their needs may temporarily and partly be “neglected ”in favor of nonhuman needs.
Similarly, Antonio ’s investment of care time was not only out of love for the soil but also from eco-
nomic considerations: “The better quality the soil has, the better the harvest will be. ”This is where
the ethnographic material starts to push the boundaries of soil care in the existing literature, namelyby exemplifying that soil care at the farm level is not only conditioned by care for the farm business
(Krzywoszynska, 2019) but is partly conditioned by care for human needs across scales that
exceeds those of soil beings. This requires a deeper engagement with the underlying assumptionsthat inform care as it is conceptualized in human-soil literature.
Expanding care
There is an established agreement in the growing soil care literature in social sciences and human-
ities that raised awareness about soil as a living ecosystem will lead to increased attentiveness,
knowledge, and thus more ethical relations between humans and soil. While the literature acknowl-edges interconnections between and co-constitution of inert matter and living organisms in the soil,
analytical focus is typically directed toward engagements —by farmers, soil practitioners, or soil
scientists —with soil biology, which is likely a consequence of the increased attention to soil as
alive. This focus has important analytical implications.
First, the focus on “using life to manage life ”(Lorimer, 2020) risks assuming that explicit
engagements with soil biota is the only legitimate way of caring, which subsequently mayrender any less explicit engagements by other groups, such as conventional farmers, as “uncaring. ”
This manifests through accounts of different agricultural landscapes that implicitly connect to1724 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
modern agricultural practices (Kallio and LaFleur, 2023), imprecise mixes of terms such as conven-
tional and conservation farming in combination with insinuations that an altered awareness is a pre-
requisite to caring for soil (Krzywoszynska, 2019) which risk portraying conventional farmers as
“uncaring ”. While I agree with Krzywoszynska (2019) that modern farming practices tend to
render soils passive, I experienced that soil care persists in conventional farming through differing
forms. In other cases, the imprecise speculative ﬂoating between different levels of scale (Puig de la
Bellacasa, 2017) in explorations of “good”care which is implicitly contrasted with “bad”care tends
to cast some forms of soil management as more caring than others.
Second, the emphasis on the relational materiality of soil biota and related components in regen-
erating broken ecologies along with the mutual prospering between human and soil biota tend toveil not only what in alternative agricultural practice may be considered soil-decimating practices
(e.g., use of herbicides or soil tillage), but also negotiations between different concerns within a
productivist agricultural industry (Evans, 2022).
Third, contributions that suggest a causal relationship between increased attention to soil liveli-
ness, more knowledge, action, and ultimately more ethical human-soil relations veil mechanisms
that condition care (Kallio and LaFleur, 2023; Krzywoszynska et al., 2020; O ’Brien 2020; Puig
de la Bellacasa, 2017). This relates to the tendency to describe human-soil biology-animal-matter
relations rather than explaining their conditioning by often foregrounding the making of relations
while backgrounding or leaving out important structures and context. While some, notably anthro-pologists, are more generous in their descriptions of human relations and their situated social, pol-
itical, economic, and/or ecological circumstances (Lyons, 2020; Evans, 2022; Meulemans, 2020b;
Münster, 2021), there is an unful ﬁlled potential in other contributions to expand on the abovemen-
tioned situated drivers beyond the farm (Kallio and LaFleur, 2023; Krzywoszynska, 2019; O ’Brien
2020). Puig de la Bellacasa ’s (2017) exploration of permaculture ethics and human-soil relations
remain on a generalized level: humans, more-than-humans, and their signi ﬁcant localized social,
cultural, political, and economic contexts are either neutralized or absent in her argument for situ-
ated care. Consequently, this lack of situatedness risks returning the immanent, everyday ethical
doings to a traditional transcendent and abstract domain: an ethics she seeks at the outset tobreak away from. Furthermore, Abrahamsson and Bertoni ’s (2014) description of vermicomposting
not only remains on an abstract level that entirely ignores context, it, like Puig de la Bellacasa
(2017) and Kallio and LaFleur (2023) collapses the particular capacities of human care, such asfarmers ’intentions to accommodate conditions for “good”microorganisms to grow.
Taken together, these tendencies suggest that soil care literature employs a rather narrow and
romanticized understanding of care: one that revolves around an abstract individualism. In the follow-ing sections, I seek to broaden the approach to soil care by ﬁrst exemplifying that there are other forms
of care in alternative (but also conventional) agriculture that cannot be neatly separated from soil care,
and second, that alternative forms of care are conditioned by particular structures and contexts.
More-than-soil care
Ethnography from Østfold and Turrialba suggests a broader reading of soil care that considers not
only conventional soil care but also how soil care extends beyond care for the farm business to
include collaborative care with and for humans, genealogies, and sociocultural values across tem-poral and spatial scales. In both regions, most farmer interlocutors inherited (parts of or whole)
farms either through consanguinity or af ﬁnity. Farmer care for soil and cultivars connects to the
continued maintenance of social relations with ancestors who, through their past work and “dwell-
ing”(Ingold, 1993) on the farm, have left a part of themselves that has materialized in the agricul-
tural landscape that farmers continue to work and form relations with in the present.Hugøy 1725
In Norway, these intergenerational connections are best expressed through an established ideal
that orients farmers ’work: one generation should hand over the farm in a better condition than that
received. For regenerative farmer Freyr, who is the ﬁfth generation on his farm, improved soil vital-
ity is at the core of this endeavor. It is a means to build on, pay respect to, and further develop hispredecessors ’knowledge and work while also seeking to improve the ecological and economic pro-
spects for his son ’s future inheritance.
Although farmers are attentive to the interconnections between the biological, chemical, and
physical properties of the soil, I experienced that regenerative farmers typically foregrounded
soil biology while conventional farmers tended to focus on soil physics in talks about good soil
management. Conventional grain farmer Olaf stressed the need for patience, waiting for soils tobe“ready ”before starting våronn (the annual set of practices done in springtime), particularly
since machinery have gotten heavier over the last decades. This makes him and other farmers
(including alternative) more attentive to air pressure in tractor tires and when and where to driveon soils according to the season, weather, and temperature. They tend to contrast these careful con-
siderations with the careless attitude of their fathers ’generation of being “theﬁrst one out. ”Driving
too early on wet and cold soil compacts the soil affecting yields for many years ahead, potentiallynot only reducing pro ﬁt but compromising their predecessors ’work and their ability to support their
families. This suggests that soil care, be it alternative or conventional, is not limited to an eye for
farm business (Krzywoszynska, 2019), but embeds consideration for the work and care of previousstewards of the farm.
Freyr (like other regenerative interlocutors) was convinced that regenerative practices stimulate
long-term synergies between improved soil fertility, food nutritional values
13, and public, environ-
mental, planetary, and climatic health. Conservation farmers expressed similar convictions, but
these did not, in my experience, highlight food quality nor public health. Rather, food quantity
was a central concern as expressed by Sigurd —and which resonates with arguments about the
need to increase national food production for a growing human population that conventional
farmers typically articulated. Norwegian farmers have a critical societal function14, and consider
it their samfunnsansvar, societal responsibility, to produce as much food as possible, particularly
given the limited area that is suitable for cultivating food for human consumption and the political
discourse about increased national self-suf ﬁciency (Regjeringen, 2021). Samfunnsansvar is a
shared imagined ideal of “morally correct behaviour [ …] that promotes all actors in society, regard-
less of socio-economic status, to act responsibly and ethically for the collective good of society ”
(Maraire and Hugøy, 2023: 63). This ideal is based on Norwegian values of collaboration and
equality. During ﬁeldwork, the COVID-19 pandemic actualized the need for increased national
self-suf ﬁciency. Conservation farmers ’quantitative-oriented arguments about maintaining yield
can therefore be analyzed as a moral responsibility and individual commitment to contribute
equally to meet and care for collective human needs at a national (and indirectly international)level. Regenerative farmers ’expectation of increased yield after a transitional phase suggests a
comparable orientation. Thus, both alternative and conventional soil care are tightly interconnected
with a responsibility —that is guided by sociocultural values —to care for nonhuman and humans ’
well-being.
More-than-soil care also prevails in Turrialba, most notably through compassion for coffee cul-
tivars and farming. This affection is not unique for alternative farmers, and is partly manifested inconventional farmers ’dedication of “care time ”(Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017) to soil by interchan-
ging manual techniques with application of herbicides for weed removal to balance what they con-
sider “life-taking ”and“life-stimulating ”practices (Hugøy and Ødegaard, 2021). On several
occasions I heard articulations of love and care for soil and plants from conventional farmers
similar to those of Antonio. Some of these statements were responses to my questions about
why they continue to cultivate coffee despite economic hardships: “We have a lot of love for1726 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
coffee, that ’s why we keep on ﬁghting despite all odds. It ’s our heritage, we can ’t just abandon
that!”Care for plants and soils are deeply interconnected to care for ancestors ’work and the situated
heritage this represents on local, regional, and national levels.
Walking through Maribel ’s farm, she showed me recently renovated parts of her farm (after the
coffee rust epidemic) with newer varieties such as Obatá, which replaced older coffee plants of her
father ’s time that she had harvested from since childhood. Despite the physical absence of these
plants, her storytelling hints at the “unvisible ”(Finkelstein, 2019) historical layering of the land-
and soilscape. Conventional farmer Daniel also renovated parts of his farm, however, unlike
Maribel, he kept some less rust-affected Caturra plants that, though less productive, served as
“memories ”of past glory days and a continuation of the region ’s“tradition. ”Such continued
care for coffee plants despite economic hardships can, as suggested in one of the abovementioned
quotes, be considered care for turrialbeño regional heritage, which is built on coffee, sugar cane,
and dairy farming (Araya, 2003). Dedication to coffee production, despite its economic andregional decline, points to a particular genealogical and historical importance not only on local
and regional, but also national spatio-temporal scales. Coffee farmers follow the path of generations
before them who have cultivated a crop that has contributed to the country ’s social, cultural, and
economic development. Being a source of capital accumulation during the 19
thand a large part
of the twentieth century (Paige, 1997), coffee is a national symbol of the ticoidentity. Care for
soil and coffee plants is a means of subsistence and care for family and ancestors at a local levelthat feeds into regional and national identities and imaginaries. Sustainable farmers ’dedication
to work with bioinputs and promote biodiversity further connects to care for the environment
and climate. Yet, Daniel ’s decision was also in ﬂuenced by temporal and economic concerns:
while he considered cattle an alternative to coffee, he weighed the large investments of time and
capital.
In short, soil care at the farm level is partly conditioned by care for nonhuman as well as human
needs and/or sociocultural imaginaries on different spatio-temporal scales that exceed those of soil
beings. This points to the entanglements of care as both a private, individual concern and a collect-
ive (human) political and social responsibility (Tronto, 1993). Contemporary soil care literature,however, tends to shift attention from situated collective care relations between primarily
humans to more abstract and individual care relations between humans and networks of soil
beings and entities. My ethnography about the embeddedness of human social relations in soilcare suggests that we should move beyond ﬂat conceptualizations of care to consider the particu-
larities of nurturing human social relations (and human capacity to care/act with intention) in situ-
ated contexts. Daniel ’s case suggests a consideration of economic and other structures that
condition soil care.
Motivations and limitations of alternative soil care
While I consider that it was experience with soil challenges that raised awareness among farmersabout the need to act, it was arguably the presence of economic, epistemic mechanisms and socialnetworks that enabled the subsequent emergence of alternative soil care. Although conservation and
regenerative farmer-interlocutors in Østfold believe that yields will eventually improve by applying
alternative practices, these farmers have, compared to turrialbeño coffee farmers, the economic
means to take risks through experimentation. It was the absence of such capital and economic vul-
nerability that was a major factor for coffee farmers to seek alternatives. Of the 50 local coffee
farmers that Marialurdes advises, only 2 used bioinputs in 2021 compared to 21 in 2022. She attrib-uted this signi ﬁcant increase to the elevated costs of compound fertilizers, which according to her
had increased from approximately 29 USD in November 2021 (per 46 kg) to 64 USD in April 2022.Hugøy 1727
In both regions, however, the presence of alternative epistemes enabled the development of prac-
tices and collective caretaking of soil that, contrary to contributions that focus on individual human
engagements with nonhumans (e.g., Abrahamsson and Bertoni, 2014; Kallio and LaFleur, 2023;
Krzywoszynska, 2019; Puig de la Bellacasa, 2017), involves different (human) actors and socialarenas. Besides the already established Soil Health Group, the state-funded projects in Østfold
have arguably enabled social arenas and establishment of networks where farmers and advisors
exchange scienti ﬁc and nonscienti ﬁc literature, experiences, co-create knowledge, tools, and
recommendations about alternative farming in a collaborative manner in farms and beyond:
through seminars, podcasts, social media, daily phone calls, and/or coursework. In Turrialba,
these social networks between farmers were not as evident to me. Yet, according to Marialurdes,it was through such networks that more farmers reached out to MAG having learned of the training
she provided about bioinputs. Besides the few farmers I knew who took courses at the National
Learning Institute (INA), such as Antonio and Maribel, Marialurdes ’s engagement for working
with bioinputs and disseminating knowledge about them was important in introducing alternative
epistemes. The combination of these mechanisms in the respective regions allowed for the emer-
gence of alternative soil care.
However, unearthing care also means tending to soil decimating practices brought on by
farmers ’situatedness in the world economy, particular productions, and ecologies. Despite their
increasing attention to soil biology as one dimension of stimulating good soil health, farmers occa-sionally make decisions that run counter to their conceptions of good soil care. To understand these
decisions, it is necessary to scale up from the abstract individualism that dominates contemporary
soil care literature to look at political and economic structures that condition soil care.
Erik, who is passionate about soil health and convinced that herbicides kill good microorgan-
isms, decided not to act in accordance with his newly gained insights when high incidences of
weeds on parts of his farm had him worried. He cultivates and sells cereal seeds ( såkorn ) for
which he has a contract and receives a higher price compared to grain cultivated for human or
animal consumption. There are particularly high standards for “cleanliness ”in terms of the presence
of“intrusive ”non-cultivated crops in between this seed; adherence to these requirements is subject
to inspection by the grain trading company with which he contracts. Although the inspection is,
according to him, mostly concerned with the potential presence of the unwanted weed, common
wild oat ( Avena fatua ), which is regulated by law
15, Erik was worried that the inspectors would
see the many weeds and suspect him of having lost control over his ﬁelds, leading to a possible
loss of the contract. He therefore decided to apply herbicides that spare certain cover crops —
which he was cultivating in between the main crop for soil regenerating purposes —but that kill
“undesirable ”plant species. Erik supposed the chemical treatment would slow soil regeneration,
which is why he treated only certain areas of the ﬁelds for comparison with untreated areas. In
doing so, he was arguably striking a balance between different “matters of care ”(Puig de la
Bellacasa, 2017) while navigating practical and ethical dilemmas within the constraints of a produc-
tionist logic (Evans, 2022).
I interpreted Erik ’s concern as an ethical dilemma that juxtaposed long-term care for soil and
short-term care for his family and business, which are inherently entangled. Economic considera-
tions entered in con ﬂict with his conviction of good soil care, making him revert to what he con-
sidered antibiotic practices, adopted from the conventional model and established agronomicknowledge.
Despite Maribel and Antonio ’s mutual understanding that the continued use of herbicides has
impaired soil fertility, they both occasionally revert to it. Maribel does so for pragmatic reasonsduring harvest in order to be able to spot and pick up coffee that falls on the ground. The
harvest season is particularly busy for turrialbeño farmers. Climatic conditions in the region
lead to an uneven ﬂowering and bean ripening, meaning that farmers must harvest frequently1728 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
(12 to 14 rounds) compared to regions such as Los Santos where ﬂowering, ripening, and harvest
are signi ﬁcantly more concentrated. Removing weed with a handheld cordless mower which runs
on petrol, as both Antonio and Maribel do, is time consuming (approximately two weeks) but they
consider it worth the investment as it maintains living roots and stimulates soil life. However, itseffects are short lived (one month) compared to applying herbicides which can be done in two
days and last longer (three months). In other words, time spent removing weeds can potentially
mean loss of harvest as ripe berries must be picked within a certain timeframe. Like Maribel,Antonio ’s decision to apply herbicides on a part of his farm in 2023 —afterﬁve years of refraining
from it —was motivated by pragmatic and economic considerations. His economic situation had
changed dramatically since 2022: health issues meant that he could not do occasional work offhis farm to help cover car repair and other large expenses; the time he used to make biological fer-
tilizers meant less time to remove weeds and prepare for sowing new coffee plants within a certain
timeframe.
In short, care is situated in environmental, economic, social, epistemic, political, temporal, and/
or climatic, mechanisms that both enable and complicate alternative forms of soil care in Østfold
and Turrialba. These mechanisms complicate ideas of care as different “matters of care ”(Puig
de la Bellacasa, 2017) that come into con ﬂict and cannot be dealt with simultaneously, forcing care-
givers to prioritize who should be the primary subject of care: family and business or soil. In the
abovementioned cases, farmers occasionally revert to what they consider soil life decimating prac-tices in combination with probiotic ones to meet immediate needs. This points to the importance of
conceptualizing soil care as deeply interconnected with human care and considering the structures
that condition these on different levels of scale.
Conclusion
Soil care takes different forms within and across different sites and agricultural approaches. The
unearthing of care in two very different contexts shows that there are convergent patterns of
working with nature, although the alternative practices for doing so are diverse and challenge the
hegemonic conventional model differently. Alternative and conventional forms of care, I argue,
cannot be reduced to soil care or multispecies relations of ecology alone: rather, they are condi-
tioned by situated environmental, genealogical, sociocultural, temporal, epistemic, economic,and political dimensions of care. Attention to such structures is particularly important if civil
society and policy makers are to push for particular forms of sustainable and biologically
diverse farms (Shiva, 2008) in aspirations of more ethical relations between humans andmore-than-human beings and entities. Starting in 2023, the project Regenerative Region
16aims
to upscale regenerative agriculture in Viken County, Norway, by identifying mechanisms that
prevent farmers from moving toward alternative agriculture is one step. Another is EU ’s ambition
to reduce pesticide use by 50% by 2030 which may markedly affect coffee management in Costa
Rica (Fernandez, 2023) and lead to increased inclusion of bioinputs.
However, the (in)attention to such mechanisms in contemporary soil care literature runs the risk
of romanticizing ethical doings. This is arguably linked to the underlying assumptions that inform
the dominant relational materialist approach to care —namely a ﬂat relational ontology (Knudsen,
2023) that is networked rather than structured, that posits immanence and hybridity while decenter-ing and qualitatively undifferentiating agency (Svensson, 2021: 3). This ontological ﬂattening has
shifted notions of care from its original inspiration and preoccupation with human capacities to
care, its embedded social relations, and the structural conditionings that enable or disable particularforms of care. I embrace the inclusion of more-than-human beings in matters of care. However, I
contend that we must step cautiously to avoid a romantizicing path that indulges in a focus onHugøy 1729
more-than-human care at the expense of attention to human social relations and intentions with care
and its structural conditioning.
Highlights
Alternative agricultural approaches challenge the hegemonic conventional model in different
ways and to different extents.
Notions of soil care must be situated and expanded.
Soil care extends beyond multispecies relations of ecology and is conditioned by multiple
mechanisms.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to all research participants who shared their perspectives and experiences with me. I sincerely
appreciate my main supervisor Ståle Knudsen for his continued dedication and insightful feedback, and myco-supervisor Cecilie Vindal Ødegaard for her valuable comments. I also thank three anonymous reviewersfor their generous comments that have helped improve the article ’s focus, structure, and content. Thanks
also to Katharine Wheeler for assistance with language editing.
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publi-
cation of this article.
Funding
The author disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article: This work was supported by the L. Meltzers Høyskolefond (grant number 102818107,
103604105).
Notes
1. Working almost exclusively with conventional farmers in Jæren strengthened my understanding of the
conventional approach in Østfold.
2. https://www.bondelaget.no/get ﬁle.php/13948298-1583147522/MMA/Bilder%20NB/Klimaavtale%20med%
20regjeringen.pdf and https://cambioclimatico.go.cr/wp-content/uploads/2 019/11/PLAN-NACIONAL-
DESCARBONIZACION.pdf [accessed 20 October 2023].
3. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/AG.LND.AGRI.ZS?locations =CR [accessed 05 September 2023].
4. https://www.regjeringen.no/no/tema/mat- ﬁske-og-landbruk/landbrukseiendommer/innsikt/jordvern/
jordvern/id2009556/ [accessed 20 October 2023].
5. https://www.icafe.cr/nuestro-cafe/estructura-del-sector/ [accessed 04 September 2023].6. https://klimaservicesenter.no/kss/klimapro ﬁler/ostfold [accessed 05 September 2023].
7. The regenerative approach differs in Norway. Whereas the independent national competence center
Regenerativt Norge emphasizes tools for farm management (holistic management), measurement, and
documentation of ecosystem vitality (ecological outcome veri ﬁcation), the regenerative environment in
Østfold that I have been working with is mainly engaged in the development of new agronomic knowledgein practice.
8. http://www.mag.go.cr/bibliotecavirtual/AV-1069.pdf [accessed 12 October 2023]
9. All farmers are given pseudonyms.1730 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
10. Although I am sympathetic to calls for contextualizing soil degradation ’s social andbiophysical reality
(Engel-Di Mauro, 2014; Malone and McClintock, 2023), the soil challenges presented here arefarmers ’own experiences.
11. See Wells and Gradwell (2001) and Engel Di-Mauro ’s (2003) for analyses connecting gender with
farming practices.
12.Pura vida (pure life) is a ticosaying for attitude, lifestyle, and appreciation of life which in this context can
be analyzed as undisturbed and good “natural ”life in its “pure”form.
13. Connections between soil fertility and food nutritional value is also made by Bengal farmers (Dewan,
2021).
14. https://www.regjeringen.no/contentas sets/8da70b8196a24296ae730eaf99056c1b/liste-over-kritiske-
samfunnsfunksjoner_endelig-versjon- 22.12.pdf [accessed 19 September 2023]
15. https://lovdata.no/dokument/SFO/forskrift/1988-03-25-251 [accessed 12 September 2023]
16. Led by the University of Oslo with partners from the Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norges Vel,
Sunn Jord and funded by Viken County Municipality. I participate in their network and organization ofworkshops.
References
Abrahamsson S and Bertoni F (2014) Compost politics: Experimenting with togetherness in vermicomposting.
Environmental Humanities 4(1): 125 –148.
Almås R (2002) Norges Landbrukshistorie 1920 –2000: Frå Bondesamfunn Til Bioindustri. [Agricultural
History of Norway 1920 –2000. From Peasant Society to Bioindustry] . Tangen: Det Norske Samlaget.
Araya EC (2003) Turrialba. 100 Años de Desarollo. [Turrialba. 100 Years of Development] . San José:
Editorial de la Universidad de Costa Rica.
Avelino J, Cristancho M, Georgiou S, et al. (2015) The coffee rust crises in Colombia and Central America
(2008 –2013): Impacts, plausible causes and proposed solutions. Food Security 7(2): 303 –321.
Babin N (2015) The coffee crisis, fair trade, and agroecological transformation: Impacts on land-use change in
Costa Rica. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems 39: 99 –129.
Barad K (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and
Meaning . Durham: Duke University Press.
Barrera-Bassols N and Zinck JA (2003) Ethnopedology: A worldwide view on the soil knowledge of local
people. Geoderma 111(3 –4): 171 –195.
Bennett J (2010) Vibrant Matter. A Political Ecology of Things . Durham: Duke University Press.
Blaikie P (1985) The Political Economy of Soil Erosion in Developing Countries . New York: Routledge.
Blaikie P and Brook ﬁeld H (1987) Land Degradation and Society . London: Methuen.
Clement G (1996) Care, Autonomy, and Justice: Feminism and the Ethic of Care . Boulder, Colorado:
Westview Press.
Dewan C (2021) Entangling rice, soil, and strength in a freshwater village. In: Misreading the Bengal Delta:
Climate Change, Development, and Livelihoods in Costal Bangladesh . Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 99 –126.
Engel-Di Mauro S (2003) Disaggregating local knowledge: The effects of gendered farming practices on soil
fertility and soil reaction in SW Hungary. Geoderma 111(3): Ethnopedology: 503 –520.
Engel-Di Mauro S (2014) Ecology, Soils, and the Left: An Ecosocial Approach. First edition. Environmental
politics and theory . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Evans RM, 2022. One paddock at a time: a multispecies ethnography of farmers ’experiments with regenera-
tive agriculture in New Zealand . MA thesis. Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington.
Fernandez I (2023) Costa Rica ’s agri-food sector and the European Green Deal. Available at: https://
ticotimes.net/2023/05/30/costa-ricas-agri-food-sector-and-the-european-green-deal ( accessed 20 October
2023).
Finkelstein M (2019) The archive of the worker. In: The Archive of Loss: Lively Ruination in Mill Land
Mumbai . Durham: Duke University Press, 29 –49.Hugøy 1731
Fisher B and Tronto J (1990) Towards a feminist theory of caring. In: EK A and Nelson MK (eds) Circles of
Care: Work and Identity in Women ’s Lives . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 35 –62.
Forbord M, Bjørkhaug H and Burton R (2014) Drivers of change in Norwegian agricultural land control and
the emergence of rental farming. Journal of Rural Studies 33: 9–19.
Giller KE, Hijbeek R, Andersson JA, et al. (2021) Regenerative agriculture: An agronomic perspective.
Outlook on Agriculture 50(1): SAGE Publications Ltd: 13 –25.
Gjølberg M (2010) Varieties of corporate social responsibility (CSR): CSR meets the “Nordic model. ”.
Regulation & Governance 4(2): 203 –229.
Graeber D (2015) Radical alterity is just another way of saying “reality ”: A reply to Eduardo Viveiros de
Castro. HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory 5(2): 1 –41.
Granjou C and Meulemans G (2023) Bringing soils to life in the human and social sciences. Soil Security 10:
100082.
Haraway D (2008) When Species Meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hendy J, Rest M, Aldenderfer M, et al. (2021) Cultures of fermentation: Living with microbes: An introduction
to supplement 24. Current Anthropology 62(S24): S197 –S206.
Hird MJ (2009) The Origins of Sociable Life: Evolution After Science Studies . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hugøy I and Ødegaard CV (2021) Becoming ‘wild’at the intersection of knowledges: Coffee rust crisis in
Costa Rica. Ethnos 86(2): Routledge: 349 –369.
Ingold T (1993) The temporality of the landscape. World Archaeology 25(2): Taylor & Francis, Ltd.: 152 –174.
Kallio G and LaFleur W (2023) Ways of (un)knowing landscapes: Tracing more-than-human relations in
regenerative agriculture. Journal of Rural Studies 101: 103059.
Kirksey SE and Helmreich S (2010) The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cultural Anthropology
25(4): 545 –576.
Knudsen S (2015) Corporate social responsibility in local context: International capital, charitable giving and
the politics of education in Turkey. Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 15(3): 369 –390.
Knudsen S (2023) Critical realism in political ecology: An argument against ﬂat ontology. Journal of Political
Ecology 30(1): 1. University of Arizona Libraries: 1 –22.
Knutsen H (2020) NIBIO POP. NIBIO 6(8): 1 –8.
Krogh L and Paarup-Laursen B (1997) Indigenous soil know ledge among the Fulani of northern Burkina Faso:
Linking soil science and anthropology in ana lysis of natural resource management. GeoJournal 43(2): 189 –197.
Krzywoszynska A (2019) Caring for soil life in the Anthropocene: The role of attentiveness in more-than-
human ethics. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 44(4): 661 –675.
Krzywoszynska A (2020) Nonhuman labor and the making of resources: Making soils a resource through
microbial labor. Environmental Humanities 12(1): 227 –249.
Krzywoszynska A (2023) Taking soil care seriously: a proposition. In: Patzel N, Grunwald S, Brevik EC, et al.
(eds) Cultural Understanding of Soils . Springer Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13169-1_19
Krzywoszynska A, Banwart S, Blacker D, et al. (2020) To know, to dwell, to care: Towards an actionable,
place-based knowledge of soils. In: Salazar JF, Granjou C and Kearnes M (eds) Thinking with Soils:
Material Politics and Social Theory . London: Bloomsbury Academic, 89 –106.
Krzywoszynska A and Marchesi G (2020) Toward a relational materiality of soils. Environmental Humanities
12(1): 190 –204.
Latour B (1999) Circulating reference: Sampling the soil in the Amazon forest. In: Pandora ’s Hope: Essays on
the Reality of Science Studies . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 24 –79.
Latour B (2004) Politics of Nature: How to Bring the Sciences into Democracy . Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Lavelle P and Spain AV (eds) (2001) Soil organisms. In: Soil Ecology . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 201 –356.
Lorimer J (2020) The Probiotic Planet: Using Life to Manage Life . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Løvberget AI and Rognstad O (2021) Jordleige stadig meir utbreidd. [Land rent increasingly widespread].
Available at: https://www.ssb.no/jord-skog-jakt-og- ﬁskeri/artikler-og-publikasjoner/jordleige-stadig-meir-
utbreidd (accessed 4 September 2023).1732 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
Lyons KM (2020) Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners and Life Politics . Durham: Duke University Press.
Malone M and McClintock N (2023) A critical physical geography of no-till agriculture: Linking degraded
environmental quality to conservation policies in an Oregon watershed. Canadian Geographies /
Géographies Canadiennes 67(1): 74 –91.
Maraire OE and Hugøy I (2023) Samfunnsansvar is not CSR: Mapping expectations and practices of (corporate)
social responsibility in Norway. In: Knudsen S (eds) Corporate Social Responsibility and the Paradoxes
of State Capitalism: Ethnographies of Norwegian Energy and Extraction Businesses Abroad . Oxford:
Berghahn, 63 –89.
Marchesi G (2020) Justus von Liebig makes the world: Soil properties and social change in the nineteenth
century. Environmental Humanities 12(1): 205 –226.
Mauss M (1995) Gaven: Utvekslingens Form Og Årsak i Arkaiske Samfunn. [The Gift: Forms and Functions
of Exchange in Archaic Societies]. (tran. T Hylland Eriksen) . Oslo: Cappelen Akademisk Forlag AS.
McElwee P (2021) The role of soils in learning and inspiration, physical and psychological experiences, and in
supporting identities. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 376(1834):
Royal Society: 20200184.
Meld. St. 11 (2016 –2017) Endring og utvikling: En fremtidsrettet jordbruksproduksjon. [Change and devel-
opment: A future-oriented agricultural productio n]. White paper. Oslo: Ministry of Agriculture and
Food.
Meulemans G (2020a) Wormy collaborations in practices of soil construction. Theory, Culture & Society
37(1): 93 –112.
Meulemans G (2020b) Reclaiming freak soils: from conquering to journeying with urban soils. In: Salazar JF,
Granjou C, Kearnes M, et al. (eds) Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social Theory . London:
Bloomsbury Academic, 157 –173.
Mol A (2008) The Logic of Care: Health and the Problem of Patient Choice . London; New York: Routledge.
Müller H (1996) Veier inn i den ‘tause kunnskapen ’. [pathways into tacit knowledge]. Norsk Antropologisk
Tidsskrift 7(3): 225 –233.
Münster D (2021) The nectar of life: Fermentation, soil health, and bionativism in Indian natural farming.
Current Anthropology 62(S24): S311 –S322.
Münster U, Dooren Tv, Schroer SA, et al. (2021) Multispecies care in the sixth extinction. Available at: https://
culanth.org/ ﬁeldsights/series/multispecies-care-in-the-sixth-extinction (accessed 12 September 2023).
Nyborg Å, Solbakken E, Svendgård-Stokke S, et al. (2008) Jordsmonn på dyrka mark i Østfold: Klassi ﬁkasjon,
egenskaper og utbredelse. Skog og landskap. [Soils on cultivated area in Østfold: classi ﬁcation, character-
istics and distribution. Forest and landscape]. Available at: https://nibio.brage.unit.no/nibio-xmlui/handle/11250/2485499 (accessed 16 September 2023).
O’Brien AT (2020) Ethical acknowledgment of soil ecosystem integrity amid agricultural production in
Australia. Environmental Humanities 12(1): 267 –284.
OECD (2017) Agricultural policies in Costa Rica . OECD Food and Agricultural Reviews. Paris: OECD
Publishing. Available at: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/agriculture-and-food/agricultural-policies-in-
costa-rica_9789264269125-en (accessed 12 September 2023).
Paige JM (1997) Coffee and Power: Revolution and the Rise of Democracy in Central America . Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Paul E (2015) Soil Microbiology, Ecology and Biochemistry
. San Diego: Academic Press.
Ponte S (2002) The “latte revolution"? regulation, markets and consumption in the global coffee chain. World
Development 30(7): 1099 –1122.
Posey DA (1985) Indigenous management of tropical forest systems: The case of the Kayapó Indians of the
Brazilian Amazon. Agroforestry Systems 3: 139 –158.
Pratt L and Harner C (1997) Sustainability analysis of the coffee industry in Costa Rica. Available at: https://
www.incae.edu/sites/default/ ﬁles/cen761.pdf.
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2017) Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human Worlds . Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.Hugøy 1733
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2019) Re-animating soils: Transforming human –soil affections through science,
culture and community. The Sociological Review 67(2): 391 –407.
Regjeringen (2021) Hurdalsplattformen. For en regjeri ng utgått fra Arbeiderpart iet og Senterpartiet 2021 –2025. [The
Hurdal platform. For a government based on the Labor Party and the Center Party 2021-2025]. Available at:
https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/cb0adb6c6fee428caa81bd5b339501b0/no/pdfs/hurdalsplattformen.
pdf (accessed 17 September 2023).
Richter DB, Bacon AR, Mobley ML, et al. (2011) Human –soil relations are changing rapidly: Proposals from
SSSA ’s cross-divisional soil change working group. Soil Science Society of America Journal 75(6): 2079 –2084.
Richter DB and Yaalon D (2012) The changing model of soil. Revisited. Soil Science Society of America
Journal 76: 766 –778.
Robinson F (1999) Globalizing Care: Ethics, Feminist Theory, and International Relations . Boulder,
Colorado: Westview Press.
Salazar JF, Granjou C, Kearnes M, et al. (eds) (2020) Thinking with Soils: Material Politics and Social Theory .
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Schroer SA, van Dooren T, Münster U, et al. (2021) Introduction: multispecies care in the sixth extinction.
Available at: https://culanth.org/ ﬁeldsights/introduction-multispecies-care-in-the-sixth-extinction (accessed
28 August 2023).
Scott JC (1998) Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed .
London: Yale University Press.
Shiva V (2008) Soil Not Oil: Environmental Justice in an Age of Climate Crisis . Cambridge: South End Press.
Statens eierrapport (2022) Statens eierrapport - Statens direkte eierskap i selskaper. [State ownership report -
The state ’s direct ownership in corporations] . Oslo: The Department of Trade and Fisheries.
Svensson O (2021) The matter of energy emerges: Bridging the divide between con ﬂicting conceptions of
energy resources. Energy Research & Social Science 72: 101895.
Swidler E (2009) The social production of soil. Soil Science 174(1): 2 –8.
Tronto JC (1993) Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care . London: Psychology Press.
Tsing AL (2015) The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Oxford:
Princeton University Press.
Turner T (1993) The role of indigenous peoples in the environmental crisis: The example of the Kayapo of the
Brazilian Amazon. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 36(3): 526 –545.
Uekoetter F (2006) Know your soil: Transitions in farmers ’and scientists ’knowledge in Germany. In: McNeill
JR and Winiwarter V (eds) Soils and Societies: Perspectives from Environmental History . Strand, Isle of
Harris: White Horse Press, 322 –340.
Viguera B, Alpizar F, Harvey CA, et al. (2019) Percepciones de cambio climático y respuestas adaptativas de
caﬁcultores costarricenses de pequeña escala. [Perceptions of climate change and adaptive responses from
small-scale Costa Rican coffee farmers]. Agronomía Mesoamericana : 333 –351.
Vogt M (2019) Variance in Approach Toward A “Sustainable ”Coffee Industry in Costa Rica: Perspectives
from Within; Lessons and Insights . London: Ubiquity Press.
Walday M, Engesmo A, Fagerli CW, et al. (2023) Overvåking av Ytre Oslofjord 2019-2023 - Årsrapport 2021.
[Monitoring of the Outer Oslofjord 2019-2023. Annual report] . Oslo: Norsk institutt for vannforskning.
Wall D, Bardgett RD, Covich A, et al. (2004) The need for understanding how biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning affect ecosystem services in soils and sediments. In: Wall D (eds) Sustaining Biodiversity
and Ecosystem Services in Soils and Sediments . Washington, DC: Island Press, 1 –12.
Wells B and Gradwell S (2001) Gender and resource management: Community supported agriculture as
caring-practice. Agriculture and Human Values 18: 107 –119.
West S, Haider LJ, Masterson V, et al. (2018) Stewardship, care and relational values. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability 35: 30 –38.1734 EPE: Nature and Space 7(4)
