URBAN ECOSYSTEM JUSTICEScott Kellogg
www.routledge.com
Routledge titles are available as eBook editions in a range of digital formats
9780367858704 Full Cover_HBK.indd  1 12-07-2021  11:59:17Routledge Equity, Justice and the Sustainable City 
URBAN ECOSYSTEM JUSTICE 
STRATEGIES FOR EQUITABLE SUSTAINABILITY AND 
ECOLOGICAL LITERACY IN THE CITY 
Scott Kellogg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Urban Ecosystem Justice 
Merging together the fields of urban ecology, environmental justice, and urban environmental education, Urban Ecosystem Justice promotes building fair, 
accessible, and mutually beneficial relationships between citizens and the soils, water, atmospheres, and biodiversity in their cities. 
This book provides a framework for recentering issues of justice and fairness 
in sustainability discourse while challenging the profound ecological alienation experienced by urban residents. While the urban sustainability movement has had many successes in the past few decades, there remain areas for it to grow. For one, the benefits of sustainability have disproportionately benefited wealthier city residents, with concerns over equity, justice, and social sustainability frequently taking a back seat to economic and environmental considerations. Additionally, many city dwellers remain estranged from and unfamiliar with ecological processes, with urban environments often thought of as existing outside of nature or as hopelessly degraded. Through a citizen-centered lens, the book offers a guide to reconciling these issues by demonstrating how questions of equity, access, and justice apply to the biophysical dimensions of the urban ecosystem: soil, water, air, waste, and biodiversity. Drawing heavily from the fields of urban ecology, environmental justice, and ecological design, this book lays out a science of cities for people: a pedagogical platform that can be used to promote ecological literacy in underrepresented urban communities through affordable and decentralized means. 
This book provides both a theoretical and practical field guide to students and 
researchers of urban sustainability, city planners, architects, policymakers, and activists wishing to develop reciprocal relationships with urban ecologies. 
Scott Kellogg has been Educational Director of the Radix Ecological Sustainability 
Center, an urban environmental education and just sustainabilities advocacy nonprofit 
based in Albany, New Y ork, since 2009. Prior to Radix, Scott was a cofounder and collective member of the Rhizome Collective in Austin, T exas, an urban sustainability and activist center which functioned from 2000 to 2009. Scott has a PhD in Science and T echnology Studies from Rennselaer Polytechnic Institute, a master’s degree in Environmental Science and Policy from Johns Hopkins, and a bachelor’s degree in Humanities from the New College of California. He teaches in a number of graduate and undergraduate programs in universities throughout the Northeast, including Bard College’s Masters in Environmental Education program. Scott is the coauthor of T oolbox for Sustainable City Living: A Do-It-Ourselves Guide (2008). 
 Routledge Equity, Justice and the Sustainable City 
Series editors: Julian Agyeman and Stephen Zavestoski 
This series positions equity and justice as central elements of the transition toward 
sustainable cities. The series introduces critical perspectives and new approaches to the practice and theory of urban planning and policy that ask how the world’s cities can become ‘greener’ while becoming more fair, equitable and just. 
The Routledge Equity Justice and the Sustainable City series addresses sustainable 
city trends in the global North and South and investigates them for their potential to ensure a transition to urban sustainability that is equitable and just for all. These trends include municipal climate action plans; resource scarcity as tipping points into a vortex of urban dysfunction; inclusive urbanization; “complete streets” as a tool for realizing more “livable cities”; the use of information and analytics toward the creation of “smart cities”. 
The series welcomes submissions for high-level cutting edge research books that 
push thinking about sustainability, cities, justice and equity in new directions by challenging current conceptualizations and developing new ones. The series offers theoretical, methodological, and empirical advances that can be used by profes -
sionals and as supplementary reading in courses in urban geography, urban sociol-ogy, urban policy, environment and sustainability, development studies, planning, and a wide range of academic disciplines. 
Understanding Urban Cycling 
Exploring the Relationship Between Mobility, Sustainability and Capital Justin Spinney 
Understanding Just Sustainabilities from Within 
A Case Study of a Shared-Use Commercial Kitchen in Connecticut Phoebe Godfrey 
Urban Ecosystem Justice 
Strategies for Equitable Sustainability and Ecological Literacy in the City Scott Kellogg 
For more information about this series, please visit www.routledge.com/ 
Routledge-Equity-Justice-and-the-Sustainable-City-series/book-series/EJSC 
 Urban Ecosystem Justice 
Strategies for Equitable Sustainability 
and Ecological Literacy in the City 
Scott Kellogg 
First published 2022 
by Routledge 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
and by Routledge 
605 Third Avenue, New Y ork, NY 10158 
Routledge is an imprint of the T aylor & Francis Group, an informa business © 2022 Scott Kellogg The right of Scott Kellogg to be identified as author of this work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording , or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
T rademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and e xplanation 
without intent to infringe. 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Names: Kellogg, Scott T ., author. Title: Urban ecosystem justice : strategies for equitable sustainability and 
ecological literacy in the city / Scott Kellogg. 
Description: Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon ; New Y ork, NY : Routledge, 
2022. | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2021014786 (print) | LCCN 2021014787 (ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Urban ecology (Sociology) | Sustainable development. | 
Environmental justice. 
Classification: LCC HT241 .K46 2022 (print) | LCC HT241 (ebook) | 
DDC 307.76—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021014786 LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021014787 
ISBN: 978-0-367-85870-4 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-08047-5 (pbk) ISBN: 978-0-367-85871-1 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.4324/9780367858711 T ypeset in Goudy 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  Contents 
List of figures and tables vii 
Prologue ix 
Introduction 1 
PART I 
Urban ecosystem justice – a chaotic bricolage of concepts 7 
1 Ecological alienation – roots and remedies 9 
2 Exclusion of social sustainability and emergence of enviro -
technocratic governance 42 
PART II 
Urban ecosystem justice – urban ecosystem justice applications 61 
3 Urban soil justice: Ecoremediation versus the toxisphere 63 
4 Urban waters justice: DIY river remediation in the aquatic 
commons 98 
5 Urban atmospheric justice 121 
6 Urban compost justice 141 
7 Urban biodiversity justice 172 
vi Contents 
 
 
  
 
 PART III 
Urban ecosystem justice pedagogy 207 
8 The radix experiment 209 
Conclusion to the book 232 
Index 235 
   
   
 
    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   Figures and tables 
Figures 
1.1 Modernity and Nature–Society Dualism 10 
1.2 The Great Dying – Drawn by a French Missionary of Abenaki 
in Maine During a Smallpox Epidemic in 1740 12 
1.3 Urban Metabolism – Art by Deniz Ayaz 25 
1.4 Ecological versus Engineering Resilience (Hoang, 2017) 31 
3.1 De-paving 70 
3.2 Applying Compost T ea 83 
3.3 Brewing Compost T ea 83 
3.4 Oyster Mushroom Cultivation 86 
3.5 Mealworms at W ork 87 
3.6 Soil Shop at Radix 90 
4.1 Launch of the Island 99 
4.2 Warning Sign 102 
4.3 Close-up of Island Roots 105 
4.4 Entry-level Island 106 
4.5 On the Shores of the Hudson 107 
4.6 Incubating the Islands 108 
4.7 Simple Rain Barrel 110 
4.8 A Completed System 112 
4.9 Aquaponics at Radix 116 
5.1 Size Comparison of Air Pollutants (EPA, 2020b) 126 
5.2 Community Nursery 132 
5.3 Unplowed Sidewalks 134 
6.1 Linear Food Waste 144 
6.2 Composting Thermometer 147 
6.3 Composting Demonstration 150 
6.4 Hierarchy for Reducing Food Scraps and Other Organic Discards 151 
6.5 Food Recovery Hierarchy – US EPA 152 
6.6 W orm Composting 154 
6.7 Biogas Digester 161 
6.8 Inside of Digester 162 
 
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   viii Figures and tables 
6.9 Community Composting Bike Hauling 165 
6.10 Chicken-assisted Composting 168 
7.1 Inside of Dovecote 179 
7.2 Silkworms 181 
7.3 Silk Moth 184 
7.4 T apped Maple T rees 186 
7.5 Boiling the Sap 188 
7.6 Black Soldier Fly 189 
7.7 Soldier Fly Larvae 191 
7.8 Insectorium 193 
7.9 Honeybees at Radix 195 
7.10 Mason Bees Emerging from Bee Hotel 196 
7.11 Wine Cap Stropharia 198 
8.1 Ecological Literacy Learning 217 
8.2 Participant in Radix Y outh Program 219 
8.3 Y outh Learning About W orm Composting 227 
8.4 Launching a Floating Island 228 
8.5 Y outh on a Kayaking T rip on the Hudson 228 
8.6 Y outh at DEC Air Monitoring Station 229 
T ables 
6.1 T able of Carbon (Browns) and Nitrogen (Greens) 146 
6.2 Charting a Binary 158 
 
 
 
  
 
  Author’s prologue: sustainability – the 
new opioid of the masses 
Since the beginning of the new millennium I have built a professional career in 
the field of urban sustainability. While consisting in part of consultation, writing, 
lecturing, and policy work, the bulk of it has been in the nonprofit sector, design -
ing, managing, and operating urban sustainability demonstration and education 
sites. These have been the Rhizome Collective in Austin, T exas, which functioned from 2000 to 2009 and the Radix Ecological Sustainability Center in Albany, New Y ork, which began in 2009 and continues to operate to the present day. Dur -
ing this time, the shape, purpose, and central players of urban sustainability have changed enormously, evolving from a radical fringe movement rife with transform-ative potential to a thoroughly mainstream, co-opted, misapplied, and potentially dangerous concept. This book is the outgrowth of these years of experience and research and an effort to grapple with the current state and future direction of the urban sustainability concept. 
My personal path from early environmental consciousness to the formation of 
the Rhizome Collective has been one of change and transformation, as well. While 
I was in high school, I considered myself to be an “environmentalist”, concerned 
with the most prominent environmental issues of the time including rainforest destruction, ozone depletion, acid rain, toxic waste, the greenhouse effect, and so on. These “post-Earth Day” causes popular in the late 1980s and early 1990s took place before sustainability discourse became widespread and reinforced a modernistic notion that humans were an inherently destructive species separate from nature and destined to ruin the planet. The message internalized was that the best an environmentalist could hope to do would to be less of a human: con-serve resources, be a vegetarian, recycle, consume less, avoid procreation, feel guilty about one’s own existence, etc. T aken to its logical conclusion, this mindset would argue that it would be best for humanity to commit speciecide in order to save the earth. Seldom, if ever, discussed were ways in which it would be possible for humans to live in a relative, if only discordant, harmony with the global eco -
system.
1 W e remained ignorant of the many examples of human societies doing 
so outside of the trajectory of Indo-European agriculturalists-turned-dominant W estern culture with which we were familiar (Balée, 2002). 
These attitudes were strongly reinforced for me at a Model UN Conference 
I attended in eleventh grade at the United Nations where a speaker discussed 
x Author’s prologue: sustainability 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   rainforest conservation in the Amazon Basin and the need to create protected 
preserves free of human activity (including indigenous peoples). Y ears later (in my PhD program) I read a piece by Donna Haraway where she deftly dissects this 
standpoint, describing it as an “Eden under glass” (Jamison, 1992). At some point in my early undergraduate years as my personal political beliefs became more radi-cal, I became disenchanted with the environmental movement, seeing it as a weak 
liberal cause that did little to significantly challenge the capitalistic forces respon-sible for ecological destruction and social injustice. I became more involved with 
decentralized nonviolent anarchist “social” campaigns such as Food Not Bombs, Homes Not Jails, and political prisoner campaigns. Involvement with these radical movements helped me to develop a solid critique of capitalist society, one that has remained central, albeit less pronounced, in my work to this day . 
I remained involved in radical causes throughout my post-undergraduate years, 
culminating in the then-nascent global justice movement’s massive demonstrations against entities such as the IMF , WTO, the W orld Bank, and the US Republican party. While initially exhilarating, these rallies ultimately led to me suffering from a degree of activist burnout – multiple arrests as well as the effects of low-intensity 
psychological warfare methods employed by police necessitated that I changed my 
personal tactics for achieving social transformation. The alter-globalization move -
ment had a clear stance and well-developed critique against global capitalism but offered little in the way of solutions. I began to ponder the meaning of the move -
ment’s rallying cry “another world is possible”: How do people eat in this other world? How do they procure water, energy, and deal with their wastes? How are the roles and responsibilities typically carried out by governmental agencies such as education, health care, transportation, and decision-making fulfilled by com-munity organizations? Is it possible to plant the seed of this alternative world while simultaneously taking a hatchet to the dominant systems which we opposed? 
Pondering these questions sent me on a quest to find their answers that led 
me to the permaculture movement. Permaculture (a portmanteau of “permanent” 
and “agriculture” and “culture”) is a design philosophy that strives to create regen-erative human–ecological relationships in areas including (but not limited to) food, water, waste, building, energy, and social systems. While drawing primarily from the ecological sciences, permaculture also borrows concepts from traditional ecological knowledge, agronomy, landscape design, architecture, and a variety of other disciplines, giving students a practical skill set of tools and technologies for building sustainable infrastructures (Lockyer, 2013). While not explicitly politi-cally aligned in one sense or another, permaculture’s open source and decentral -
ized structure made it highly compatible with the radical anarchistic philosophies I held at the time. In this sense, permaculture provided the philosophical and 
pragmatic counterbalance to my activism-informed social criticism that I had been 
seeking – for every “no” I previously had, I now had a “yes”. Being able to point 
to positive, functioning alternatives lent considerable strength and validity to my critique. 
While having enormous potential as both a design philosophy and a worldview, 
the permaculture movement was not without its shortcomings. Foremost among 
Author’s prologue: sustainability xi 
 
 
 
 them is the fact that permaculture was created primarily for extensive rural and 
land-based applications. While employed by many working farmers in the Global South, based on my observations most of permaculture’s adherents in the Global North were white, middle class, and landowning. While there was some discussion of urban applications, most of the material in a standard permaculture curriculum had little relevance to city dwellers and even less to low-income urban renters. Furthermore, I saw permaculture’s political ambiguity as a potential weakness of 
the movement (while mostly dominated by leftists, there was a troubling right-leaning libertarian element at play as well). 
In response to these critiques, I sought to synthesize an urban-based permacul-
ture with anarchist politics, developing a concept I named “radical sustainability”. 
This was also a reaction to the growing neoliberalization of sustainability (most notably in the form of “sustainable development”) and to corporate greenwash-ing in general (Swyngedouw, 2010). With radical sustainability in mind, myself and a handful of other like-minded activists cofounded the Rhizome Collective in Austin, T exas. Rhizome consisted of a nearly 10,000 square foot warehouse that functioned both as an urban sustainability demonstration site and as a center for community organizing, providing space to various activist organizations includ-ing Food Not Bombs, Bikes Across Borders, the Independent Media Center, and Inside Books (a books-for-prisoners operation). Interspersed among these organi-zations’ workspaces were gardens, constructed wetlands, wind turbines, chickens, parabolic solar cookers, rain barrels, aquaponics fish farms, and composting toilets. Intended to be simple, affordable, and made of repurposed components, the place -
ment and respective ebbs and flows of these systems were strategically aligned, guided by permaculture design principles (Holmgren, 2002). 
By housing these disparate components in common space, we hoped to create 
a vital cross-pollination of people, ideas, and interests, tangibly demonstrating the necessary interconnectedness of social and ecological justice issues (and therein challenging a persistent meme in many activist circles that maintains these as sep -
arate). For us, “rhizome” was both a literal botanical term and a metaphor. Inspired by the Deleuzian/Guattarian concept of rhizomatic organization (Deleuze, 2004), we saw ourselves as being one autonomous chapter that was linked to others at the root level through an interconnected network. Just like the running bamboo that was spread around the space’s periphery, our movement was also hidden under -
ground, tenacious, and difficult to uproot. 
The Rhizome Collective lasted from 2000 to 2009, in that time evolving from a 
burned-out dilapidated shell of a warehouse inhabited by circus punks to a reason-ably well-functioning consensus-run collective, operating a thriving community space and receiving federal grant funding. Rhizome’s peak likely occurred in 2004 with the acquisition of a ten-acre brownfield parcel and subsequent receipt of an EPA Brownfields Cleanup Award. The property, located on the edge of Austin city limits, had been previously used for several decades as an illegal dumping site and was covered in a literal mountain of debris. Aware of how much it would cost to clean the site, its owner was eager to donate it to a nonprofit and at least receive a tax write-off. Upon learning of the property, we simultaneously applied for and 
xii Author’s prologue: sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 received a $200,000 EPA grant to clean the site and transform it into an urban 
sustainability education park. Over the next two years we set about the cleanup, paying ourselves to carefully remove and separate out every piece of garbage, 
sorting them according to their reuse or recyclability potential. State and federal authorities were stunned when we finished the project on schedule and received a certificate of completion, amazed that we were able to complete the cleanup with such limited funding and scant resources. It was likely our nimbleness, resourceful -
ness, motivation, and lack of extensive overhead costs that allowed us to succeed where larger organizations failed.
2 
Perhaps, the most interesting aspect of the entire project to me was our attend-
ance of two annual national EPA-sponsored brownfield conferences in Denver and Boston. Expecting to find other small nonprofits such as ours working on similar endeavors, I instead found representatives of an apparently large and grow -
ing industry related to the acquisition, cleanup, and subsequent redevelopment of blighted urban properties. Comprising a coalition of government officials, massive engineering firms, and real estate interests, it became obvious to me that govern-ment brownfield programs primarily served to redirect federal dollars into these private corporations, who no doubt in turn created a powerful lobby. A handful 
of small nonprofits such as ours were given funding to create the appearance that issues of social sustainability were taken into consideration. At these conferences there was virtually no discussion about the social justice components or potential negative repercussions of brownfields development, such as creating local employ -
ment or the risk of gentrification. That was perhaps my first exposure to a style of depoliticized technocratic sustainability governance that I’ve since encountered many times and that in many ways has come to dominate much of sustainability discourse. 
In the time between the creation of Rhizome and today, the character and 
extent of urban sustainability, along with its associated discourses, have changed considerably. What was a radical idea in 2000 has since become commonplace, with the idea of “sustainable cities” now having largely been embraced by urban planners, corporations, and the mainstream media (Swyngedouw, 2010). When Rhizome began, it seemed to me (perhaps naively) that merely planting a gar -
den in the city was a radical act. By 2008, it was obvious that it was no longer the case. Sensing that urban sustainability was in danger of being co-opted, Rhi-zome cofounder Stacy Pettigrew and I wrote the book, T oolbox for Sustainable City 
Living: A Do-It-Ourselves Guide (Kellogg, 2008). The book was an attempt not only to document the previous years’ work at Rhizome but also to securely situ-ate urban sustainability (or at least aspects of it) within a radical political plat -
form. It was here that we detailed the notion of “radical sustainability” and made explicit references to its use in “dual-power anarchist strategies”. Furthermore, the book extensively critiqued “green capitalism” and warned of the potential for sustainability endeavors to result in the gentrification of low-income communities. 
Being one of the first books of its kind on a topic of growing popularity, “T oolbox” was well received and sold vigorously. Within a year of its publication, however, a flurry of other similarly themed “urban homesteading” books were released. 
Author’s prologue: sustainability xiii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 In general, they were apolitical, slickly produced, and no doubt appealed to a wider 
commercial audience. Urban sustainability had gone mainstream, and “T oolbox” was quickly relegated to radical fringes. Immediately, I witnessed a backlash from 
“post-politically” minded sustainability advocates. At one book publicity event in Phoenix, Arizona, I was instructed by the organizer to avoid bringing up any 
politically controversial topics and to only focus on “gee-whiz” type positive solu-tions (I proceeded to anyway, much to their chagrin). I saw a dangerous potential 
for sustainability to become an opioid of the masses. Promising simple solutions – 
pretty gardens, solar panels, bicycle transportation, and rain barrels – people were 
distracted, feeling as if they were making a difference all the while the capitalist machine churned onwards. Permaculture, if not continually engaged with critical issues of equity, justice, and access, risked being reduced to a chic gardening fad of the middle class. 
Rhizome ultimately fell victim to the pressures of urban growth that we were 
unintentionally complicit in fueling. In 2009, an internal policy change in Austin’s City Code enforcement department triggered building inspectors to target spaces such as ours that informally hosted arts, music, or community activism. Spaces such as these were apparently seen as undesirable to the new incoming occupants of the high-end residential complexes now being built across the city’s historically Latino East Side. Even the industrially zoned neighborhoods where Rhizome was located were subject to crackdowns. This process of displacement and gentrifica-tion had been underway for some time, however, and was to at least some degree exacerbated by the presence of “bohemian” operations such as Rhizome. Despite being outspoken against the rapid increase in property values and allying with anti-gentrification causes, we ultimately succumbed to the enormous economic pressure put on our community, a consequence of Austin’s incredible growth rate over the 2000–2010 decade. In March 2009, we were subject to a building inspec-
tion that resulted in extensive code violations that would have been impossibly expensive to remedy. Somewhat ironically, many of the innovative sustainability features at Rhizome that had won us widespread acclaim from the city were con-sidered among the most egregious violations. Facing extensive penalties, I was left 
with no choice but to sell the building that housed the Rhizome Collective. 
On the heels of the destruction of Rhizome, I moved with my wife and two 
daughters to Albany, New Y ork, to begin again. Albany and Austin are two very different cities. Apart from both being capital cities that begin with the letter “ A”, they have very little in common in terms of climate, history, culture, politics, population, economic processes, social dynamics, or otherwise. While Austin is a young, rapidly growing (sprawling) typical sunbelt city that celebrates its “weird-ness”, Albany is an old shrinking post-industrial “rust belt” town with entrenched politicians, cold winters, and in further contrast to Austin, celebrates being “bor -
ing”. While moving to Albany may have seemed like an unlikely choice, there were reasons why it was chosen over other places – as both my wife and I had 
family in the region, we had been spending summers in Albany for several years already. In “shrinking cities” (a phenomenon I discuss later in this book), there 
are opportunities to address both affordable housing and food security issues 
xiv Author’s prologue: sustainability 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 simultaneously. Unlike in fast-growing cities where every square foot of space is 
contested, the abundance of housing stock and vacant property in shrinking cities makes it possible to have both affordable homes and urban agriculture. Further -
more, the challenge of repurposing old industrial infrastructure for sustainable uses is a monumental and fascinating challenge that must be carried out through-out the world in cities like Albany. 
With these considerations in mind, we conceived the idea of the Radix Eco -
logical Sustainability Center. Radix (the Latin word for “root”) clearly had many parallels with Rhizome in both its name and purpose; however, there would be key differences. With Rhizome, I commonly felt that I was spread too thin by 
managing its many moving parts and was never successful in developing serious environmental educational programming for youth (the freaky post-apocalyptic aesthetic of Rhizome certainly did not help parents or teachers to feel comfortable in bringing their children there, either). With Radix, I wanted to focus on being an 
environmental education center that existed primarily to serve inner-city children and youths, building meaningful and long-lasting relationships with area public schools. Building this level of community trust would not be an easy process, but I felt compelled to begin. 
From 2009 to the present day, I have been working as the educational direc-
tor of the Radix Center. I have been successful at creating a functioning urban 
environmental education center consisting of a one-acre farm containing a solar greenhouse, microlivestock, aquaponics, bees, gardens, perennial food forest, composting operation, and more. W e receive numerous visitations each year from groups ranging from elementary school age children to university students. With each group, I try to increase their ecological literacy and demonstrate how green 
and agricultural spaces function when integrated into a high-density urban mosaic. 
Since the publication of “T oolbox” and the beginning of Radix, I have been 
trying to push the boundaries of what is commonly regarded as pertinent to urban sustainability: both in being more explicit regarding issues of equity and justice and in “going beyond the backyard”. A serious inherent limitation in the idea 
of “urban homesteading” is that it makes sustainability primarily about the indi-vidual. The allusion to “homesteading” alone conjures sentimental images of the rugged frontiersman, self-reliant and self-sufficient. In many ways, self-sufficiency is antithetical with urban living: urban residents, historically, are specialists as opposed to generalists and can rely on the skills and expertise of their neighbors through barter and exchange. In many ways, the greatest perk and asset of living in a city is the freedom to not have to be a jack-of-all-trades but rather to become particularly proficient in one area. In truth, I am only so critical as I am fully in 
support of urban residents in being more self-reliant, however, I would encourage 
them to recognize the importance of social interconnectivity and the potential of collective information exchange within an urban system. 
I was additionally interested in looking at urban ecological systems beyond the 
level of the individual homestead, backyard, lot, garden, etc. What was the syn-ergistic effect of all these spaces interacting with each other? What could we say about creating mutually reciprocal relationships with urban waterways, soils, and 
Author’s prologue: sustainability xv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 atmospheres that cut across and beyond the level of the individual sustainability 
site? What were our interactions like with the non-human living systems within a city that we were not directly cultivating? How much of a barrier do toxic indus -
trial legacies create to furthering these relationships? Could we look at urban per -
maculture on a whole systems scale “beyond the backyard”?
3 
Asking these questions led me quickly to the discipline of urban ecology, a field 
that was and is almost entirely studied from a top-down perspective and is made up of primarily by experts in the fields of urban planning and design. I began to won-
der if the insights of this discipline had potential to be used by citizen sustainability activists; could obscure ideas such as urban metabolisms (Girardet, 1992), patch dynamics (Alberti, 2005), airsheds (Kirstine), anthrosols (Smith, 1980), novel ecosystems (Robbins, 2014), synanthropic species (Rodewald, 2008), and recon-ciliation ecology (Rosenzweig, 2003) be appropriated to be part of their toolkit? Furthermore, I wanted to apply questions of social justice, access, and equity to 
the urban ecosystem concepts that are seldom more than superficially considered in professional circles. Who has access to the rivers that flow through cities and what barriers stand between them? Which populations are most disproportion-ately exposed to soilborne toxins, and can they proactively work to reduce them? How do we, as citizens, think about our urban atmospheres? Similar questions have been raised numerous times by the environmental justice movement but most commonly from a “reactive” standpoint. Could we have respectful, loving, nurturing (if not imperfect) relationships with the various dimensions of the urban ecosystem? If possible, could ecosystem justice’s critical analysis be combined with the ethos of urban homesteading to create mutually reciprocal symbioses between the human residents of a city and the rivers, skies, soils, birds, mammals, bugs, plants, and microbes cohabitating and cocreating them with us? 
It is with these fundamental questions that I began my PhD program, the 
research for my dissertation, and now this book, coining the term “urban ecosys -
tem justice” for use as an overarching framework. The privilege of being a gradu-ate student had given me the space and access to extensive and disparate bodies of literature related to these themes. Much of my work and research has been an attempt at synthesis, combining the critique of one discipline with the insights of another. Many researchers approach the topic of urban ecosystem justice peripher -
ally yet are not explicitly in dialogue with one another. This is most starkly notice -
able in the separation between the social and natural sciences, a long-standing 
division that both confounds and frustrates me. In addition to the aforementioned areas of urban ecology, urban design, and environmental justice, I have also drawn 
significantly from the fields of political ecology, geography, critical urban theory, historical ecology, science and technology studies, and socio-ecological systems theory. Each discipline offers unique insights that help to create a fuller, more complex picture of the topic. 
One important realization I’ve come to in my research, however, is that it’s 
not necessary, realistic, or appropriate for me to try to develop any sort of “uni-fying theory of cities”. Cities are inherently complex, dynamic, and constantly adapting environments made up of a plurality of moving parts and stories. 
xvi Author’s prologue: sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 T o quote Timothy Morton, “Places contain multitudes”, the whole of a city is less 
than the sum of its parts (Morton, 2016). In this sense, Morton implies that cities are almost anti-emergent phenomena! From a distance, they may appear to be a 
monolithic whole, but once you zoom in, you realize that there are infinitely more dimensions to them at the micro level – larger on the inside than on the outside. 
I feel liberated in not having to understand, describe, and reduce all their pro -
cesses into a single set of ideas or equations. In this sense, approaches to just urban transitions require a necessary diversity and plurality of approaches – decentral -
ized and horizontally distributed. Sustainabilities are situated and contextualized, sharing common aspects yet uniquely tailored to the micro-political conditions of the point of their implementation (Sze, 2018). 
It is with this history and these experiences that I present this book. It is my 
wish that it may serve as a toolbox of concepts and practical skills useful to the activist-scholar working for just sustainabilities and ecological equities and that it may further the goal of transferring knowledge from the confines of the ivory tower to the intellectual commons. 
Notes 
1 Botkin, Daniel B. The moon in the nautilus shell: Discordant harmonies reconsidered. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press, 2012. 
2 See Proctor, Rachel. Showing rhizome the money, May, Friday, December 17, 2004. www. 
austinchronicle.com/news/2004-12-17/243200/ 
Works cited 
Alberti, M. (2005). The effects of urban patterns on ecosystem function. International 
Regional Science Review, 28(2), 168–192. 
Balée, W . a. (2002). Advances in historical ecology . New Y ork: Columbia University Press. 
Deleuze, G. (2004). Anti-Oedipus. London: A&C Black. 
Girardet, H. (1992). The Gaia Atlas of cities: New directions for urban living . New Y ork: UN 
Habitat. 
Holmgren, D. (2002). Principles & pathways beyond sustainability . Hepburn: Holmgren 
Design Services. 
Jamison, P . K. (1992). No Eden under glass: A discussion with Donna Haraway. Feminist 
T eacher , 10–15. 
Kellogg, S. a. (2008). T oolbox for sustainable city living: A do-it-ourselves guide. Boston, MA: 
South End Press. 
Lockyer, J. a. (2013). Environmental anthropology engaging ecotopia: Bioregionalism, permacul-
ture, and ecovillages  (V ol. 17). New Y ork: Berghahn Books. 
Morton, T . (2016). Dark ecology: For a logic of future coexistence. New Y ork: Columbia Uni-
versity Press. 
Robbins, P . (2014). No going back: The political ethics of ecological novelty. In T raditional 
wisdom and modern knowledge for the earth’s future (V ol. 1, pp. 103–118). Japan: Springer. 
Rodewald, A. D. (2008). Consumer resource matching in urbanizing landscapes: Are 
Synanthropic species over-matching. Ecology , 89(2), 515–521. 
Author’s prologue: sustainability xvii 
 
Rosenzweig, M. L. (2003). Reconciliation ecology and the future of species diversity. Oryx, 
37(2), 194–205. 
Smith, N. J. (1980). Anthosols and human carrying capacity in Amazonia. Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers, 70(4), 553–566. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2010). Impossible sustainability and the post-political condition: Making strate -
gies in spatial planning . Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Sze, J. e. (2018). Sustainability: Approaches to environmental justice and social power. New 
Y ork: New Y ork University Press. 

 
 
 
  0 
Introduction 
As the majority of humans on the earth now live in urban environments, it could 
be argued that the battle for a sustainable world could be fought and won primarily within cities. Cultural leverage points, economic engines, centers of innovation, and home to millions, how these complex adaptive socio-ecological urban entities unfold will have profound impacts on the rest of the planet. Will cities become centers of progressive ideals of justice and equity where residents coexist in rela-tive harmony with the non-human world, or will they become monstrous toxin-producing resource vacuums with entrenched and chasmic disparities between the haves and have-nots? These are critical questions, and the field of urban sustain-ability has been developed to inform the responses. This discipline has undergone both considerable growth and change over the past few decades. Once regarded as a radical fringe topic (albeit with revolutionary potential), the idea of sustain-able cities has now become quite mainstream, with numerous books and journals dedicated to its study. Inasmuch as the concept has been increasingly co-opted by corporate and neoliberal interests, it is often reduced to a marketing buzzword. More insidiously, though, sustainability discourse is now used to create a green -
ish veneer to an emerging form of enviro-technocratic governance that provides premium environmental services to wealthy residents while relegating the poor to ecological sacrifice zones on the city’s toxic periphery (Swyngedouw, 2009). This divide has the ill effect of instilling a sense of separateness from and fear of the non-human among the urban populace, further widening the false duality of nature and society. With pressures from persistent inequality, climate change, energy depletion, and biosphere degradation continuing to mount (Steffen, 2015), the imperative to initiate urgent just urban transformations grows greater . 
It is here that urban sustainability is at a crossroads – can it be reclaimed by 
citizen-centered and grassroots organizations for the purpose of building genu-inely just and healthy communities, or has urban sustainability become nothing more than another “opiate of the masses” to keep us distracted while neoliberal business-as-usual carries on? T o inform this discussion, it is necessary to analyze what I believe to be two of the primary challenges that the urban sustainability 
movement now faces. These are what I refer to respectively as “social-sustainability 
exclusion” and “ecological alienation”. 
DOI: 10.4324/9780367858711-1 
 2 Introduction 
Social sustainability exclusion 
Sustainability discourse over recent years has placed a disproportionate emphasis 
on the “environmental” and “economic” aspects of sustainability, largely ignor -
ing or underemphasizing sustainability’s social dimension (Agyeman, 2002). This trend has produced a form of techno-managerial sustainability or “post-politics” (Swyngedouw, 2010) that is attractive to business owners, policymakers, and the ruling classes as it promotes a “green” agenda that is at once friendly to capital and conducive to crafting the illusion of community consensus. By relegating the social component to the sidelines, inconvenient questions regarding equity, access, fair -
ness, race, and class are glossed over, and fundamental structural socioeconomic inequalities are never addressed. As such, the status quo remains unchallenged and environmental initiatives privilege only affluent communities. Little or no attempt is made to ensure that there is equitable distribution of environmental harms and goods, and in cases when environmental amenities are provided to low-income communities, it often results in the unintentional (or intentional?) con-sequence of their displacement/cultural alienation (i.e., gentrification) (Gould, 2016). The most extreme form in which this manifests is the phenomenon of “urban ecological securitization” (Hodson, 2009), where premium environmental services are provided to the wealthy and the poor are displaced to the urban edges where they are subject to the brunt of ecological risk, exposure, and vulnerability. More recently, extreme visions for such techno-ecological authoritarian regimes have manifested under the name of “ecomodernism” (Asafu-Adjaye, 2015) that would propose that humans live entirely segregated from nature in self-contained urban spheres. 
Ecological alienation 
Ecological alienation or ecological rift (McClintock, 2010) is a present-day mani-festation of the nature–society dualism professed through modernist ideals and philosophy (Descola, 1996). Through it, urban residents are profoundly separated from and ignorant of the natural processes and systems that make life on the earth possible (i.e., food production, water, composting/decomposition, energy, atmos -
pheric/climatic processes, non-human life). The separation of town and country has relegated these processes and systems to the urban periphery or hinterlands, making them invisible and inaccessible to urban residents (Elmqvist, 2013). In instances where “remnant” ecologies remain in cities, they are commonly made inaccessible through enclosure, poisoned, degraded, or otherwise devalued. It has only been in the past few decades that the discipline of urban ecology itself has embraced the role that human and social processes play in urban ecosystem functioning, prompting a shift in emphasis from the “ecology in” to the “ecology of” cities (Pickett, 2016). Where environmental education does exist in cities, it teaches about the environment and nature as external to the city, with urban environments being considered unworthy of study (Thomashow, 2015). Like -
wise, definitions of “the environment” seldom are extended to include social and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 3 Introduction 
human processes. The combined influence of these conditions produces in both children and adults what is referred to as “ecophobia”, or fear of ecological systems and processes (Sobel, 1996). When a citizenry has no sense of interrelation, love, concern, or responsibility for ecological systems, they cannot be expected to act in their defense. 
Synthesis and solution: urban ecosystem justice 
Urban ecosystem justice is an attempt to reconcile these two problems, and inas -
much as it hopes to redirect the energy and intent of the urban sustainability movement toward more progressive and regenerative ends. In framing cities as complex, adaptive socio-ecological systems that are the coevolutionary products of both human and non-human processes (Alberti, 2008), urban ecosystem jus -
tice looks at how questions of equity, access, fairness, race, and class apply to the biophysical dimensions of urban ecosystems (soil, water, waste, air, biodiversity). By doing so, it makes explicit and moves social sustainability to the forefront of sustainability discourse, while simultaneously challenging ecological alienation by making the urban ecosystem a legitimate, and relevant topic of study. V ery impor -
tantly, urban ecosystem justice situates itself within a citizen-centered, grassroots context (Smith, 2016). In this regard, it serves as a pedagogical tool kit focused on exploring and creating mutually reciprocal symbioses between ordinary citizens and urban ecologies from the ground up, an angle typically not explored from top-down planning and policy perspectives. By applying a DIY ethic to the “ecology of cities” paradigm developed in the discipline of urban ecology (Pickett, 2016), humans are central and integral to urban environmental processes. In this regard, urban ecosystem justice can be thought of a “science of cities” for the people (McPhearson, 2016). 
This book is divided into three main parts. The first part consists of a thorough 
analysis of the questions of ecological alienation and equity exclusion, largely based around an examination of related concepts and their reconciliatory poten-tial. Collectively, these concepts form a “chaotic bricolage” that comprise the urban ecosystem justice mosaic. This first part is heavily theoretical and func-tions to unpack key concepts and analyze how they fit within and contribute to a larger urban ecosystem justice framework. The second part is an in-depth explo -
ration of urban ecosystem justice itself in both its theoretical and practical com-ponents, divided into sections pertaining to the various biophysical “spheres” of the urban ecosystem: soil, water, waste (compost), atmospheres, and biodiversity. The second part is less theoretical than the first and delves into more applied, grounded applications and discussions of the nuts and bolts of urban ecosystem justice. The third part is a study in applied urban ecosystem justice told in the story of the Radix Ecological Sustainability Center and its educational philoso -
phy. I hope the reader will be able to draw equally upon all parts of the text. 
This book, particularly in Part II, places a strong emphasis on the practical 
application of this knowledge, containing a number of “how-to” sections that pro -
vide a step-by-step instruction on how to construct and implement the learning 
4 Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 tools and systems described. While this format may be atypical for an academic 
work, I believe it provides a critical bridge between the realms of theory and prac-
tice and will hopefully be of great use to the scholar-activist engaged in the fields of urban environmental education, ecological design, environmental justice advo -
cacy, and all manner of “situated solidarities” (Routledge, 2015). Like the false dichotomy of nature and society, the mythological divide between activist and scholar is similarly damaging – too often academics will theorize and postulate on topics which they have no direct, engaged, embodied, and visceral relationship with. I have regularly observed that many professional scholars understand eco -
logical concepts on an intellectual level yet lack primary, dirty-handed, intimate familiarity with their subjects. This can be remedied through activities like garden-ing and composting that are grounding, both literally and metaphorically. This firsthand awareness and mutualism with the non-human world is a salve to the mental fatigue theoreticians must otherwise endure. Furthermore, inclusion and collaboration with nonacademic communities give access to an expert knowledge not available within the confines of the ivory tower. Likewise, many sustainability activists would benefit from an expanded theoretical analysis, a luxury that the demands of advocacy work rarely permit. It is my sincere wish that, through this, the knowledge, insights, and skills of the academy be made broadly accessible to those outside of its often impermeable boundaries. 
Works cited 
Agyeman, J. R. (2002). Exploring the nexus: Bringing together sustainability, environmen-
tal justice and equity. Space and Polity, 6(1), 77–90. 
Alberti, M. (2008). Advances in urban ecology integrating humans and ecological processes in 
urban ecosystems. New Y ork: Springer Science+Business Media. 
Asafu-Adjaye, J. e. (2015). An ecomodernist manifesto. Breakthrough Institute. Retrieved 
April 4, 2016, from www.ecomodernism.org 
Descola, P . a. (1996). Nature and society: Anthropological perspectives. London: T aylor & 
Francis. 
Elmqvist, T . e. (2013). History of urbanization and the missing ecology. In Urbanization, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services: Challenges and opportunities (pp. 13–30). Dordrecht, 
the Netherlands: Springer. 
Gould, K. A. (2016). Green gentrification: Urban sustainability and the struggle for environmen-
tal justice . New Y ork: Routledge. 
Hodson, M. a. (2009). Urban ecological security: A new urban paradigm? International 
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 31(1), 193–215. 
McClintock, N. (2010). Why farm the city? Theorizing urban agriculture through a lens of 
metabolic rift. Cambridge Journal of Regions Economy and Society, 3(2), 191–207. 
McPhearson, T . e. (2016). Advancing urban ecology toward a science of cities. BioScience, 
66(3), 198–212. 
Pickett, S. T . (2016). Evolution and future of urban ecological science: Ecology in, of, and 
for the city. Ecosystem Health and Sustainability , 2(7). 
Routledge, P . a. (2015). Situated solidarities and the practice of scholar-activism. Environ-
ment and Planning D: Society and Space, 33(3), 391–407. 
Smith, A. e. (2016). Grassroots innovation movements. London: T aylor & Francis. 
Introduction 5 
 
 
 Sobel, D. (1996). Beyond ecophobia. Great Barrington, MA: Orion Society. 
Steffen, W . e. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing 
planet. Science, 347. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2009). The antinomies of the postpolitical city: In search of a demo -
cratic politics of environmental production. International Journal of Urban and Regional 
Research, 33(3), 601–620. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2010). Impossible sustainability and the post-political condition. In Mak-
ing strategies in spatial planning  (pp. 185–205). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Thomashow, C. e. (2015). Urban complexity and environmental education. In Urban 
environmental education. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Civic Ecology Lab. Retrieved from www. 
researchgate.net/profile/Angelique_Hjarding/publication/302877963_Urban_Planning_ 
and_Environmental_Education/l 
Introduction 
Agyeman, J. R. (2002). Exploring the nexus: Bringing together sustainability, environmental
justice and equity. Space and Polity, 6(1), 77–90. 
Alberti, M. (2008). Advances in urban ecology integrating humans and ecological processes in
urban ecosystems. New York: Springer Science+Business Media. 
Asafu-Adjaye, J. e. (2015). An ecomodernist manifesto . Breakthrough Institute. Retrieved April 
4, 2016, from www.ecomodernism.org 
Descola, P. a. (1996). Nature and society: Anthropological perspectives. London: Taylor &
Francis. 
Elmqvist, T. e. (2013). History of urbanization and the missing ecology. In Urbanization,
biodiversity and ecosystem services: Challenges and opportunities (pp. 13–30). Dordrecht, the
Netherlands: Springer. 
Gould, K. A. (2016). Green gentrification: Urban sustainability and the struggle for
environmental justice. New York: Routledge. 
Hodson, M. a. (2009). Urban ecological security: A new urban paradigm? International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research, 31(1), 193–215. 
McClintock, N. (2010). Why farm the city? Theorizing urban agriculture through a lens of
metabolic rift. Cambridge Journal of Regions Economy and Society, 3(2), 191–207. 
McPhearson, T. e. (2016). Advancing urban ecology toward a science of cities. BioScience,
66(3), 198–212. 
Pickett, S. T. (2016). Evolution and future of urban ecological science: Ecology in, of, and for
the city. Ecosystem Health and Sustainability, 2(7). 
Routledge, P. a. (2015). Situated solidarities and the practice of scholar-activism. Environment 
and Planning D: Society and Space , 33(3), 391–407.  
Smith, A. e. (2016). Grassroots innovation movements. London: Taylor & Francis. 
Sobel, D. (1996). Beyond ecophobia. Great Barrington, MA: Orion Society. 
Steffen, W. e. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet.
Science, 347. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2009). The antinomies of the postpolitical city: In search of a democratic
politics of environmental production. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,
33(3), 601–620. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2010). Impossible sustainability and the post-political condition. In Making
strategies in spatial planning (pp. 185–205). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Thomashow, C. e. (2015). Urban complexity and environmental education. In Urban
environmental education. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Civic Ecology Lab. Retrieved from
www.researchgate.net/profile/Angelique_Hjarding/publication/302877963_Urban_Planning_and
_Environmental_Education/l 
 
Ecological alienation – roots and remedies 
Alberti, M. e. (2003). Integrating humans into ecology: Opportunities and challenges for studying
urban ecosystems. BioScience, 53(12), 1169–1179. 
Altvater, E. e. (2016). Anthropocene or capitalocene? Nature, history, and the crisis of
capitalism. Oakland, CA: Pm Press. 
Anderson, M. K. (2013). Tending the wild: Native American knowledge and the management of
California’s natural resources. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Angus, I. (2015). Hijacking the Anthropocene. Climate and Capitalism, 19. 
Asafu-Adjaye, J. e. (2015). An ecomodernist manifesto . Breakthrough Institute. Retrieved April 
4, 2016, from www.ecomodernism.org 
Atkins, P. J. (2012). Animal cities: Beastly urban histories. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 
Balée, W. a. (2006). Time and complexity in historical ecology: Studies in the neotropical
lowlands . New York: Columbia University Press.  
Barthel, S. a. (2013). Urban gardens, agriculture, and water management: Sources of resilience
for long-term food security in cities. Ecological Economics, 86, 224–234.
Baskin, J. (2015). Paradigm dressed as epoch: The ideology of the Anthropocene.
Environmental Values, 24(1), 9–29. 
Berkes, F. (2017). Sacred ecology. London: Routledge. 
Boone, C. G. (2012). Urbanization and sustainability: Linking urban ecology, environmental
justice and global environmental change (Vol. 3). New York: Springer Science & Business
Media. 
Botkin, D. B. (1992). Discordant harmonies: A new ecology for the twenty-first century. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 
Brenner, N. P. (2009). Cities for people, not for profit. City, 13(2), 176–184. 
Broto, V. C. (2012). Interdisciplinary perspectives on urban metabolism. Journal of Industrial
Ecology, 16(6), 851–861. 
Cadenasso, M. e. (2015). The Baltimore School of Urban Ecology: Space, scale, and time for 
the study of cities . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
Capra, F. a. (2014). The systems view of life: A unifying vision. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. 
Chelleri, L. e. (2016). Are people responsive to a more sustainable, decentralized, and user-
driven management of urban metabolism? Sustainability, 8(3), 275. 
Childers, D. L. (2014). Advancing urban sustainability theory and action: Challenges and
opportunities. Landscape and Urban Planning, 125, 320–328. 
Colding, J. S. (2019). Wicked problems of smart cities. Smart Cities, 2(4), 512–521. 
Cole, R. J. (2012). Transitioning from green to regenerative design. Building Research & 
Information , 40(1), 39–53.  
Collier, M. J. (2014). Novel ecosystems and the emergence of cultural ecosystem services.
Ecosystem Services, 9, 166–169. 
Collier, M. J. (2015). Novel ecosystems and social-ecological resilience. Landscape Ecology,
30(8), 1363–1369. 
Cretney, R. (2014). Resilience for whom? Emerging critical geographies of socio-ecological
resilience. Geography Compass, 8(9), 627–640. 
Crist, E. (2016). The reaches of freedom: A response to an ecomodernist manifesto.
Environmental Humanities, 7(1), 245–254. 
Cronon, W. (1996). The trouble with wilderness: Or, getting back to the wrong nature.
Environmental History, 1(1), 7–28. 
Crumley, C. L. (2018). Issues and concepts in historical ecology: The past and future of
landscapes and regions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Davis, J. e. (2019). Anthropocene, capitalocene, . .. plantationocene? A manifesto for ecological
justice in an age of global crises. Geography Compass, 13(5), e12438. 
Davis, M. (2007). Planet of slums. New York: Verso. 
Decker, E. H. (2000). Energy and material flow through the urban ecosystem. Annual Review of 
Energy and the Environment , 25, 685–740 (Volume publication date November 2000), 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.25.1.685. 
Del Tredici, P. (2010). Wild urban plants of the Northeast. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Descola, P. a. (1996). Nature and society: Anthropological perspectives. London: Taylor &
Francis. 
DHS, U. S. (2020). Resilience. Retrieved from www.dhs.gov/topic/resilience 
Dooling, S. (2009). Ecological gentrification: A research agenda exploring justice in the city.
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 33(3), 621–639. 
Dull, R. A. (2010). The Columbian encounter and the Little Ice Age: Abrupt land use change,
fire, and greenhouse forcing. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100(4),
755–771. 
Eisenstein, C. (2018). Climate: A new story. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books. 
Ellis, E. C. (2010). Anthropogenic transformation of the biomes, 1700 to 2000. Global Ecology
and Biogeography, 19(5), 589–606. 
Engels, F. (1959). The dialectics of nature . Moscow: Progress.  
Ernstson, H. (2014). Stop calling me resilient. Comment on Tom Slater’s blog post “The
Resilience of Neoliberal Urbanism ”.  
Ernstson, H. a. (2018). Urban political ecology in the Anthropo-obscene: Interruptions and
possibilities . London: Routledge. 
Fitzgibbons, J. a. (2019). Just urban futures? Exploring equity in “100 Resilient Cities”. World
Development, 122, 648–659. 
Folke, C. e. (2010). Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability.
Ecology and Society, 15(4). 
Frawley, J. a. (2014). Rethinking invasion ecologies from the environmental humanities.
London: Routledge. 
Girardet, H. (1992). The Gaia Atlas of cities: New directions for urban living. New York: UN-
Habitat. 
Girardet, H. (2008). Cities people planet: Urban development and climate change. New York:
John Wiley & Sons Incorporated. 
Gleeson, B. (2013). Resilience and its discontents . Research Paper No. 1. Melbourne: 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne Sustainable Society Institute. Retrieved September 20,
2015, from www.sustainable.unimelb.edu.au/sites/default/files/docs/MSSI-ResearchPaper-
01_Gleeson_Resilience_2013.pdf 
Gliessman, S. R. (1998). Agroecology: Ecological processes in sustainable agriculture. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Golubiewski, N. (2012). Is there a metabolism of an urban ecosystem? An ecological critique.
Ambio, 41(7), 751–764. 
Grove, J. M. (2015). The Baltimore School of Urban Ecology: Space, scale, and time for the 
study of cities . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
Hamilton, C. (2004). Growth fetish . London: Pluto Press.  
Hamilton, C. (2013). Earth masters: Playing God with the climate. Sydney: Allen and Unwin. 
Haraway, D. (2015). Anthropocene, capitalocene, plantationocene, chthulucene: Making kin.
Environmental Humanities, 6(1), 159–165. 
Hartt, M. A. (2019). Resilient shrinking cities. In The Routledge handbook of urban resilience.
New York: Routledge. 
Harvey, D. (2008). The right to the city. The City Reader, 6, 23–40. 
Heynen, N. M. (2006). The nature of cities: Urban political ecology and the politics of urban
metabolism. In In the nature of cities: urban political ecology and the politics of urban
metabolism. New York: Routledge. 
Hoang, T. C. (2017). A systematic approach to the dilemma between flood vulnerability and
resilience-review and concepts. Vietnam Journal of Science and Technology, 55(5), 620.
Creative Commons. 
Hobbs, R. J. (2013). Defining novel ecosystems. In Novel ecosystems: Intervening in the new
ecological world order. Oxford: John Wiley and Sons. 
Hobbs, R. J. (2014). Novel ecosystems: Concept or inconvenient reality? A response to Murcia
et al. Trends Ecology Evolution, 29, 645–646. 
Hodson, M. a. (2009). Urban ecological security: A new urban paradigm? International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research, 33(1), 193–215. 
Hollander, J. B. (2011). The bounds of smart decline: A foundational theory for planning
shrinking cities. Housing Policy Debate, 21(3), 349–367. 
Houston, D. (2013). Crisis is where we live: Environmental justice for the Anthropocene.
Globalizations, 10(3), 439–450. 
Hughes, S. a. (2020). Just urban transitions: Toward a research agenda. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Climate Change , 11(3).  
Jenkins, J. (2019). The humanure handbook. Grove City, PA: Joseph Jenkins, Inc. 
Kaika, M. (2017). “Don’t call me resilient again!”: The New Urban Agenda as immunology . .. or .
.. what happens when communities refuse to be vaccinated with “smart cities” and indicators.
Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 89–102. 
Koch, A. e. (2019). Earth system impacts of the European arrival and Great Dying in the
Americas after 1492. Quaternary Science Reviews, 13–36. 
Kueffer, C. (2015). Ecological novelty: Towards an interdisciplinary understanding of ecological
change in the anthropocene. Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Kull, C. A. (2018). Critical invasion science: Weeds, pests, and aliens. In The Palgrave 
handbook of critical physical geography  (pp. 249–272). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan.  
Latour, B. (2013). “Facing Gaia”: Six lectures on the political theology of nature. In Gifford
lectures on natural religion, 18–28. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Levin, S. A. (1999). Fragile dominion: Complexity and the commons. Reading, MA: Perseus. 
Lorimer, J. (2012). Multinatural geographies for the Anthropocene. Progress in Human
Geography, 36(5), 593–612. 
Macintyre, B. (2010). The fault line in Haiti runs straight to France. The Sunday Times, 21. 
Mann, C. C. (2005). 1491: New revelations of the Americas before Columbus . New York: Alfred 
A. Knopf Incorporated. 
Marris, E. (2013). Perspective: Coming of age in a trash forest. In Novel ecosystems:
Intervening in the new ecological world order. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons. 
Martellozzo, F. e. (2014). Urban agriculture: A global analysis of the space constraint to meet
urban vegetable demand. Environmental Research Letters, 9(6), 064025. 
McClintock, N. (2010). Why farm the city? Theorizing urban agriculture through a lens of
metabolic rift. Cambridge Journal of Regions Economy and Society, 3(2), 191–207. 
McNeill, J. R. (2016). The great acceleration: An environmental history of the Anthropocene 
since 1945 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
McPhearson, T. e. (2016). Advancing urban ecology toward a science of cities. BioScience,
6(3), 198–212. 
McShane, C. a. (1997). The centrality of the horse in the nineteenth-century American city. In
The making of urban America (pp. 105–130). Wilmington: Scholarly Resources. 
Meerow, S. a. (2019). Urban resilience for whom, what, when, where, and why? Urban
Geography, 40(3), 309–329. 
Meijer, S. A. (2013). From community resilience towards urban resilience: Exploring the
grassroot initiatives’ role in cities. In Living green scientific conference. Delft, The Netherlands:
Delft University of Technology. 
Melosi, M. V. (2003). The historical dimension of urban ecology: Frameworks and concepts. In
Understanding urban ecosystems (pp. 187–200). New York: Springer. 
Mollison, B. (1988). Permaculture: A designer’s manual (p. 576). Tyalgum, NSW: Tagari
Publications. 
Molotch, H. (1976). The city as a growth machine: Toward a political economy of place.
American Journal of Sociology, 82(2), 309–332. 
Monstadt, J. (2009). Conceptualizing the political ecology of urban infrastructures: Insights from
technology and urban studies. Environment and Planning, 41(8), 1924. 
Murcia, C. e. (2014). A critique of the “novel ecosystem” concept. Trends in Ecology &
Evolution, 29(10), 548–553. 
Neyrat, F. (2018). The unconstructable earth: An ecology of separation. New York: Fordham
University Press. 
Odum, E. P. (1989). Ecology and our endangered life-support systems . Sunderland: Sinauer 
Associates. 
Olsson, L. e. (2014). Why resilience is unappealing to social science: Theoretical and empirical
investigations of the scientific use of resilience. Science Advances, 1(4), e1400217. 
Pellow, D. N. (2018). Afterword: From more than just sustainability to a more just resilience. In
Sustainability: Approaches to environmental justice and social power (pp. 271–278). New York:
New York University Press. 
Perrow, C. (2011). Normal accidents: Living with high risk technologies. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press. 
Pickett, S. T. , McGrath, B. , Cadenasso, M. L. , & Felson, A. J. (2014). Ecological resilience
and resilient cities. Building Research & Information , 42(2), 143–157.  
Pickett, S. T. (2016). Evolution and future of urban ecological science: Ecology in, of, and for
the city. Ecosystem Health and Sustainability, 2(7). 
Plieninger, T. a. (2012). Resilience and the cultural landscape: Understanding and managing
change in human-shaped environments. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Redlinger, T. e. (2001). Survival of fecal coliforms in dry-composting toilets. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology, 67(9), 4036–4040. 
Robbins, P. (2014). No going back: The political ethics of ecological novelty. In Traditional
wisdom and modern knowledge for the earth’s future (Vol. 1, pp. 103–118). Japan: Springer. 
Ruddiman, W. F. (2010). Plows, plagues, and petroleum: How humans took control of climate . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Ruser, A. a. (2016). Technology can save us, cant it? The emergence of the “technofix”
narrative in climate politics. In Proceedings of the International Conference Technology+ 
Society= Future  .  
Scoones, I. (1999). New ecology and the social sciences: What prospects for a fruitful
engagement? Annual Review of Anthropology , 28(1), 479–507.  
Sehgal, P. (2015). The profound emptiness of resilience. The New York Times Magazine. 
Shellenberger, M. a. (2015). An ecomodernist manifesto: From the death of environmentalism
to the birth of ecomodernism. The Breakthrough Institute. 
SOIL . (2015). What we do. Retrieved January 11, 2015, from www.oursoil.org/ 
Stoetzer, B. (2018). Ruderal ecologies: Rethinking nature, migration, and the urban landscape
in Berlin. Cultural Anthropology, 33(2), 295–323. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2006). Circulations and metabolisms: (Hybrid) natures and (cyborg) cities.
Science as Culture, 15(2), 105–121. 
Thorén, H. , & Olsson, L. (2018). Is resilience a normative concept? Resilience, 6(2), 112–128. 
Tsing, A. L. (2014). Blasted landscapes (and the gentle arts of mushroom picking). In The
multispecies salon (pp. 87–109). Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Walker, B. a. (2012). Resilience practice: Building capacity to absorb disturbance and maintain
function. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Walker, L. R. (2012). The biology of disturbed habitats . Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Weil, T. a. (2020). IT risk and resilience: Cybersecurity response to COVID-19. IT Professional , 
22(3), 4–10. 
Wilson, D. (2004). Toward a contingent urban neoliberalism. Urban Geography, 5(8), 771–783. 
Worster, D. (1988). The ends of the earth: Perspectives on modern environmental history.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Worthy, K. (2013). Invisible nature: Healing the destructive divide between people and the
environment . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.  
York, R. a. (2003). Key challenges to ecological modernization theory: Institutional efficacy,
case study evidence, units of analysis, and the pace of eco-efficiency. Organization & 
Environment , 16(3), 273–288.  
 
Exclusion of social sustainability and emergence of enviro-technocratic
governance 
Agyeman, J. (2005). Sustainable communities and the challenge of environmental justice. New
York: New York University Press. 
Agyeman, J. R. (2002). Exploring the nexus: Bringing together sustainability, environmental
justice and equity. Space and Polity, 6(1), 77–90. 
Allen, B. L. (2013). Justice as measure of nongovernmental organization success in
postdisaster community assistance. Science, Technology & Human Values, 38(2), 224–249. 
Axel-Lute, M. (2019, July 31). It doesn’t matter if your neighborhood is going to eventually
gentrify. Shelterforce Magazine. 
Barnett, J. (2006). Climate change, insecurity and injustice. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology Press. 
Blanco, H. e. (2009). Shaken, shrinking, hot, impoverished and informal: Emerging research
agendas in planning. Progress in Planning, 72, 195–250. 
Bullard, R. D. (2008). Dumping in Dixie: Race, class, and environmental quality. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press. 
Checker, M. (2011). Wiped out by the “Greenwave”: Environmental gentrification and the
paradoxical politics of urban sustainability. City & Society, 210–229. 
Clark, B. D. (2018). The bottom line: Capital’s production of social inequalities and
environmental degradation. Journal of Environmental Studies and Sciences, 8(4), 562–569. 
Colding, J. a. (2013). The potential of “Urban Green Commons” in the resilience building of
cities. Ecological Economics, 86, 156–166. 
Colding, J. e. (2013). Urban green commons: Insights on urban common property systems.
Global Environmental Change, 23(5), 1039–1051. 
Cole, L. W. (2001). From the ground up: Environmental racism and the rise of the environmental
justice movement. New York: New York University Press.
Corburn, J. (2005). Street science: Community knowledge and environmental health justice.
Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press. 
Council, N. E. (2004). Ensuring risk reduction in communities with multiple stressors:
Environmental justice and cumulative risks/impacts. Retrieved from
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-04/documents/ensuringriskreducationnejac. 
Curran, W. a. (2012). Just green enough: Contesting environmental gentrification in Greenpoint,
Brooklyn. Local Environment  , 17(9), 1027–1042.  
Daly, H. E. (2011). Ecological economics: Principles and applications. Washington, DC: Island
Press. 
Davis, M. a. (2011). Evil paradises: Dreamworlds of neoliberalism. New York: The New Press. 
Fainstein, S. S. (2010). The just city. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Fortun, K. (2011). Afterword: Working “faultlines”. In Technoscience and environmental justice:
Expert cultures in a grassroots movement (p. 249). Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press. 
Frickel, S. (2011). Who are the experts of environmental health justice? In Technoscience and
environmental justice: Expert cultures in a grassroots movement (pp. 21–39). Cambridge, MA:
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press. 
Frumkin, H. e. (2005). Environmental health: From global to local (Vol. 11). Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons. 
Gidwani, V. a. (2011). Urban commons. Economic and Political Weekly  , 46(50), 42–43.  
Gould, K. A. (2016). Green gentrification: Urban sustainability and the struggle for
environmental justice. New York: Routledge. 
Gunderson, L. H. , & Holling, C. S. (2002). Panarchy: Understanding transformations in human
and natural systems. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Hardin, G. (2009). The tragedy of the commons. Journal of Natural Resources Policy Research,
1(3), 243–253. 
Harding, S. G. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge? Thinking from women’s lives.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Harvey, D. (2008). The right to the city. In The city reader (Vol. 6, pp. 23–40). Basel,
Switzerland: Birkhäuser. 
Harvey, D. (2010). Social justice and the city (Vol. 1). Athens: University of Georgia Press. 
Herrmann, D. L. , Schwarz, K. , Shuster, W. D. , Berland, A. , Chaffin, B. C. , Garmestani, A. S. ,
& Hopton, M. E. (2016). Ecology for the shrinking city. BioScience, 66(11), 965–973. 
Hess, D. J. (2009). Localist movements in a global economy: Sustainability, justice, and urban
development in the United States. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Press. 
Hodson, M. a. (2009). Urban ecological security: A new urban paradigm? International Journal
of Urban and Regional Research, 31(1), 193–215. 
Holifield, R. M. (2009). Introduction spaces of environmental justice: Frameworks for critical
engagement. Antipode, 41(4), 591–612. 
Hollander, J. B. (2011). The bounds of smart decline: A foundational theory for planning
shrinking cities. Housing Policy Debate, 21(3), 349–367. 
Hughes, S. a. (2020). Just urban transitions: Toward a research agenda. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 11(3). 
Lefebvre, H. (1972). Le Droit à la Ville. Paris: Anthropos. 
Marcuse, P. (2012). Whose right(s) to what city? In Cities for people, not for profit: Critical urban
theory and the right to the city (pp. 24–41). New York: Routledge. 
Marcuse, P. e. (2009). Searching for the just city: Debates in urban theory and practice.
London: Routledge. 
Miraftab, F. (2004). Making neo-liberal governance: The disempowering work of empowerment.
International Planning Studies, 9(4), 239–259. 
Molotch, H. (1976). The city as a growth machine: Toward a political economy of place.
American Journal of Sociology, 82(2), 309–332. 
Nagendra, H. a. (2014). Applying the social-ecological system framework to the diagnosis of
urban lake commons in Bangalore, India. Ecology and Society, 19(2), 67. 
Nassauer, J. I. (2014). Urban vacancy and land use legacies: A frontier for urban ecological
research, design, and planning. Landscape and Urban Planning, 125, 245–253.
Ostrom, E. (2015). Governing the commons. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Oswalt, T. R. (2006). Atlas of shrinking cities. Ostfildern: Hatje Crantz. 
Peck, J. (2015). Austerity urbanism: The neoliberal crisis of American cities. New York: Rosa
Luxemburg Stiftung. 
Pelling, M. , & Manuel-Navarrete, D. (2011). From resilience to transformation: The adaptive
cycle in two Mexican urban centers. Ecology and Society, 16(2). 
Pellow, D. N. (2017). What is critical environmental justice? Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Popper, D. a. (2010). Smart decline in post-carbon cities: The Buffalo Commons Meets, Buffalo,
New York. In The post-carbon reader: Managing the 21st century’s sustainability crises.
Retrieved from www.library.uniteddiversity.coop/Transition_Relocalisatio 
Raworth, K. (2012). A safe and just space for humanity: Can we live within the doughnut. Oxfam
Policy and Practice: Climate Change and Resilience, 8(1). 
Rhodes, J. a. (2013). Shrinking “Smart”? Urban redevelopment and shrinkage in Youngstown,
Ohio. Urban Geography, 34(3), 305–326. 
Robbins, P. (2011). What is political ecology? The hatchet and the seed. In Political ecology: A
critical introduction (Chapter 1). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons. 
RTC . (2017, February 3). Mission and history . Retrieved from Right to the City, 
www.righttothecity.org 
Schatz, L. (2013). Decline-oriented urban governance in Youngstown, Ohio. In The city after
abandonment (p. 87). Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Siefkes, C. (2009). The commons of the future. Z-NET. Retrieved November 23, 2016, from
www.zcomm.org/znetarticle/the-commons-of-the-future-by-christian-siefkes/ 
Steele, W. e. (2012). Planning the climate-just city. International Planning Studies, 17(1), 67–83. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2009). The antinomies of the postpolitical city: In search of a democratic
politics of environmental production. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research,
33(3), 601–620. 
Swyngedouw, E. (2016). The mirage of the sustainable “Smart” city planetary urbanization and
the spectre of combined and uneven apocalypse. In Cities in the 21st century (Chapter 11, p.
134). New York: Routledge. 
Sze, J. e. (2018). Sustainability: Approaches to environmental justice and social power. New
York: New York University Press. 
Tumber, C. (2011). Small, gritty, and green: The promise of America’s smaller industrial cities in
a low-carbon world. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press. 
USEPA . (2020). Environmental justice. United States Environmental Protection Agency  . 
Retrieved from www.epa.gov/environmentaljustice 
Wiechman, T. (2007). Between spectacular projects and pragmatic deconstruction. Paper
presented at Conference on The future of shrinking cities: Problems, patterns, and strategies of 
urban transformation in a global context  . Retrieved from www.rop.tu-dortmund.de/c  
Wiechmann, T. a. (2012). Urban shrinkage in Germany and the USA: A comparison of
transformation patterns and local strategies. International Journal of Urban and Regional
Research, 36(2), 261–280. 
Wolch, J. R. (2014). Urban green space, public health, and environmental justice: The
challenge of making cities “just green enough”. Landscape and Urban Planning, 125, 234–244. 
 
Urban soil justice 
Alloway, B. J. (2004). Contamination of soils in domestic gardens and allotments: A brief
overview. Land Contamination and Reclamation, 12(3), 179–187. 
Antisari, L. V. (2015). Heavy metal accumulation in vegetables grown in urban gardens.
Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 35(3), 1139–1147. 
Atkins, P. J. (2012). Animal cities: Beastly urban histories. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. 
Atlas, S. (2015). Soil Atlas 2015. Retrieved from https://gsf.globalsoilweek.org/soilatlas-2015. 
Bacon, A. R. (2011). Human – soil relations are changing rapidly: Proposals from SSSA’s cross-
divisional soil change working group. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 75(6),
2079–2084.
Bernes, C. (1998). Persistent organic pollutants. Stockholm: Swedish Environmental Protection
Agency. 
Birkhofer, K. e. (2008). Long-term organic farming fosters below and aboveground biota:
Implications for soil quality, biological control and productivity. Soil Biology and Biochemistry , 
40(9), 2297–2308. 
Bledsoe, C. S. (2014). Beyond mutualism: Complex mycorrhizal interactions. In Progress in
botany (pp. 311–334). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. 
Cao, H. e. (2010). Heavy metals in rice and garden vegetables and their potential health risks to
inhabitants in the vicinity of an industrial zone in Jiangsu, China. Journal of Environmental
Sciences, 22, 1792–1799. 
Chemlal, R. T. (2012). Microbiological aspects study of bioremediation of diesel-contaminated
soils by biopile technique. International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 75, 201–206. 
Chen, G. (2009). Alleviation of soil compaction by Brassica cover crops. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Maryland. 
Chiang, F. H. (2013, Spring). Vermitea remediation of hydrocarbon contaminated soil. Vermitea
and Bioremediation. Retrieved from
https://nature.berkeley.edu/classes/es196/projects/2013final/ChiangF_2013.pdf. 
Cookson Jr, J. T. (1995). Bioremediation engineering: Design and application. New York:
McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
Daniel, R. (2004). The soil metagenome: A rich resource for the discovery of novel natural
products. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 15(3), 199–204. 
Darwish, L. (2013). Earth repair: A grassroots guide to healing toxic and damaged landscapes.
Gabriola, BC: New Society Publishers. 
Diamond, J. (2005). Collapse: How societies choose to fail or succeed. New York: Penguin. 
DiSalvo, C. (2014). 17 The Growbot Garden Project as DIY speculation through design. DIY
Citizenship: Critical Making and Social Media, 237. 
Drobník, J. (1999). Genetically modified organisms (GMO) in bioremediation and legislation.
International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 44(1), 3–6. 
Egendorf, S. P. (2018). Constructed soils for mitigating lead (Pb) exposure and promoting urban
community gardening: The New York City Clean Soil Bank pilot study. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 175, 184–194. 
Eglash, R. a. (2014). Basins of attraction for generative justice. In Chaos theory in politics (pp.
75–88). Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Springer. 
Funtowicz, S. O. (1999). Science for the post-normal age. Futures, 25(7), 739–755. 
Garnett, T. (2000). Urban agriculture in London: Rethinking our food economy. In Growing
cities, growing food (pp. 477–500). Feldafing, Germany: German Foundation for International
Development. 
Gasecka, M. e. (2013). The efficient degradation of selected PAHs in soil with a substrate
refuse from Pleurotus ostreatus  cultivation. Fresenius Environmental Bulletin, 22(9A), 
2651–2658. 
Gittleman, M. e. (2017). Estimating stormwater runoff for community gardens in New York City.
Urban Ecosystems, 20(1), 129–139. 
Haller, H. e. (2016). Microbial transport of aerated compost tea organisms in clay loam and
sandy loam: A soil column study. International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 106, 10–15. 
Hess, D. J. (2016). Undone science: Social movements, mobilized publics, and industrial
transitions . Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.  
Hillel, D. (1992). Out of the earth: Civilization and the life of the soil. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. 
Hou, D. a.-T . (2014). Sustainability: A new imperative in contaminated land remediation.
Environmental Science & Policy, 39, 25–34. 
Hough, R. L. (2004). Assessing potential risk of heavy metal exposure from consumption of
home-produced vegetables by urban populations. Environmental Health Perspectives, 11. 
Jonsson, A. , & Haller, H. (2014). Sustainability aspects of in-situ bioremediation of polluted soil
in developing countries and remote regions. Environmental Risk Assessment of Soil
Contamination, 57–86. 
Jouquet, P. e. (2006). Soil invertebrates as ecosystem engineers: Intended and accidental
effects on soil and feedback loops. Applied Soil Ecology, 32(2), 153–164.
Kellogg, S. (2016). Community based bioremediation: Grassroots responses to urban soil
contamination. Teknokultura, 13(2), 491–510. 
Kirchner, G. a. (1998). Accumulation of 210Pb, 226Ra and radioactive cesium by fungi. Science
of the Total Environment, 222(1–2), 63–70. 
Kubiëna, W. L. (1970). Micromorphological features of soil geography . No. 631.42 K8.  
Lau, K. L. (2003). Use of spent mushroom compost to bioremediate PAH-contaminated
samples. Chemosphere, 52(9), 1539–1546. 
Lidsky, T. I. (2003). Lead neurotoxicity in children: Basic mechanisms and clinical correlates.
Brain, 126(1), 5–19. 
Liittschwager, D. (2012). A world in one cubic foot: Portraits of biodiversity. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. 
Margulis, L. (2009). Genome acquisition in horizontal gene transfer: Symbiogenesis and
macromolecular sequence analysis. In Horizontal gene transfer (pp. 181–191). New York:
Humana Press. 
McClintock, N. (2010). Why farm the city? Theorizing urban agriculture through a lens of
metabolic rift. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 3(2), 191–207 
Menalled, F. e. (2009). From conventional to organic cropping: What to expect during the
transition years. Bozeman, MT: Montana State University Extension Service MontGuide
MT200901AG. 
Mielke, H. W. (2012). The urban rise and fall of air lead (Pb) and the latent surge and retreat of
societal violence. Environment International, 43, 48–55. 
Miliutenko, S. A. (2013). Opportunities for environmentally improved asphalt recycling: The
example of Sweden. Journal of Cleaner Production, 43, 156–165. 
Mohammadi-Sichani, M. e. (2018). Ability of Agaricus bisporus , Pleurotus ostreatus  and 
Ganoderma lucidum  compost in biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbon-contaminated soil. 
International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology, 1–8. 
Monosson, E. (2012). Evolution in a toxic world: How life responds to chemical threats.
Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Ohsowski, B. M. (2012). The potential of soil amendments for restoring severely disturbed
grasslands. Applied Soil Ecology, 60, 77–83. 
Okerentugba, P. e. (2015). Spent mushroom compost for bioremediation of petroleum
hydrocarbon polluted soil: A review. Journal of Environmental Science and Toxicology, 4(1),
1–7. 
O’Riordan, T. (2013). Interpreting the precautionary principle. London: Routledge. 
Perelo, L. W. (2010). In situ and bioremediation of organic pollutants in aquatic sediments.
Journal of Hazardous Materials, 177(1–3), 81–89. 
Pirkle, J. L. (1998). Exposure of the US population to lead, 1991–1994. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 106(11), 745. 
PlasticsEurope . (2016). Plastics-the facts. Retrieved October 20, 2016, from
http://www.plasticseurope.org/plastics–the-facts-2016-15787.aspx?FollD 
Prasad, L. R. (2000). Contamination of allotment soil with lead: Managing potential risks to
health. Journal of Public Health, 22(4), 525–530. 
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of
care. Social Studies of Science, 45(5), 691–716. 
Purnomo, A. S. (2010). Application of mushroom waste medium from Pleurotus ostreatus  for 
bioremediation of DDT-contaminated soil. International Biodeterioration & Biodegradation , 
64(5), 397–402. 
León Rejón, L. , García Trigueros, B. , Rosales Reyes, M. , Soto Paniza, C. , Cámara Pérez-
Vela, C. , Cifuentes, C. , . . . & Delgado-Moreno, L. (2013). Use of vermitea for removing
pesticides from soil. High School Students for Agricultural Science Research. Volume III is
licensed under a Creative Commons Reconocimiento-SinObraDerivada 3.0 Unported License:
69. 
Renforth, P. e. (2011). Designing a carbon capture function into urban soils. Proceedings of the
ICE-Urban Design and Planning, 164, 121–128. 
Richter, D. e. (2015). Soil in the Anthropocene. In IOP conference series: Earth and
environmental science (p. 25). Bristol: IOP Publishing. 
Rondon, M. R. (1999). The earth’s bounty: Assessing and accessing soil microbial diversity.
Trends in Biotechnology, 17(10), 403–409.
Sánchez, C. (2010). Cultivation of Pleurotus ostreatus  and other edible mushrooms. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 85(5), 1321–1337. 
Santos-Lozada, A. R. (2018). In Puerto Rico, counting deaths and making deaths count. Health
Affairs, 37(4), 520–522. 
Sargent, J. D. (1994). The role of nutrition in the prevention of lead poisoning in children.
Pediatric Annals, 23(11), 636–642. 
Scalenghe, R. a. (2009). The Anthropogenic sealing of soils in urban areas. Landscape and
Urban Planning, 90(1), 1–10. 
Séré, G. e. (2010). Early pedogenic evolution of constructed Technosols. Journal of Soils and
Sediments, 10(7), 1246–1254. 
Shiva, V. (2008). Soil not oil: Environmental justice in a time of climate crisis. Cambridge, MA:
South End Press. 
Smith, N. J. (1980). Anthrosols and human carrying capacity in Amazonia. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, 70(4), 553–566. 
Stamets, P. (2005). Mycelium running: How mushrooms can help save the world. New York:
Random House Digital, Inc. 
Stoessel, F. e. (2018). Assessing the environmental impacts of soil compaction in Life Cycle
Assessment. Science of the Total Environment, 630, 913–921. 
Storelli, M. M. (2008). Potential human health risks from metals (Hg, Cd, and Pb) and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) via seafood consumption: Estimation of target hazard
quotients (THQs) and toxic equivalents (TEQs). Food and Chemical Toxicology, 46(8), 2. 
Tang, Z.-L. T.-A.-H. (2017). The study of the microbes degraded polystyrene. Advances in
Technology Innovation, 2(1), 13–17. 
Targulian, V. O. (1978). Structural and functional approaches to the soil: Soil-memory and soil-
moment. In Mathematical modeling in ecology (pp. 17–33). Moscow: Nauka. 
Tate, R. L. (1995). Soil microbiology. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons. 
Tilman, D. (1998). The greening of the green revolution. Nature, 211. 
USEPA . (2009). How does your garden grow? Brownfields Redevelopment and Local
Agriculture . Retrieved April 6, 2011, from www.epa.gov/brownfields/success/local_ag.pdf.  
Van Der Heijden, M. G. (2008). The unseen majority: Soil microbes as drivers of plant diversity
and productivity in terrestrial ecosystems. Ecology Letters, 11(3), 296–310. 
Vasenev, V. a. (2018). Urban soils as hot spots of anthropogenic carbon accumulation: Review
of stocks, mechanisms and driving factors. Land Degradation & Development, 29(6),
1607–1622. 
Vidali, M. (2001). Bioremediation: An overview. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 73(7), 1163–1172. 
Wakefield, S. Y. (2007). Growing urban health: Community gardening in South-East Toronto.
Health Promotion International, 22(2), 92–101. 
Walker, L. R. (2012). The biology of disturbed habitats. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Washbourne, C.-L. P. (2012). Investigating carbonate formation in urban soils as a method for
capture and storage of atmospheric carbon. Science of the Total Environment, 431, 166–175. 
Yang, S.-S. e. (2018). Biodegradation of polystyrene wastes in yellow mealworms (larvae of
Tenebrio molitor Linnaeus): Factors affecting biodegradation rates and the ability of
polystyrene-fed larvae to complete their life cycle. Chemosphere, 191. 
Yang, Y. e. (2015). Biodegradation and mineralization of polystyrene by plastic-eating meal-
worms: Part 1, Chemical and physical characterization and isotopic tests. Environmental
Science & Technology, 49(20), 12080–12086. 
 
Urban waters justice 
Asafu-Adjaye, J. B. (2015). An ecomodernist manifesto . Oakland, CA: Breakthrough Institute.  
Barcott, B. a. (2001). Aquaculture’s troubled harvest. Mother Jones, 26(6), 38–45. 
Barthel, S. C. (2010). Social – ecological memory in urban gardens: Retaining the capacity for
management of ecosystem services. Global Environmental Change, 20(2), 255–265. 
Beatley, T. (2014). Blue urbanism: Urban design for a blue planet. Washington, DC: Island
Press/Center for Resource Economics.
Beck, M. W. (2011). Oyster reefs at risk and recommendations for conservation, restoration,
and management. Bioscience, 61(2), 107–116. 
Borchardt, D. a. (1997). Urban stormwater discharges: Ecological effects on receiving waters
and consequences for technical measures. Water Science and Technology, 36(8), 173–178. 
Buchholz, T. a. (2007). Urban stream daylighting: Case study evaluations. Blacksburg, VA:
Virginia Water Resources Research Center. 
Bullard, R. D. (1999). Atlanta megasprawl. Forum for Applied Research and Public P olicy,
14(3). 
Cao, H. e. (2010). Heavy metals in rice and garden vegetables and their potential health risks to
inhabitants in the vicinity of an industrial zone in Jiangsu, China. Journal of Environmental
Sciences (China), 22, 1792–1799. 
Cao, W. , & Zhang, Y. (2014). Removal of nitrogen (N) from hypereutrophic waters by
ecological floating beds (EFBs) with various substrates. Ecological Engineering, 62, 148–152. 
Checker, M. (2018). Green apple, brown spots: Environmental gentrification in New York City.
In Urban life: Readings in the anthropology of the city (p. 413). Long Grove, IL: Waveland
Press. 
Chen, G. a. (2010). Penetration of cover crop roots through compacted soils. Plant and Soil,
331(1–2), 31–43. 
Curran, W. a. (2018). A just enough green? Industrial gentrification and competing socio-
natures in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. In Just green enough (Vol. 32, pp. 32–46). London: Routledge
in association with GSE Research. 
Danks, S. G. (2010). Asphalt to ecosystems: Design ideas for schoolyard transformation. New
York: New Village Press. 
Despommier, D. (2013). Farming up the city: The rise of urban vertical farms. Trends in
Biotechnology, 31(7), 388–389. 
Flannery, T. (2002). The future eaters: An ecological history of the Australasian lands and
people . New York: Grove Press.  
Frazer, L. (2005). Paving paradise: The peril of impervious surfaces. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 113(7), A456. 
Grabowski, J. H. (2007). Restoring oyster reefs to recover ecosystem services. In Ecosystem
engineers: Plants to protists (pp. 281–298). London: Elsevier. 
Grizzle, R. e. (2013). Oyster Restoration Research Project (ORPP) final technical report: ORRP
Phase 1: Experimental oyster reef development and performance results. New York: US Army
Corps of Engineers – New York District, The Port Authority of New York & New Jersey. 
Guoyan, C. H. (2005). Treatment in water bodies pollution by ecological floating bed
technology. China Water Kesources, 5, 22. 
Ingham, E. R. (2000). Brewing compost tea. Kitchen Gardener, 29, 16–19. 
Krasny, M. E. (2012). Civic ecology: A pathway for earth stewardship in cities. Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment, 10(5), 267–273. 
Krasny, M. E. (2014). New York City’s oyster gardeners: Memories and meanings as
motivations for volunteer environmental stewardship. Landscape and Urban Planning, 132,
16–25. 
Kurlansky, M. (2007). The big oyster: History on the half shell. New York: Random House. 
Lave, R. (2016). Stream restoration and the surprisingly social dynamics of science. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water, 3(1), 75–81. 
LESEC . (2015). Lower east side ecology center. Retrieved December 11, 2015, from
www.lesecologycenter.org 
Logsdon, G. (1978). Getting food from water: A guide to backyard aquaculture. Emmaus, PA:
Rodale Press, Inc. 
Lundy, L. a. (2011). Integrating sciences to sustain urban ecosystem services. Progress in
Physical Geography, 35(5), 653–669. 
McAvoy, W. A. (2012). Plant community classification and the flora of Native American shell-
middens on the Delmarva Peninsula. Maryland Naturalist, 53(1), 1–34. 
McLarney, W. O. (1984). The freshwater aquaculture book: A handbook for small scale fish
culture in North America . Washington, DC: Hartley and Marks.  
Moran, S. (2010). Cities, creeks, and erasure: Stream restoration and environmental justice.
Environmental Justice, 3(2), 61–69.
Neale, M. W. (2016). Re-engineering buried urban streams: Daylighting results in rapid changes
in stream invertebrate communities. Ecological Engineering, 87, 175–184. 
Noonan, D. S. (2005). Neighbours, barriers and urban environments: Are things different on the
other side of the tracks? Urban Studies, 42(10), 1817–1835. 
Pelton, T. a. (2010). On the Brink-Chesapeake’s native oysters: What will it take to bring them
back? Chesapeake Bay Program. Retrieved from
https://mdstatedocs.slrc.info/digital/collection/mdgov/id/0/ 
Porter, M. J. (2015). The Hudson River watershed, New York State, USA. In Catchment and
river basin management (pp. 95–117). London: Routledge. 
Sedlak, D. (2016). Fool me once. Environmental Science and Technology, 50, 7937–7938. 
Sloan, R. J. (1988). PCB patterns in Hudson River fish: II: Migrant and marine species. In
Fisheries research in the Hudson River (p. 325). Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press. 
Tsihrintzis, V. A. (1997). Modeling and management of urban stormwater runoff quality: A
review. Water Resources Management, 11(2), 136–164. 
Wattigney, W. A.-W. (2017). The biomonitoring of great lakes populations program. Journal of
Environmental Health, 79(8), 42. 
Willems, P. e. (2012). Climate change impact assessment on urban rainfall extremes and urban
drainage: Methods and shortcomings. Atmospheric Research, 103, 106–118. 
Zhao, F. e. (2012). Purifying Eutrophic River waters with integrated floating island systems.
Ecological Engineering, 40, 53–60. 
 
Urban atmospheric justice 
Abram, D. (2018). The commonwealth of breath. In Atmospheres of breathing (p. 263). Albany,
NY: SUNY Press. 
Amato, P. (2012). Clouds provide atmospheric oases for microbes. Microbe, 7(3), 119–123. 
Avolio, M. L. (2018). Biodiverse cities: The nursery industry, homeowners, and neighborhood
differences drive urban tree composition. Ecological Monographs, 88(2), 259–276. 
Aydogan, A. , & Cerone, R. (2021). Review of the effects of plants on indoor environments.
Indoor and Built Environment, 30(4), 442–460. 
Barwise, Y. a. (2020). Designing vegetation barriers for urban air pollution abatement: A
practical review for appropriate plant species selection. Climate and Atmospheric Science , 3(1), 
1–19. 
Beacham, A. M. (2019). Vertical farming: A summary of approaches to growing skywards. The
Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology, 94(3), 277–283. 
Beck, U. (1995). Ecological enlightenment: Essays on the politics of the risk society. London:
Humanities Press International. 
Bo, M. e. (2020). A combined citizen science – modelling approach for NO2 assessment in
Torino Urban Agglomeration. Atmosphere, 11(7), 721. 
Brito, V. V. (2020). Urban food forestry and its role to increase food security: A Brazilian
overview and its potentialities. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening. USDA report. Retrieved from
https://pubag.nal.usda.gov/catalog/7095314 
Brown, N. , Buse, C. , Lewis, A. , Martin, D. , & Nettleton, S. (2020). Air care: An “aerogra-phy”
of breath, buildings and bugs in the cystic fibrosis clinic. Sociology of Health & Illness, 42(5),
972–986. 
Bunge, A. e. (2019). Urban foraging for food security and sovereignty: Quantifying edible forest
yield in Syracuse, New York using four common fruit-and nut-producing street tree species.
Journal of Urban Ecology, 5(1). 
Castro, J. e. (2018). Edible urban forests as part of inclusive, sustainable cities. Unasylva,
69(250), 59–65. 
Chay, K. Y. (2003). The impact of air pollution on infant mortality: Evidence from geographic
variation in pollution shocks induced by a recession. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(3), 1121–1167. 
Chen, L.-J. e. (2017). An open framework for participatory PM 2.5 monitoring in smart cities.
IEEE Access, 5, 14441–14454. 
Chilson, P. B. (2017). Aeroecology. Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
Clark, K. H. (2013). Introducing urban food forestry: A multifunctional approach to increase food
security and provide ecosystem services. Landscape Ecology, 28(9), 1649–1669. 
Dayaneni, G. (2009). Carbon fundamentalism vs. climate justice. Race, Poverty & the
Environment , 16(2), 7–11.  
Dutta, P. e. (2009). Common sense: Participatory urban sensing using a network of handheld
air quality monitors. Proceedings of the 7th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor
Systems (pp. 349–350). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1145/1644038.1644095. 
English, P. B. (2017). The imperial county community air monitoring network: A model for
community-based environmental monitoring for public health action. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 125(7). 
EPA . (2020a). Heat island effect. United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved
from www.epa.gov/heatislands 
EPA . (2020b). Particulate Matter (PM) pollution. United States Environmental Protection
Agency. Retrieved from www.epa.gov/pm-pollution/particulate-matter-pm-basics 
Erell, E. D. (2012). Urban microclimate: Designing the spaces between buildings. London:
Routledge. 
Fares, S. e. (2017). Carbon sequestration by urban trees. In The urban forest (pp. 31–39).
Cham: Springer. 
Field, J. J. (2020). Urban tree canopy governance and redlined neighborhoods: An analysis of
five cities. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Fischer, L. K. (2020). Connecting people to biodiversity in cities of tomorrow: Is urban foraging a
powerful tool? Ecological Indicators, 112. 
Freytas-Tamura, K. d. (2017, February 17). A push for diesel leaves London gasping amid
record pollution. The New York Times. 
Gaither, C. J. , Aragón, A. , Madden, M. , Alford, S. , Wynn, A. , & Emery, M. (2020). “Black
Folks Do Forage”: Examining wild food gathering in Southeast Atlanta communities. Urban
Forestry & Urban Greening, 56, 126860. 
Garrison, J. D. (2018). Environmental justice in theory and practice: Measuring the equity
outcomes of Los Angeles and New York’s “Million Trees” campaigns. Journal of Planning
Education and Research. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X18772072. 
Ghertner, D. A. (2020). Airpocalypse: Distributions of life amidst Delhi’s polluted airs. Public
Culture, 32(1), 133–162. 
Golumbic, Y. N.-T. (2019). User centered design of a citizen science air-quality monitoring
project. International Journal of Science Education, Part B, 9(3), 195–213. 
Gori, A. F. (2019). Reprint of: Growing healthy food under heavy metal pollution load: Overview
and major challenges of tree based edible landscapes. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 45. 
Górska, M. (2016). Breathing matters: Feminist intersectional politics of vulnerability . Linkop- 
ing, Switzerland: Linkoping University. 
Graham, S. (2015). Life support: The political ecology of urban air. City, 19(2–3), 192–215. 
Hagler, G. S. (2012). Field investigation of roadside vegetative and structural barrier impact on
near-road ultrafine particle concentrations under a variety of wind conditions. Science of the
Total Environment, 419, 7–15. 
Hamilton, W. D. (1998). Spora and Gaia: How microbes fly with their clouds. Ethology Ecology
& Evolution, 10(1), 1–16. 
Haney, C. (2020). Beyond “Snow Shoveler’s Infarction”: Broadening perspectives on winter
health risks. Geography Compass, 14(7). 
Haney, C. R. (2020). Winter weather hazards: Injuries and fatalities associated with snow
removal. Dissertation, Mississippi State University. 
Harlan, S. L. (2007). In the shade of affluence: The inequitable distribution of the urban heat
island. Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 15, 173–202. 
Harvey, C. (2020, January). Love snow? Here’s how it’s changing. Scientific American. 
Hawken, P. e. (2017). Drawdown: The most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse
global warming. New York: Penguin. 
Helden, A. J. (2012). Urban biodiversity: Comparison of insect assemblages on native and non-
native trees. Urban Ecosystems, 15(3), 611–624.
Houston, A. A. (2015). Real time data. Retrieved from www.airalliancehouston.org/air-quality-
now/ 
Irga, P. J. (2018). The phytoremediation of indoor air pollution: A review on the technology
development from the potted plant through to functional green wall biofilters. Reviews in
Environmental Science and Bio/Technology, 17(2), 395–415. 
Jacke, D. a. (2005). Edible forest gardens, Volume II: Ecological design and practice for
temperate - climate permaculture. Hartford, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing. 
Janoski, T. P. (2018). Effects of climate change on wind-driven heavy-snowfall events over
eastern North America. Journal of Climate, 31(22), 9037–9054. 
Kaufman, A. e. (2017). A citizen science and government collaboration: Developing tools to
facilitate community air monitoring. Environmental Justice, 10(2), 51–61. 
Kendal, D. C. (2014). Global patterns of diversity in the urban forest: Is there evidence to
support the 10/20/30 rule? Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 13(3), 411–417. 
Kim, K. J. (2010). Variation in formaldehyde removal efficiency among indoor plant species.
HortScience, 45(10), 1489–1495. 
Klinenberg, E. (2015). Heat wave: A social autopsy of disaster in Chicago. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. 
Koo, B. W. , Boyd, N. , Botchwey, N. , & Guhathakurta, S. (2019). Environmental equity and
spatiotemporal patterns of urban tree canopy in Atlanta. Journal of Planning Education and
Research. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X19864149. 
Kull, C. A. (2018). Critical invasion science: Weeds, pests, and aliens. In The Palgrave
handbook of critical physical geography (pp. 249–272). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Kumar, P. e. (2014). Ultrafine particles in cities. Environment International, 66, 1–10. 
Kumar, P. e. (2015). New directions: Air pollution challenges for developing megacities like
Delhi. Atmospheric Environment, 122, 657–661. 
Landor-Yamagata, J. L. (2018). Urban foraging in Berlin: People, plants and practices within the
metropolitan green infrastructure. Sustainability, 10(6). 
Locke, D. H. , Hall, B. , Grove, J. M. , Pickett, S. T. , Ogden, L. A. , Aoki, C. , . . . & O’Neil-
Dunne, J. P. (2021). Residential housing segregation and urban tree canopy in 37 US Cities.
npj Urban Sustainability, 1(1), 1–9. 
Lohr, V. I. (2014). Urban trees worldwide have low species and genetic diversity, posing high
risks of tree loss as stresses from climate change increase. XXIX International Horticultural 
Congress on Horticulture: Sustaining Lives, Livs, Livelihoods and Landscapes (IHC2014) , V 
1108. 
Maas, R. , & Grennfelt, P. (2016). Towards cleaner Air-CLRTAP scientific assessment report
2016. In EMEP-Steering body and Working Group on effects-convention on long-range
transboundary air pollution (Vol. 1). United Nations. 
MacIvor, J. S. (2016). Air temperature cooling by extensive green roofs in Toronto Canada.
Ecological Engineering, 95, 36–42. 
Mahajan, S. , & Kumar, P. (2020). Evaluation of low-cost sensors for quantitative personal
exposure monitoring. Sustainable Cities and Society, 57, 102076. 
Mahajan, S. e. (2020). A citizen science approach for enhancing public understanding of air
pollution. Sustainable Cities and Society, 52. 
Manes, F. e. (2012). Urban ecosystem services: Tree diversity and stability of tropospheric
ozone removal. Ecological Applications, 22(1), 349–360. 
Manigrasso, M. e. (2017). Pedestrians in traffic environments: Ultrafine particle respiratory
doses. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(3), 288. 
McLain, R. e. (2012). Producing edible landscapes in Seattle’s urban forest. Urban Forestry & 
Urban Greening , 11(2), 187–194.  
McLain, R. J. (2014). Gathering “wild” food in the city: Rethinking the role of foraging in urban
ecosystem planning and management. Local Environment, 19(2), 220–240. 
Morello-Frosch, R. M. (2001). Environmental justice and southern California’s “Risk-scape”: The
distribution of air toxics exposures and health risks among diverse communities. Urban Affairs
Review, 36(4), 551–555. 
Murphy, M. W. (2013). Formaldehyde levels in FEMA-supplied travel trailers, park models, and
mobile homes in Louisiana and Mississippi. Indoor Air, 23(2), 134–141. 
Muthumani, A. a. (2017). Effectiveness of liquid agricultural by-products and solid complex
chlorides for snow and ice control. Journal of Cold Regions Engineering, 31(1).
Negi, R. (2020). Urban air. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East,
40(1), 17–23. 
Nieuwenhuis, M. (2013). Terror in the air in Istanbul. Society and Space: open site. Retrieved
October 5, 2016, from www.societyandspace.com/2013/06/20/marijnnieuwenhuis-terror-in-the-
air-in-istanbul/#comments 
Nieuwenhuis, M. (2018). Atmospheric governance: Gassing as law for the protection and killing
of life. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 36(1), 78–95. 
Novotny, E. V. (2008). Increase of urban lake salinity by road deicing salt. Science of the Total
Environment, 406(1–2), 131–144. 
Nyelele, C. a. (2020). Urban forestry & urban greening. The Equity of Urban Forest Ecosystem
Services and Benefits in the Bronx, NY., 53.  
O’Dowd, C. D. (2002). Marine aerosol formation from biogenic iodine emissions. Nature,
417(6889), 632–636. 
Ogden, L. E. (2014). Life in the clouds. BioScience, 64(10), 861–867. 
Ottinger, G. (2010). Buckets of resistance: Standards and the effectiveness of citizen science.
Science, Technology, & Human Values, 35(2), 244–270. 
Ottosen, T.-B. a. (2020). The influence of the vegetation cycle on the mitigation of air pollution
by a deciduous roadside hedge. Sustainable Cities and Society, 53. 
Pal, J. S. (2015). Future temperature in Southwest Asia projected to exceed a threshold for
human adaptability. Nature Climate Change, 6(2), 197. 
Park, H. e. (2019). Urban food systems that involve trees in Northern America and Europe: A
scoping review. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 45. 
Poe, M. R. (2014). Urban foraging and the relational ecologies of belonging. Social & Cultural
Geography, 15(8), 901–919. 
Ragnedda, M. (2017). The third digital divide: A Weberian approach to digital inequalities.
London: Taylor & Francis. 
Rannila, P. a. (2016). Syracuse, sidewalks, and snow: The slippery realities of public space.
Urban Geography, 37(7), 1070–1090. 
Riolo, F. (2019). The social and environmental value of public urban food forests: The case
study of the Picasso Food Forest in Parma, Italy. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 45. 
Rizwan, A. M. (2008). A review on the generation, determination and mitigation of Urban Heat
Island. Journal of Environmental Sciences, 20(1), 120–128. 
Robitu, M. e. (2006). Modeling the influence of vegetation and water pond on urban
microclimate. Solar Energy, 80(4), 435–447. 
Sanchez, L. a. (2019). Cooling Detroit: A socio-spatial analysis of equity in green roofs as an
urban heat island mitigation strategy. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 44. 
Shackleton, C. M. (2017). Urban foraging: A ubiquitous human practice overlooked by urban
planners, policy, and research. Sustainability, 9(10). 
Sheil, D. (2018). Forests, atmospheric water and an uncertain future: The new biology of the
global water cycle. Forest Ecosystems, 5(1), 1–22. 
Shendell, D. G. (2007). The Outdoor Air Quality Flag Program in Central California: A school-
based educational intervention to potentially help reduce children’s exposure to environmental
asthma triggers. Journal of Environmental Health, 70. 
Sloterdijk, P. (2009). Terror from the Air. Semiotext. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sobel, D. (2004). Place-based education: Connecting classrooms & communities. Great
Barrington, MA: Orion Society. 
Stebbins, S. (2019, February 26). Ghost towns: 30 Zip codes with the highest vacancy rates in
the US. USA Today. 
Steele, W. L. (2015). Urban climate justice: Creating sustainable pathways for humans and
other species. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 14, 121–126. 
Steffens, J. T. (2012). Exploration of effects of a vegetation barrier on particle size distributions
in a near-road environment. Atmospheric Environment, 50, 120–128. 
Takane, Y. e. (2019). Urban warming and future air-conditioning use in an Asian megacity:
Importance of positive feedback. Climate and Atmospheric Science, 2(1), 1–11. 
Tam, N. F. (1987). Heavy metal pollution in roadside urban parks and gardens in Hong Kong.
Science of the Total Environment, 59, 325–328. 
Tellström, S. (2014). Urban agroforestry: For developing ecosystem services in urban forests.
Thesis. Mid Sweden University, Faculty of Science, Technology and Media, Department of
Ecotechnology and Sustainable Building Engineering. 
Threlfall, C. G. (2017). Increasing biodiversity in urban green spaces through simple vegetation
interventions. Journal of Applied Ecology, 54(6), 1874–1883. 
Tsilini, V. e. (2015). Urban gardens as a solution to energy poverty and urban heat island.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 14, 323–333. 
Waring, M. S. (2016). Bio-walls and indoor houseplants: Facts and fictions. Microbiomes of the 
Built Environment: From Research to Application, Meeting , 3 .  
Weerakkody, U. e. (2018). Evaluating the impact of individual leaf traits on atmospheric
particulate matter accumulation using natural and synthetic leaves. Urban Forestry & Urban
Greening, 30, 98–107. 
Wightman, K. E. (1999). Good tree nursery practices: Practical guidelines for community 
nurseries.  Nairobi, Kenya: International Centre for Research in Agroforestry.  
Wolverton, B. (2010). Plant-based air filters for formaldehyde remediation in FEMA trailers.
Picayune, MS: Wolverton Environmental Services, Inc. 
Wolverton, B. C. (1997). How to grow fresh air: 50 Houseplants to purify your home or office.
New York: Penguin Books. 
World Health Organization . (2016). Ambient air pollution: A global assessment of exposure and
burden of disease. Clean Air Journal, 26(2), 6. 
Yang, D. S. (2009). Screening indoor plants for volatile organic pollutant removal efficiency.
HortScience, 44(5), 1377–1381. 
Yang, J. Y. (2015). Ranking the suitability of common urban tree species for controlling PM2.5
pollution. Atmospheric Pollution Research, 6(2), 267–277. 
 
Urban compost justice 
Agyeman, J. (2005). Sustainable communities and the challenge of environmental justice. New
York: New York University Press. 
Anastas, P. T. (2000). The role of catalysis in the design, development, and implementation of
green chemistry. Catalysis Today, 55(1), 11–22. 
Attanayake, C. P. (2015). Potential bioavailability of lead, arsenic, and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in compost-amended urban soils. Journal of Environmental Quality, 44(3),
930–944. 
Balée, W. L. (2006). Time and complexity in historical ecology: Studies in the neotropical
lowlands . New York: Columbia University Press.  
Barrena, R. e. (2014). Home composting versus industrial composting: Influence of composting
system on compost quality with focus on compost stability. Waste Management, 34(7),
1109–1116. 
Campbell, S. (1998). Let it rot! The gardener’s guide to composting. North Adams: Storey
Publishing. 
Ceccanti, B. e. (2006). Soil bioremediation: Combination of earthworms and compost for the
ecological remediation of a hydrocarbon polluted soil. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, 177(1),
383–397. 
Eisenstein, C. (2018). Climate: A new story. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books. 
EPA, U. (2017). LMOP – Landfill Methane Outreach Program. United States Environmental
Protection Agency. Retrieved July 2, 2017, from www.epa.gov/lmop/basicinformation-about-
landfill-gas 
Farrell, M. a. (2010). Use of composts in the remediation of heavy metal contaminated soil.
Journal of Hazardous Materials, 175(1), 575–582. 
Fries, A. (2018, March 28). Albany , Saratoga counties move ahead with $45M organic waste 
facility. Retrieved from Times Union, www.timesunion.com/news/article/Albany-Saratoga-
counties-move-ahead-with-45M-12787834.php 
Gouin, T. e. (2004). Evidence for the “grasshopper” effect and fractionation during long-range
atmospheric transport of organic contaminants. Environmental Pollution, 128(1–2), 139–148. 
Gunders, D. (2012). Wasted: How America is losing up to 40 percent of its food from farm to
fork to landfill. New York: Natural Resources Defense Council.
Gustavsson, J. e. (2015). Global food losses and food waste. Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations website. Retrieved April 30, 2017, from www.fao.org/food-
loss-and-food-waste/en/ 
Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the trouble: Making kin in the Chthulucene. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press. 
Herrmann, D. L. , Schwarz, K. , Shuster, W. D. , Berland, A. , Chaffin, B. C. , Garmestani, A. S. ,
& Hopton, M. E. (2016). Ecology for the shrinking city. BioScience, 66(11), 965–973. 
Heynen, N. a. (2005). The neoliberalization of nature: Governance, privatization, enclosure and
valuation. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 16(1), 5–8. 
Hoornweg, D. P.-T. (2013). Environment: Waste production must peak this century. Nature
News, 615. 
King, F. H. (2011). Farmers of forty centuries or permanent agriculture in China, Korea and
Japan. Folkestone: Global Oriental. 
Kwasniak, A. J. (2009). Right to rainwater: A cloudy issue. Windsor Review of Legal & Social
Issues, 26, 105. 
Lefebvre, H. (1996). The right to the city. Writings on cities, 63181. Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishers. 
McClintock, N. (2012). Why farm the city? Theorizing urban agriculture through a lens of
metabolic rift. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 191–207. 
Montgomery, D. R. (2012). Dirt: The erosion of civilizations. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press. 
Papargyropoulou, E. e. (2014). The food waste hierarchy as a framework for the management
of food surplus and food waste. Journal of Cleaner Production, 76, 106–115. 
Protection, M. D. (2019). Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS). Retrieved from Maine
Department of Environmental Protection, www.maine.gov/dep/spills/topics/pfas/index.html 
Rich, D. (2007). Taking out the trash: Municipal green waste needs cleaning up. Special to The
Chronicle. Retrieved from www.sfgate.com/green/article/Taking-out-the-trash-Municipal-green-
waste-needs-3301750.php 
Schaffer, G. D. (2016). Building utopia with tomorrow {u2019} s trash: Formal and informal
infrastructures for organics recycling in New York City. Dissertation, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. 
Sierra . (2010). Landfill-gas-to-energy, Sierra Club Report on. Prepared by the Sierra Club
LFGTE Task Force. Retrieved September 2, 2017, from
www.sierraclub.org/sites/www.sierraclub.org/files/landfill-gas-report.pdf 
Swyngedouw, E. (2006). Metabolic urbanization: The making of cyborg cities. In In the nature of
cities (pp. 36–55). London: Routledge. 
Wade, L. (2018, December 15). Local town dumps a thing of the past due to high cost of
government regulations. Des Moines Register. Retrieved from
www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/2018/12/15/local-town-dumps-thing-past-due-high-
cost-government-regulations/2322022002/ 
Weber, C. L. (2008). Food-miles and the relative climate impacts of food choices in the United
States. Environmental Science and Technology, 42(10), 3508–3513. 
 
Urban biodiversity justice 
Akkerman, S. F. (2011). Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Review of Educational
Research, 81(2), 132–169. 
Alberti, M. (2008). Advances in urban ecology integrating humans and ecological processes in
urban ecosystems. New York: Springer Science+Business Media. 
Alvarez, L. (2012). The role of black soldier fly, Hermetia illucens (L.) (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) in
sustainable waste management in Northern Climates. Thesis, University of Windsor. 
Andrews, E. (2019). To save the bees or not to save the bees: Honey bee health in the
Anthropocene. Agriculture and Human Values  , 36(4), 891–902.  
Asayama, S. e. (2020). Are we ignoring a black elephant in the Anthropocene? Climate change
and global pandemic as the crisis in health and equality. Sustainability Science, 1–7.
Barber, E. J. (1991). Prehistoric textiles: The development of cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze
Ages with special reference to the Aegean. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Beatley, T. (2011). Biophilic cities: Integrating nature into urban design and planning.
Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Beekman, M. a. (2000). Long-range foraging by the honey-bee, Apis mellifera  L. Functional 
Ecology, 14(4), 490–496. 
Bennett, C. E. (2018). The broiler chicken as a signal of a human reconfigured biosphere. Royal
Society Open Science, 5(12), 180325. 
Berg, A. v. (2012). Defining modern, sustainable tapping guidelines. Burlington, VT: University
of Vermont Proctor Maple Research Center. 
Berger, J. (2013, April 3). Breeding pigeons on rooftops, and crossing racial lines. The New
York Times. 
Bowleg, L. (2020, July). We’re not all in this together: On COVID-19, intersectionality, and
structural inequality. American Journal of Public Health, 917. 
Bradshaw, C. J. (2016). Massive yet grossly underestimated global costs of invasive insects.
Nature Communications, 1–8. 
Brown, J. E. (2013). Remaking maple: New method may revolutionize maple syrup industry.
University Communications, University of Vermont. Retrieved from
www.uvm.edu/uvmnews/news/remaking-maple 
Buizer, M. B. (2016). Governing cities reflexively: The biocultural diversity concept as an
alternative to ecosystem services. Environmental Science & Policy, 62, 7–13. 
Cai, F. a. (2016). Seasons and neighborhoods of high lead toxicity in New York City: The feral
pigeon as a bioindicator. Chemosphere, 161, 274–279. 
Castellet-Rovira, F. e. (2018). Stropharia rugosoannulata  and Gymnopilus luteofolius : Promising 
fungal species for pharmaceutical biodegradation in contaminated water. Journal of
Environmental Management, 207, 396–404. 
Chung, A. Y. (2010). Edible insects and entomophagy in Borneo: Forest insects as food:
Humans bite back. United Nations, NY: Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations. 
Clark, C. (2019). The communitarian moment: The radical challenge of the Northampton
Association . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.  
Cooke, A. O. (1920). A book of dovecotes. London: TN Foulis. 
Cornell, U. (2020). Bee diversity in New York. Retrieved from Pollinator Network at Cornell,
https://pollinator.cals.cornell.edu/wild-bees-new-york/bee-diversity-new-york/ 
Davis, M. (2006). The monster at our door: The global threat of avian flu. New York: Macmillan. 
Duchesne, L. e. (2005). Changes in structure and composition of maple – beech stands
following sugar maple decline in Québec, Canada. Forest Ecology and Management, 208(1– 3),
223–236. 
Elmqvist, T. e. (2013). Urbanization, biodiversity and ecosystem services: Challenges and
opportunities: a global assessment. Dordrecht: Springer. 
Farrell, M. (2013). The sugarmaker’s companion: An integrated approach to producing syrup
from maple, birch, and walnut trees. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing. 
Flies, E. J. (2018). Cities, biodiversity and health: We need healthy urban microbiome initiatives.
Cities & Health, 2(2), 143–150. 
Fortel, L. e. (2016). Use of human-made nesting structures by wild bees in an urban
environment. Journal of Insect Conservation, 20(2), 239–253. 
Frank, S. D. (2020). Can cities activate sleeper species and predict future forest pests? A case
study of scale insects. Insects, 11(3), 142. 
Givens, M. e. (2013). The black soldier fly how-to-guide. Durham, NC: University of North
Carolina. 
Gorelick, S. (2016). How capitalism is changing Vermont’s Maple syrup industry for the worse.
Shareable. Retrieved from www.shareable.net/mapjam-3-0-join-us-to-put-sharing-on-the-map/ 
Goulson, D. (2019). The insect apocalypse, and why it matters. Current Biology, 29(19), R967-
R971. 
Gowdy, J. a. (2013). The ultrasocial origin of the Anthropocene. Ecological Economics, 95,
137–147. 
Green, A. (2008, November 27). Asian beetle spells death for maples so dear. The New York
Times.
Haag-Wackernagel, D. a. (2004). Health hazards posed by feral pigeons. Journal of Infection,
307–313. 
Han, F. A. (2012). From where did the Western honeybee (A pis mellifera) originate? Ecology
and Evolution, 2(8), 1949–1957. 
Haraway, D. (2018). Staying with the trouble for multispecies environmental justice. Dialogues
in Human Geography, 8(1), 102–105. 
Heise, U. K. (2016). Imagining extinction: The cultural meanings of endangered species.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Hinchliffe, S. a. (2006). Living cities: Towards a politics of conviviality. Science as Culture,
15(2), 123–138. 
Hinchliffe, S. a. (2008). People, animals and biosecurity in and through cities. In Networked
disease: Emerging infections in the global city (pp. 214–227). Oxford, UK: Oxford. 
Houston, D. e. (2018). Make kin, not cities! Multispecies entanglements and “becoming-world”
in planning theory. Planning Theory, 17(2), 190–212. 
Human Rights Watch, a. U. (2003). Small change: Bonded child labor in India’s silk industry . 
Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing. 
Jensen, N. H. (2019). “We will eat disgusting foods together”: Evidence of the normative basis
of Western entomophagy-disgust from an insect tasting. Food Quality and Preference, 72,
109–115. 
Jerolmack, C. (2008). How pigeons became rats: The cultural-spatial logic of problem animals.
Social Problems, 72–94. 
Jones, B. A. (2013). Zoonosis emergence linked to agricultural intensification and environmental
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(21), 8399–8404. 
Jonsell, M. (2017). Black soldier fly, Hermetia illucens, invasive food? Entomologisk Tidskrift,
138(3-4), 231–232. 
Kimmerer, R. (2013). Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge and the
teachings of plants. Canada: Milkweed Editions. 
Klein, J. (2007). A vending machine for crows. Dissertation, New York University, Interactive
Telecommunications Program. 
Lee, H. L. (1995). A case of human enteric myiasis due to larvae of Hermetia illucens  (Family: 
Stratiomyiadae ): First report in Malaysia. The Malaysian Journal of Pathology, 17(2), 109–111.  
Lenzen, M. e. (2020). Global socio-economic losses and environmental gains from the
Coronavirus pandemic. PloS One, 15(7). 
Leong, M. R. (2018). Biodiversity and socioeconomics in the city: A review of the luxury effect.
Biology Letters, 14(5), n.a. 
Lerner, H. a. (2017). A comparison of three holistic approaches to health: One health,
EcoHealth, and planetary health. Frontiers in Veterinary Science, 163(4). 
Li, Q. e. (2011). From organic waste to biodiesel: Black soldier fly, Hermetia illucens , makes it 
feasible. Fuel, 90(4), 1545–1548. 
MacInnis, G. a. (2019). Pollination by wild bees yields larger strawberries than pollination by
honey bees. Journal of Applied Ecology, 56(4), 824–832. 
Margulis, L. (2008). Symbiotic planet: A new look at evolution. Amherst: Basic Book, NYC. 
McLain, R. J. (2014). Gathering “wild” food in the city: Rethinking the role of foraging in urban
ecosystem planning and management. Local Environment, 19(2), 220–240. 
Mega, E. R. (2020). COVID has killed more than one million people: How many more will die?
Nature. Retrieved September 30, 2020, from https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-02762-y (Epub
ahead of print, PMID: 32999443). 
Mills, J. G. (2017). Urban habitat restoration provides a human health benefit through
microbiome rewilding: The microbiome rewilding hypothesis. Restoration Ecology, 25(6),
866–872. 
Mooallem, J. (2006, October 5). Pigeon wars. New York Times Magazine. 
Moore, L. J. (2013). Buzz: Urban beekeeping and the power of the bee. New York: New York
University Press. 
Murphy, B. A. (2009). How do we come to know? Exploring maple syrup production and climate
change in near north Ontario. Geography, 2. 
Nading, A. M. (2013). Humans, animals, and health: From ecology to entanglement.
Environment and Society, 4(1), 60–78.
Nana, P. e. (2018). Black soldier flies ( Hermetia illucens  Linnaeus) as recyclers of organic 
waste and possible livestock feed. International Journal of Biological and Chemical Sciences,
12(5), 2004–2015. 
Nguyen, T. T. (2015). Ability of black soldier fly (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) larvae to recycle food
waste. Environmental Entomology, 44(2), 406–410. 
Nigro, C. (2012, August 23). How did the pigeon get to NYC? Retrieved from New York Public
Library, www.nypl.org/blog/2012/08/23/how-did-pigeon-get-nyc 
Nimmo, R. (2015). Apiculture in the anthropocene: Between posthumanism and critical animal
studies. In Animals in the anthropocene: Critical perspectives on non-human futures (pp.
177–200). Manchester: University of Manchester. 
Norton, B. A. (2019). Urban meadows as an alternative to short mown grassland: Effects of
composition and height on biodiversity. Ecological Applications, 29(6). 
O’Callaghan-Gordo, C. a. (2020). COVID-19: The disease of the Anthropocene. Environmental
Research. Retrieved May 15, 2020, from https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.109683. 
Oldroyd, B. P. (2012). Domestication of honey bees was associated with expansion of genetic
diversity. Molecular Ecology, 21(18), 4409–4411. 
Osa, O. (2013). Pulke, maple syrup, and palm wine: International and multicultural literatures for
cross-cultural learning and understanding. Humanities Education, 11, 43. 
Panelli, S. , Epis, S. , Cococcioni, L. , Perini, M. , Paroni, M. , Bandi, C. , Drago, L. , & Vincenzo
Zuccotti, G. (2020). Inflammatory bowel diseases, the hygiene hypothesis and the other side of
the microbiota: Parasites and fungi. Pharmacological Research, 159, 104962. 
Poe, M. R. (2013). Urban forest justice and the rights to wild foods, medicines, and materials in
the city. Human Ecology, 41(3), 409–422. 
Poe, M. R. (2014). Urban foraging and the relational ecologies of belonging. Social & Cultural
Geography, 15(8), 901–919. 
Potts, S. G. (2018). Robotic bees for crop pollination: Why drones cannot replace biodiversity.
Science of the Total Environment, 642, 665–667. 
Pozdnyakova, N. e. (2018). The degradative activity and adaptation potential of the litter-
decomposing fungus Stropharia rugosoannulata. World Journal of Microbiology and
Biotechnology , 34(9), 133.  
Quammen, D. (2012). Spillover: Animal infections and the next human pandemic. New York: W.
W. Norton & Company. 
Ryznar, R. M. (2001). Using remotely sensed imagery to detect urban change: Viewing Detroit
from space. Journal of the American Planning Association, 67(3), 327–336. 
Sarpong, D. e. (2019). Biodegradation by composting of municipal organic solid waste into
organic fertilizer using the black soldier fly ( Hermetia illucens ) (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) larvae. 
International Journal of Recycling of Organic Waste in Agriculture, 8(1), 45–54. 
Scoones, I. , Dry, S. , Leach, M. , Forster, P. , Wilkinson, A. , Bloom, G. , . . . & Standing, H.
(2018). Free-book: Pathways to health and sustainability . Oxfordshire, UK: Routledge.  
Shackleton, C. M. (2017). Urban foraging: A ubiquitous human practice overlooked by urban
planners, policy, and research. Sustainability, 9(10), 1884. 
Simone-Finstrom, M. e. (2016). Migratory management and environmental conditions affect
lifespan and oxidative stress in honey bees. Scientific Reports, 6. 
Spranghers, T. e. (2017). Cold hardiness of the black soldier fly (Diptera: Stratiomyidae).
Journal of Economic Entomology, 110(4), 1501–1507. 
Sturges, M. (2018). “Bleed on, blest tree!”: Maple sugar georgics in the early American
Republic. Early American Studies: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 16(2), 353–380. 
Swinscoe, I. e. (2019). Seaweed-fed black soldier fly ( Hermetia illucens ) larvae as feed for 
salmon aquaculture: assessing the risks of pathogen transfer. Journal of Insects as Food and
Feed, 5(1), 15–27. 
Tomberlin, J. K. (2020). Black soldier fly from pest to “crown jewel” of the insects as feed
industry: An historical perspective. Journal of Insects as Food and Feed, 6(1), 1–4. 
Valentín, L. e. (2013). Mycoremediation of wood and soil from an old sawmill area contaminated
for decades. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 260, 668–675. 
Villanueva-G, R. D.-U. (2005). Extinction of Melipona beecheii  and traditional beekeeping in the 
Yucatán peninsula. Bee World, 86(2), 35–41. 
Villazana, J. a. (2019). Tolerance of immature black soldier flies (Diptera: Stratiomyidae) to cold
temperatures above and below freezing point. Journal of Economic Entomology, 112(6),
2632–2637. 
Waltner-Toews, D. (2017). Zoonoses, one health and complexity: Wicked problems and
constructive conflict. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 
372 .  
Wang, Y.-S. a. (2017). Review of black soldier fly ( Hermetia illucens ) as animal feed and human 
food. Foods, 6(10), 91. 
Wasko, N. J. (2020). Multiple sclerosis, the microbiome, TLR2, and the hygiene hypothesis.
Autoimmunity Reviews, 19(1). 
Winfree, R. e. (2007). Native bees provide insurance against ongoing honey bee losses.
Ecology Letters, 10(11), 1105–1113. 
Zhang, A. (2020). Circularity and enclosures: Metabolizing waste with the black soldier fly.
Cultural Anthropology, 35(1), 74–103. 
Zimmer, C. (2020, April 24). Welcome to the virosphere. The New York Times. 
 
The radix experiment 
Agyeman, J. a. (2003). Toward just sustainability in urban communities: Building equity rights
with sustainable solutions. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 590(1), 35–53. 
Alberti, M. e. (2003). Integrating humans into ecology: Opportunities and challenges for studying
urban ecosystems. BioScience, 53(12), 1169–1179. 
Balée, W. a. (2002). Advances in historical ecology. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Brones, A. (2018). Food apartheid: The root of the problem with America’s groceries. The
Guardian, 15. 
Cole, R. J. (2013). Regenerative design, socio-ecological systems and co-evolution. Building
Research & Information, 41(2), 237–247. 
Ferguson, R. S. (2015). Grassroots engagement with transition to sustainability: Diversity and
modes of participation in the international permaculture movement. Ecology and Society, 20(4). 
Fien, J. (1995). Teaching for a sustainable world: The environmental and development
education project for teacher education. Environmental Education Research, 1(1), 21–33. 
Gardner, H. E. (2011). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. London: Hachette
UK. 
Grass, R. a. (2002). Second national people of color environmental leadership summit - Summit
II. Washington, DC: Summit II. 
Herrmann, D. L. (2016). Sustainability for shrinking cities. Sustainability, 911. 
Holmgren, D. (2002). Principles & pathways beyond sustainability. Hepburn: Holmgren Design
Services. 
Krasny, M. E. (2009). Applying a resilience systems framework to urban environmental
education. Environmental Education Research, 15(4), 465–482. 
Lockyer, J. a. (2013). Environmental anthropology engaging ecotopia: Bioregionalism,
permacul-ture, and ecovillages (Vol. 17). New York: Berghahn Books. 
Martusewicz, R. A. (2014). Ecojustice education: Toward diverse, democratic, and sustainable
communities. London and New York: Routledge. 
Matthews, B. E. (1995). Teaching and evaluating outdoor ethics education programs. Retrieved
April 17, 2017, from www.files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED401097.pdf 
McClintock, N. (2011). From industrial garden to food desert. In Cultivating food justice: Race,
class, and sustainability (pp. 89–120). Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Orr, D. W. (1992). Ecological literacy: Education and the transition to a postmodern world.
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
Scott, D. a. (2017). “Sacrifice Zones” in the green energy economy: Toward an environmental
justice framework. McGill Law Journal/Revue de droit de McGill, 62(3), 861–898. 
Sobel, D. (1996). Beyond ecophobia. Great Barrington, MA: Orion Society. 
Sobel, D. P.-B. (2004). Connecting classrooms & communities. Great Barrington, MA: Orion
Society.
Sze, J. e. (2018). Sustainability: Approaches to environmental justice and social power. New
York: New York University Press. 
Thomashow, C. e. (2015). Urban complexity and environmental education. In Urban 
environmental education . Ithaca, NY: Cornell Civic Ecology Lab. Retrieved from 
www.researchgate.net/profile/Angelique_Hjarding/publication/302877963_Urban_Planning_and
_Environmental_Education/l 
Walker, B. a. (2012). Resilience practice: Building capacity to absorb disturbance and maintain
function. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
Wolfmeyer, M. (2013). STEM, meet ecojustice. Green Theory and Praxis Journal, 7(1), 32–46. 
 
