ORIGINAL PAPER
Various Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics
Jonathan Hope1
Received: 18 August 2017 /Accepted: 27 October 2017 /Published online: 7 November 2017
#Springer Science+Business Media B.V ., part of Springer Nature 2017
Abstract There is a steady and maybe growing impulse in biosemiotics to open itself
to the arts and humanities. Recent events and publications indicate a desire expressed
by biosemioticians and non-biosemioticians to engage in a dialogue concerning themanner in which living systems are cast, understood and dealt with, a dialogue that willdetermine the future course of those fields of research. In this article, I react to tworecent monographs on the subject, Paul Cobley ’sCultural implications of biosemiotics
(2016 ) and Wendy Wheeler ’sExpecting the earth. Life, culture, biosemiotics (2016 ).
After a close reading of these two books, I then briefly present certain issues that shed adifferent light on cultural biosemiotics: human pressure on other-than-human organ-
isms, domestication and reproductive rights.
Keywords Biosemiotics and culture .Nature-culture .Margins of biosemiotics .
Interdisciplinary dialogue .Co-construction of humans and other-than-humans
Introduction
By now, the history and shape of biosemiotics is well established (Favareau 2007 ).
Biosemioticians contributed, and are still actively contributing to a paradigmatic shift in
our understanding of life, drawing it away from a physicalist or mechanist framework(where living processes are reduced to efficient causes) to a one where life is consideredas a meaningful and intentional phenomenon. Life is not just about molecules, but alsoabout signs, signs that are at play in the biochemical make-up of slime-mold, in theorientation of leaves and branches, in the flight patterns of birds, in the languagedevelopment of humans. Because life is perfused with signs, organisms are actual
subjects (not machines), they have experiences (they are not involved in simple
exchanges of data), they are said to learn and adapt (they are not driven by someBiosemiotics (2017) 10:397 –411
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12304-017-9307-6
*Jonathan Hope
hope.jonathan@uqam.ca
1Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
vague explanatory principle like instinct), they evolve with their environment (and
cannot exist torn, abstracted from the world). A quick look at research being done inbiosemiotics reveals, among other things, that whatever biosemiotics is(field, disci-
pline, science, research agenda, etc.), it is doing a wonderful job at clarifying themanner by which living systems create and transform sign relations and how, betweenthemselves, those living systems exchange signs.
By embracing sign relations in living systems, it was generally implied –or taken for
granted –that linguistic, political, symbolic exchanges, the phenomena and objects of a
narrowly understood and construed logocentric human culture, are relegated to therealm of the humanities. This, in itself, is paradoxical: indeed, semiotics as it unfoldedin the writings of structuralists and poststructuralists, was in many cases politicallycommitted. These thinkers (for example, and to varying degrees through their careers,Barthes, Derrida, Kristeva) did not shy away from political debate, but embraced it.Why was this commitment (generally) ignored by biosemioticians? In addition, why
are biosemiotic approaches to human culture (typically) bound to an ontological
argument –Bbiosemiosis is a source, an origin for human cultural experiences ^–,b u t
tend to disengage when it is time to actually interpret the more problematic conse-quences of nature-culture expressions? Human culture is also alive so to speak.
Therefore, shouldn ’t biosemioticians take into account this naturality? Though it
(generally) shies away from human issues, biosemiotics may be on the cusp of animportant transformation. Indeed, as we can see after a close reading of Paul Cobley ’s
Cultural implications of biosemiotics (2016 ) and Wendy Wheeler ’sExpecting the
earth. Life, culture, biosemiotics (2016 ), some biosemioticians are actively engaged
with questions relating to human culture. Without actually reviewing these books, Ipropose to examine some key components of these two monographs in order to indicateanother possible path uniting nature and culture through semiotics.
Cobley ’sCultural Implications of Biosemiotics
Cobley argues that the arts, ethics, codes, human modelling systems are all, in a sense,properties that emerged from life. Culture emerged from nature. Following on Peirce ’s
synechism ( 1992a ), stating the seamlessness of the universe, Cobley reflects upon the
Bcontinuity of semiosis across nature ^(2016 : 3). This continuity links not only matter,
but also minds, and, crucially, matter and minds all together, transcending the infamousCartesian dualism. The body is key in getting around such a difference, in that ittranslates or adapts the inner world to the outer world. Equally important are theinterpretative capacities of organisms and the creation of species-specific Umwelten .
One of the unique characteristics of the human Umwelt is that it allows for Bprojecting
possible worlds: fictional projections and ethical projections as well as those associatedwith logic, science and Thirdness, and the ability to make educated guesses, or asPeirce would say, ‘abductions ’.^(Cobley 2016 :8 )T h i si sp o s s i b l em a i n l yb e c a u s eo f
theBverbal language ’s recursive potential ^(Cobley 2016 :8 ) ,t h ef a c tt h a th u m a n s
(semiotic animals) developed, through language, a symbolic capacity for using andrecognizing the evolution of sign patterns.
In essence, what Cobley retrieves from biosemiotics, and what he puts to use in his
analysis of cultural semiosis, is not only the fact that signs are exchanged throughout398 Hope J.
the living world, and that those signs create experience and subjectivity, but also the
fact that humans, as animals, have the unique capacity to grasp signhood from whichexperience and subjectivity emerge –something rarely expressed in common concep-
tions of the nature/culture link. Cobley writes:
While biosemiotics has inculcated conceptions of agency and semiosis, cultural
analysis has been less receptive to calls for it to contextualize the human in terms
of its natural heritage. [ …] It is thus probably true to say that most discussions of
culture take place as if in an evolutionary vacuum, with only very partial thoughtgiven to the rest of the natural world in which culture is embedded. ( 2016 :2 4–25)
Cobley considers that the arts and humanities have, generally, ignored biosemiosis(ignored semiosis in the living world and ignored their own rootedness in that sameliving world); this is basically why he writes his book. Himself from the humanities,
Cobley turns against Bthe arts ’and humanities ’traditional refusal to translate from the
sciences or even engage with them ^(2016 : 25). The isolationism of the arts and
humanities, their sacrosanct autonomy, is not only unrealistic, but also out of step with
the investigations and discoveries of the (natural) sciences.
In this case, language, though it is a uniquely human modeling system, is not
completely abstracted from the material/natural world, from our organic bodies thatdeveloped skills for communication and speech. Considering the interd isciplinary quality
of biosemiotics, Cobley states that BBiosemiotics presents a synthesis of human knowing
in which it is continuous with semio tic processes in other organisms ^(2016 :4 2 ) .I n
championing the idea of co-evolution of language and brain, biosemioticians can arguethat artistic expressions, ethical/political stances and other symbolic practices, do notappear ex nihilo , but depend upon millions of years of living, natural semiosic evolution.
A necessary outcome is that selfhood (or agency) is also natural, through and through.Indeed, bodies are thriving swarms of cells in continuous communication (endosemiosis);and those bodies communicate among themselves (exosemiosis), and not only through thechannel of language, but by manner of chemical signals, movement, radiation, sound
waves, electrical fields, etc. It is precisely be cause biosemioticians consider language and
agency as phenomena that emerged from the natural, material world, that they readily
assume an anti-humanist political stance. Cobley writes: BBiosemiotics ’insistence on
continuity from endosemiosis and across nature to the sphere of human affairs is alreadypolitical in its vivid counterposition to modern liberal humanism ^(2016 :4 7–48). Cobley
is obviously not adopting here the viewpoint of biological reductionism –an
oversimplified explanation of culture and society in biological terms where the agents ’
freedom is completely absent and which does not, cannot a c c o u n tf o rt h ef a c tt h a t
living organisms make choices that are notcommanded by genes. Rather, he is
asking us to acknowledge the facts that some dimensions of life are heavilycontrolled while others are more autonomous, and that these two realms of restric-tion and flexibility are necessarily coupled.
Contrasted to the (economic) agent of rational free will, biosemiotics outlines a new
approach to ethics where individuals (self and others) are first and foremost groundedin organic matter and semiosis. Cobley does not lay out an agenda, or proposebioethical policies. Rather he reframes the ethical question in order to fuel Bbiocentric
human responsibility with theoretical practice ^(Cobley 2016 : 71). In this perspective,Various Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 399
ethics no longer concerns the human, glottocentric value voluntarily given to others –
humans, animals, plants, protists, fungi or bacteria. Rather, ethics concerns the manner
in which we humans, as critically aware sign-users, can responsibly commit ourselves,or act in regards to biosemiosic processes (given our initial relation to/dependence onthem) taken in a global context. Cobley refers to this as love, resonating with Peirce ’s
doctrine of agapism ( 1992b ). Cobley thus envisions a world where the human, the
exceptional animal that knows it uses signs, Bis compelled to care for semiosis or, by
association, all life on the planet ^(2016 : 123), in other words, assuming some sort of
stewardship over nature and Bpresiding [ …] over the diversity of semiosis ^(2016 :
123). By embracing synechism –the interdependence of all things, living or not –,
semiotics and biosemiotics are thoroughly political even if, as Cobley states, theyappear not to be ( 2016 : 71). Two reasons can explain the apolitical appearance of
bio/semiotics. First, bio/semioticians typically refrain from prescribing actions, policiesor codes of conduct, behavioural checklists that could guide us in our daily lives.
Second, we are so accustomed to seeing politics being practiced in terms of dialectical
conflict, that we have forgotten that a holistic, global perspective, more peaceful,homeostatic and conservative, is political in the first place.
At this point we are zeroing in on a key cultural implication of biosemiotics. If ethics
also requires stability, Cobley argues, it is essential that we renew our understanding andappreciation of a type of invariance manifest across living systems. The field ofchildhood development clearly indicates that there is a certain degree of repression orconstraint in the ways we build our relations with others (be they of first, second, or third
order; through the body or through words). Thus we develop relatively predictable
habits and routines that structure and sustain our lives; we generate redundancy thatcounteracts to a certain extent, or puts a brake to the infinite growth of semiosic freedom.Restraint can obviously be willed ; but Cobley ’s point is that in many cases, we exhibit
restraint beyond our will. Intellectuals associated to structuralism and poststructuralism
did a wonderful job in reminding us that our decisions were not always reached througha deliberate and autonomous act of rationality: decisions are, if not conditioned at leastprofoundly influenced by our desires (psychoanalysis), by power associated to social
class and money (Marxism), by the structure of language (linguistics/ sémiologie ).
Cobley ’s claim is that decisions (the most outwardly manifest ones that riddle our daily,
social lives) are also informed by the biosemiosic relations that made and continue to
make up organisms, both at the level of the individual and of the species.
Contra the idea that language can only serve to create limitless novelty, Cobley
reminds us of its restful and pacifying quality, precisely what is involved in degrowth(for more on this notion, see Demaria et al. 2013 ). If there is one prescription we could
venture from reading Cobley ’s book, it might be the following: thirdness and that
seemingly unstoppable, capital-fuelled (and fuel-injected) machine of human culture,could, should slow down and rethink itself. In this sense, Cobley insists that werecognize and protect a certain pointlessness, or incompleteness of the humanities(what Cobley refers to as the anti-humanist humanities ), an incompleteness that mirrors
the one in nature argued for by Terrence Deacon ( 2011 ). Indeed, the disciplines of arts
and language enable us to touch something that is not there. This focus on absence,writes Cobley, reveals Bthe human propensity for fictionality ^(2016 : 121), a fictionality
that was paramount for humans to adapt themselves to the world, and to adapt the
world to themselves.400 Hope J.
Finishing Cobley ’s book, we are left with many questions concerning what cultural
biosemiotics is or can do. A few should be exposed.
First, there is a certain political/ideological ambiguity in Cobley ’s book: this ambi-
guity can actually be stimulating and, in any case, it is unavoidable in that living
processes cannot be partitioned into simplistic models of political behaviour. Butsometimes ambiguity can be tendentious. For instance, Cobley ends his fourth chapter,
BThe Natural Subject ^with a curious remark where he seems to lambaste the whole
field of gender and queer studies, an academic trend of sexual otherness loosely
associated to the left, qualifying its work as Bsqueamish prevarication ^(2016 :5 8 ) .I
think I see what Cobley is getting at: the scope of otherness implied by Bhighly
specialized sexual practices ^(Cobley 2016 : 59) are minor ,s ot os p e a k ,c o m p a r e dt o
the plethora of biotic relations that make up living systems. However, I am not sure thathis harsh focus on gender issues is an effective way to build bridges with othercommunities –let alone if it adequately grasps the full potential of those issues
(something I do not myself claim to master). This tangent culminates, at the end ofCobley’ s fifth chapter, trenchantly titled BEthics cannot be voluntary ^,w i t ha
heteronormative claim according to which parental love is the proper model ofsemiosis. However, we could say that friendship, a democratic, dialectical and some-times chosen solidarity, is probably a more appropriate model for certain relationshipsin nature, for example in the case of symbiosis. On this particular issue of care, genderand queer theory within ecological debates (Mortimer-Sandilands and Erickson 2010 )
has proven itself to be not only relevant but also absolutely necessary. Equally relevant
is María Puig de la Bellacasa ’s recent research on soil care ( 2015 ), intersecting science
and nature. Care goes in all directions, it circulates. A caring relationship is precisely
that, a relationship ; if we start attributing roles to agents, we risk objectifying them at
which point the relationship becomes secondary. Therefore, we should question theideological assumptions behind Cobley ’s proposal to endow humans with a special
Bpresidential ^status.
As previously mentioned, Cobley also accepts a certain apolitical appearance of
global semiotics that could pass as conservatism (see his generally critical vision of
discursive politics 2016 :7 0–72, and a co-authored paper, Cannizzaro and Cobley
2015 ). Adopting a holistic, biosemiotic perspective of the world may be useful –it is
one way we can think of and with contemporary widespread environmental damage.
But we should ask ourselves what happens when we insist, in today ’s world, on the
importance of constraints and the respect of unifying habits that keep in check novelimpulsions. This is not only a theoretical construction, but also an ideological position
that should be interpreted in the light of contemporary social and cultural upheavals.Biosemioticians also rely on discursive and thoroughly ideological constructions. We
find indications of this in Cobley ’s work. Indeed, he is generally critical of structuralism
and its heirs. At one point Cobley even seems to imply that the latter ’s glottocentric
experiments are interchangeable with, or causally linked to the humanistic rationalworldview that gave rise to liberal capitalism (tying up Modernity in a sweepinggesture –inviting readers to conflate structuralism with the recent banking scandals
2016 :7 1–72). But then Cobley also hails the anti-humanist agenda of what could be
referred to as left-leaning disciplines, such as post-colonialism or media studies, thatquestion Bthe fragmentation of contemporary identity ^(2016 :1
1 1 –112). There seems
to be a hesitation, or a fruitful tension in Cobley ’s book concerning the status ofVarious Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 401
continental post/structuralism and the loosely defined cultural studies; that tension can
serve as a real catalyst for thought and should be exploited.
Finally, a turning point in Cobley ’s book occurs at the end of the fifth chapter
devoted to ethics, after explaining a distinction drawn out by Giorgio Agambenbetween bios andzoē(the former referring to the way of life of an individual or a
group, the latter referring to the fact of being alive shared by all organisms). This
distinction, writes Cobley is Bnot one that is utilised in biosemiotics ^(2016 :7 0 ) ,
principally because the distinction is linguistic and blinds us to the fact the individuals
and groups are always already living. Cobley adds:
The state may conflate biosandzoēfor political purposes, to maintain particular
kinds of power relations. However, beyond the recognition of a relationship ofdependency between the non-human and human aspects of the biosphere, thedistinction has little explanatory benefit for biosemiotics in general and for its
discussion of ethics specifically. ( 2016 :7 0 )
Here, I think Cobley is describing a certain situation. However, I think biosemioticians
can do two things, namely: study sign relations within and among living systems (call
this core biosemiotics, or biosemiotics proper); and reflect on the discourses thatharness life, from a biosemiotic perspective or not. Cobley himself mentions thatBsemiosis ‘in nature ’is more frequently subject to the vagaries of socio-political forces
than is often acknowledged ^(2016 : 116). What could happen if we started to acknowl-
edge these forces? And, more specifically, what could happen to biosemiotics? I willreturn to this question later.
Wheeler ’sExpecting the Earth. Life, Culture, Biosemiotics
InExpecting the earth. Life, culture, biosemiotics (2016), Wheeler continues the
exploration of relational semiosis in living systems, and the connected social, artistic,
and technological issues, that she had already examined in The whole creature.
Complexity, biosemiotics and the evolution of culture (Wheeler 2006 ). In her latest
book, Wheeler could have limited herself to foundational biosemiotic texts and ideas;
however, she also includes some that are less influential in biosemiotics proper, notablyt h ew o r ko fG e o r g e sS i m o n d o n ,G i l l e sD e l e u z ea n dF é l i xG u a t t a r i .I nm ym i n d ,t h i sheritage-blending is not only absolutely commendable, it is also necessary ifbiosemioticians wish to engage with others. Indeed, we speak to others and areunderstood by them, not only by using our own words, but also by using the words
of our interlocutors.
1
In the twentieth century, researchers in the fields of human sciences, social sciences
and the arts had the tendency of resisting biology. This was unfortunate, as organisms –
including humans –are always embodied, engaged in a non-stop flow of biological,
1In his recent review of this Expecting the earth , Thierry Bardini ( 2017 ) sheds light on certain limitations of
the book in regards to Simondon ’s relational ontology and its history in biosemiotics over the last decade.
What distinguishes my close reading from Bardini ’s review is that I wish to expose her use of cultural
biosemiotics –which appears quite similar to Cobley ’s–in order to contrast it to another nature-culture
semiotic project in the third part of my text.402 Hope J.
biosemiosic processes, conditioned by and creating its worldly experiences, even when
they make political decisions, when they create works of art, when they move on andtransform the Earth ’s surface. As any organism, the human participates in the complex
network of genes, proteins and cellular interactions, in the determination of self, in thestabilisation and destabilisation of its ecosystems. Mind and body grow from eachother. This is why individuals and species present structural and functional similarities.
Even the most abstract (i.e. ideal, rational, linguistic) manifestations of semiosis,
evolved from organisms, they had Bto spring from an organism ’s necessary senses of
world and flesh, had to be remembered, to be inherited, grown and adapted inecological relation ^(2016: 4). Organisms may express inventive and creative behav-
iour, but they also express habits that reproduce and transform themselves over millionsof years. There are patterns of meaning, and this explains why many signs work in thefirst place. Wheeler repeatedly quotes an excerpt from Peirce ’sBThe Basis of Pragma-
tism in the Normative Sciences ^:BIt seems a strange thing, when one comes to ponder
over it, that a sign should leave its interpreter to supply a part of its meaning ^(Peirce
1998 : 394). But, as Peirce will go on to say, this incompleteness of the sign that must be
filled by the interpreter, just shows that the Buniverse is perfused with signs ^(Peirce
1998 :3 9 4 ) –in other words, that things, interpreters and meanings are all tied up,
expressed through the ever-growing web of semiosis.
Organisms participate in the creation of reality; this does not imply that without us,
the world disappears, but rather that with us, through our actions, circuits of informa-tion and meaning are triggered. What is this information? When I learn, for instance,
that there is a terrorist attack, or when an airborne molecule serves as a signal to a bull
moose that a cow in heat is nearby, or when cells exchange calcium in order to regulateenzymes and proteins, the information is not in the actual objects or events, but rather inthe relation that is created –a relation that means something to the organism that
experiences or is affected by it. This is a process of Bturn[ing] information into
meaning ^(Wheeler 2016 : 61). As Wheeler is quick to point out, the reasons why
biologists had (and some still have) difficulty in accepting this, can be explained bytheir difficulty in admitting the reality of teleological processes where the subject (a
relation) creates itself according to its inner and outer experiences. The subject reads
itself and reads the world because it can recognize and relate to patterns it finds there. Itknows what to expect –as Wheeler ’s title makes clear –because similar situations have
been dealt with for ages. Organisms have been projecting themselves, acting on andrethinking habits, since the first unicellular life forms appeared on Earth approximately3.8 billion years ago. The appearance of multicellular organisms a billion years ago, therich diversification of complex organisms during the Cambrian explosion some 500million years ago, the age of forests and the resulting land expansion of animals some
380 million years ago, only serve to show how quickly and densely this semiosis
spread. The growth of organisms and of behavioural patterns rested on, and continuesto invite expectations which have, in the words of Wheeler
great causal power. [They] will shape what an organism does and how itdevelops, and will make changes in the world it inhabits. Every day of our lives,we–and other animals –exist in states which cause us to do many things.
Expectations are relations to no-things which have real causal and shaping
powers. ( 2016 :1 2–13)Various Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 403
The fact that we have such expectations is a clear indication that the world
expresses a relational, semiosic logic. As Deleuze and Guattari said, and Heideggerbefore them, existence is not an inner experience, but the experience of beingprojected, towards the world, towards others, towards what is not yet. Thus, Wheelergives the following, creative and outgoing, definition of life as the situation wherebywe embrace newness and Barrive to become opened up to further, a lifetime ’s,
relations ^(2016 :2 1 2 ) .
If living organisms can engage with what is not yet, what is expected (see the
incompleteness referred to by Cobley/Deacon), it is because they are notdetermined by
genes. Organisms are not machines that follow a blueprint, nor is their evolution theresult of random exploration. Rather, organisms are living beings that creativelyinterpret a code. Thus genes do not mean anything until they are read by cells. If
reading exists today in human culture (reading books, papers, screens), it is onlybecause organisms have been doing something likereading for ages (Wheeler 2016 :
195). To offer a semiotic/relational explanation (versus a substantialist one), eachorganism is the result of its specific way of reading code material (sign vehicles), givena certain set of conditions –just as a concert is the creative interpretation, enactment of
a score by specific musicians who must at every moment of the performance makedecisions. Life is a feed-back process where certain conditions, capacities, and envi-ronmental cues are blended into and by a self-organising creature. Wheeler speaks hereof a cybernetic teleology at play in and across living systems ( 2016 : 76) where past and
present situations force us to adjust our future intended behaviour, where present and
future expected situations make us re-evaluate our past ( 2016 :1 2 8 ) .
Patterns of meaning are reproduced; current structures echo, are scaffolded upon
ancient ones. Modern knowledge built itself on knowledge from the Middle ages,
before that, Antiquity, the early humans, and beyond (Wheeler 2016 :8 7–88). Yet
knowledge also deals mistakes, and mistakes too can grow. A (personal) example:anybody who has been watching the news in the past year knows that bogus claimsgrow, conspiracy theories lead to bigger ones, can become headlines and king-makers.The growth of knowledge also implies matter: structural repetitions in culture, repro-
duce patterns in living and non-living nature (Wheeler 2016 :1 4 8–149). It is not enough
to say that nature and culture are linked (humans are part and parcel of nature); in
addition, one must admit that nature and culture flow into each other. Thresholds aside,there is redundancy in the structures of anthroposemiosis that echoes those at play inbiosemiosis (and even physiosemiosis). The anthroposemiosis in work, study andcreation, necessarily reproduces, in its unfurling structure, the natural world itself; thereis a structural analogy between the inside ( Innenwelt ) and the outside ( Umwelt),
between the past and that which is coming, between nature and art. The world is full
of habits; Bwhere a system has been will influence where it is going ^(Wheeler 2016 :
73). In this case, there should be a structural continuity between the operations of: the
eye, optic nerve, cerebral cortex, and brain stem; the function of icons and symbols; thehistory and theory of visual arts. Life definitely needs the structuring stability of habits.But when organisms are strictly habit-driven, writes Wheeler, Bthere comes repetition
without difference, and one of the many kinds of death ^(2016 : 192). Wheeler may be
thinking about cancer cells, stuck in repetition mode. Thus, for development andevolution to occur, life must also be creative, it must take risks and accept to make,
and act on felt, abductive inferences.404 Hope J.
Before moving on to the last part of this article, explaining how semiotics can be
applied to reconsider nature-culture, I would like to react to a specific point in
Wheeler ’sb o o k .
Expecting the earth is not only a critique of what biological science was, and in
many cases still is: i.e. deterministic and gene-obsessed. Wheeler also discusses artisticissues. According to Wheeler, in artistic creation Bconscious thought may well be an
impediment ^(2016 : 85); experience of creation is one of Bnonconscious gestation and
emergent illumination ^(2016 : 93); artists are attuned to unconscious life, awe, the
sublime ( 2016 : 178), they feel Ba close acquaintance with the wisdom of attending to
happenstance and the human body ’s coded and communicative but largely unworded
life^(189). These are only a few instances of Wheeler ’sq u a s i - R o m a n t i ct a k eo na r t
which seems to inform her understanding of biology. This makes sense considering thatRomantics (especially Germans, British, and Americans) were instrumental in combin-ing art and natural sciences. As Wheeler insists on the virtues of Benchantment,
incantation, creativity (not to mention the play of musement) ^(2016 : 199), we feel
that her critique of mechanized biology, is also a critique of mechanised art. It is alsoanalogous to her wariness concerning Btoo much technological interference in living
processes ^(Wheeler 2016 : 123). In a way, Wheeler ’s book can be seen as a critique of
what art has become in the last decades: ceding to technology, intellectualism, projectmanagement. Two points are worth mentioning. First, a Romantic return may not bepossible –Wheeler hints at this in her reading of Simondon ( 2016 : 220). I even wonder
to what extent such a return is even desirable, considering that Romanticism was
thoroughly Humanistic: the importance of nature rested on the experience humans
could make of it. In addition, the typical Romantic idea of nature was one of pristineand unabused bioregions. Today however, it is probably more urgent to consider andconfront the natural world co-created by its most world-forming inhabitants, humans.In my mind, the installations of Betty Beaumont, or the tissue art of SymbioticA, shedmore light on human in / as nature, than the paintings of Caspar David Friedrich (asinvaluable as these are) –and not just by what they represent but, more essentially, by
themanner in which they do so. In any case, this appeal to Romanticism establishes a
value to art and life –a value that is thoroughly ideological.
Nature-Culture Semiotics
After reading these two books, I was struck by their similarities and differences. First,Cobley and Wheeler both insist on the idea that a properly conducted study of humanculture must take into account the natural sources of that culture. However, Wheeler has
a Romantic perspective, where life and art are braided together; this is not an issue for
Cobley, who adopts a more programmatic tone, showing how biosemiotics could beeffectively integrated in the cultural and social sciences. Cobley ’s writing is linear and
progressive, whereas Wheeler ’s writing gyrates, maybe enacting the redundancy that
occurs in life. Bardini rightly says the book is Borganized in a loop ^(2017 : 133). But
these differences are somewhat superficial. To me, what crucially opposes Cobley andWheeler is an ideological commitment. Cobley and Wheeler both argue in favour of theemergence of cultural phenomena from natural phenomena, yet in doing so, they are
able to present contrasted views that are ultimately ideological; he insists on stabilityVarious Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 405
and the structuring properties of constraints, she insists on creativity, the freedom of
chance and abduction. I may be exaggerating this distinction; however, after readingthese two books, I cannot see how biosemiotics will be above or shielded fromideology. It is precisely this hunch (felt guess? abduction?) that prompts me toreconsider what cultural biosemiotics can be.
Lack of space here prevents me from closely reading other important contributions
to this question. But two should be mentioned: BSemiotic dimensions of human
attitudes towards other animals: a case of zoological gardens ^(Mäekivi and Maran
2016 ) and the multi-authored BHow can the study of the humanities inform the study of
biosemiotics ^(Favareau et al. 2017 ). Mäekivi and Maran convincingly argue that
human ’s attitudes towards different animal species are conditioned by cultural and
biological factors. Among the cultural factors, mythological (symbolic) meaning influ-ences the value we humans give to animals. More importantly, from a biosemioticperspective, our knowledge of, and feelings towards the biosemiosic relations those
animals activate (and the extent to which these relations overlap with ours) also
influence our valuation of non-human species. A similar application of biosemioticsis found in (Favareau et al. 2017 ). Being a multi-authored collection of texts, it is risky
to draw general conclusions. However, two points could be singled out. An underlyingassumption seems shared by many of the authors of this article, namely thatbiosemiosic relations inform anthroposemiosic relations. The question I am asking is:doesn ’t this information go both ways? What does anthroposemiosis do with and to
biosemiosis? The second point, is that knowledge of humanities can help
biosemioticians be more creative (Kull ’s appeal to poetry in life), it can help them
appreciate the density of webs of meaning (Cobley ’s statement that semiotics is the
oxygen of biosemiotics). My question directly resonates with this: how can we
creatively rethink what biosemiotics is about? How do other fields of inquiry thatoperate in the arts and humanities, that may or may not take into account biosemiotictheory, consider living systems, processes and structures?
To repeat a question I asked earlier: why are biosemiotic approaches to (human)
culture typically bound to an ontological argument –Bbiosemiosis is a source, an origin
for human cultural experiences ^–, but tend to disengage when it is time to interpret the
more problematic consequences of nature-culture expressions? It ’s as if we were so
eager to reset semiotics in the living world, that, in doing so, we radically dismissedproblems of linguistic, political, symbolic nature. I would be tempted to call this a caseofBthrowing the baby out with the bathwater ^. Notwithstanding John Deely ’s(2001 )
enthusiastic prediction that the twenty-first century will be semiotic, we must admit thatthe twentieth century was also riddled with signs, meaning and interpretation. And evenif it was mostly limited to a Post/Modern, human perspective, I cannot see how a century
of intensely diverse scientific and cultural production could be simply cast aside.
Briefly put, I would say that biosemiotics is absolutely compelling in its descrip-
tions, explanations, interpretations of the various signs processes within living systems .
However, it is (generally) less interested by, or unfamiliar with the interpretation of
linguistic, symbolic, political appropriations of, and impacts on living systems (whether
those appropriations and impacts are its own, or whether they are found in other fields).
A n dy e t ,w es h o u l db ea b l et or e a dJ a k o bv o nU e x k ü l l ’s famous monograph Af o r a y
into the worlds of animals and humans (2010 ) with his marginal yet absolutely riveting
text, BDarwin and the English morality ^(2013 ), where Umwelt theory is put to use.406 Hope J.
Without following Uexküll ’s racist argument, I still think that his activism and his
attempts to draw out symbolic or political consequences of his Umweltforschung are
absolutely admirable. Equally compelling (and equally problematic) are two seminars
given by Martin Heidegger, his well-known Fundamental concepts of metaphysics.
world, finitude, solitude. 1929 –1930 (2008 )a n dh i sl e s s e rk n o w n Nature, history, state.
1933 –1934 (2013 ). Here Heidegger thinks world-forming (environment-building) ca-
pacities of humans alongside the creation of the nation-state: polis informs the bios.
Considering the intersection of life and (human, discursive, practical) culture, does
not mean that we abandon what biosemiotics has been standing for since its inception
(the study of signs and meaning in living systems) and devote ourselves entirely todiscourse analysis. But since culture emerges from, and takes shape in nature, it isimportant to probe what culture does retroactively to nature (and not just throughepigenetics). In other words, it is not enough to state that living systems are perfusedwith signs, that they develop and evolve with endo- and exo-semiosic cues, that
developmental and evolutionary intention impacts living systems. We must also rec-
ognize and deal with the feedback cycle, the impact of human-cultural discourses andpractices on those cues. In essence, human laws, policies and practices, serve to control,repress, and stimulate living systems in ways that can be as effective as naturalselection. We could very well extend Foucault ’s(1997 ) insights on biopower to all,
other-than-human living things. In my mind, this is something that biosemioticianscould integrate in their research.
Take Uexküll ’s most famous example, the tick ( 2010 :4 4–53). Ticks are hematoph-
agous ectoparasitic arachnids. A questing tick finds prey by detecting changes inhumidity, heat, carbon dioxide levels, by feeling movement; the arachnid will let itselffall on the prey, insert its hypostome, and draw blood. Some ticks move from one preyto another, others hold fast on their host. Now, in this subjective biosemiosic account ofthe arachnid, human discursive and practical issues are obviously irrelevant. And yet,when local health organisations recommend spraying pesticides in at risks areas, tokeep pressure on tick populations in order to prevent the expansion of Lyme disease,we must admit that human discourse and practice finds its way into the dynamics of
that living system.
In the same way colonisation, resource extraction and species management are
not, per se, parts of the Umwelten of the boreal woodland caribou ( Rangifer
tarandus caribou ), a sedentary cervidae whose range spans widthwise across
Canada. But in certain areas, these mammals are threatened, endangered or
completely extinct due to human activities such as logging and mining(Environment and Climate Change in Canada 2017). Recently a small herd of
caribou on the brink of extinction in northern Quebec has been making the
headlines (Skene and Lewis 2017 , Hope 2017). Business representatives, environ-
mentalists and government officials are fighting over the territory that is both
resource-rich and home to the herd. Obviously the caribou does not know this in
the manner it knows how to find the reindeer lichen ( Cladonia rangiferina )i t
thrives upon. Yet here again, human discourse and practise become a determiningthread in the webs of meaning of the caribou. Biosemiosis is being impacted uponby anthroposemiosis.
Domestication of plants or animals is an another example of the pressure human
management has on nature. Take cattle, for example, descended from the now extinctVarious Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 407
Auroch ( Bos primigenius )( F r a n c i s 2015 :1 2 7 –147). In a sense, humans hijacked the
Auroch; we could say the same thing with rice, corn, pigs, chicken, cotton, wood,
phosphorous, etc. When the non-domesticated (and dangerous) Auroch died off some400 years ago, it had already been replaced by different breeds of domesticated(gentler) cattle, thousands of years in the making. The point I wish to make is thathumans changed in order to keep up with their Bcreations ^. The key here is the new
symbiont: a human-cattle biopolitical organisation, determined as much by genetics asby agricultural techniques (and, in the last centuries, by techno-capitalism). This newsymbiont is rigorously controlled and so is everything that surrounds it (fodderproduction, water management, use of antibiotics, fashions in meat consumption,etc.) We were making cows, but we were also making ourselves. To take up Uexküll ’s
(2010 : 190) contrapuntal relation, we became cow-like and cows became human-like.
Case in point: lactose had to be tolerated for dairy farming to expand, and thehegemony of breeds (Angus and Holstein) is determined by what the cows mean for
us (meat and milk). The bizarre and myth-ridden case of the Heck neo-Auroch created
in prewar Germany, dubbed the BNazi super-cow ^, is a revealing example of how
humans shape living organisms according to their ideas, needs, desires, anxieties (asHeidegger would rightly say 2008 :§ §3 9 –48, humans are world-forming ), then they
evolve within that world, are themselves informed by it. In this sense, doing a fullcultural biosemiotics of domestication should not only involve studying the influenceof other-than-human biosemiosis on humans ( Bhumans adapted to the meaningful
rhythms and patterns of the natural world ^); it should also entail the study of human
pressure on other-than-humans, the transformation of other-than-human experiences inthe hands of humans.
Another particular issue that could be examined concerns reproductive rights. Sex,
embryology and gestation, miscarriages, labour and delivery, oral contraceptives anddrug-induced abortions, are sustained with biochemical signalling; these phenomenacould very well be the object of quality core biosemiotic research. But as MargaretAtwood made it well known in The handmaid ’st a l e (1985 )r e p r o d u c t i o ni sn o t only an
organic issue. In the United States, especially in the last year, reproduction makes no
sense whatsoever without a cultural lens. In the month of January 2017, no less than
167 bills were introduced by legislators throughout the United States restrictingabortions, from the presidential executive order banning US-funded NGO ’s from
offering abortion services and information, to Justin Humphrey ’s House Bill 1441, that
the Oklahoma representative justified by describing pregnant women as Bhosts ^(this
particular one was introduced in February of 2017) (Redden 2017 ;S m i t h 2017 ; Valenti
2017 ; Wilson 2017 ). This is not a partisan issue, these are facts that must be dealt with
and that have serious consequences for women who wish to organize their bodies and
pregnancies (by any standards, 167 bills in one month restricting access to a specific
aspect of healthcare is excessive). Debates surrounding reproductive rights activate anumber of issues relating to gender (International Planned Parenthood Federation2015 ), race (Dutton 2014 ), economic status (Sonfield et al. 2013 ), education (Dias
et al. 2015 ). The question is: how could cultural biosemiotics contribute to this? Nature
and culture are linked, biosemioticians know this. Human culture emerges from nature,Cobley and Wheeler have clearly demonstrated this. But what is at stake with repro-ductive rights, is that the nature/culture relationship becomes fully bi-directional, fully
dynamic. Indeed, laws that restrict access to abortion and abortion-related information –408 Hope J.
or for that matter, laws that enable such access –,i m p a c to nl i v i n go r g a n i s m s .L a w s
thus find themselves fed into the Uexküllian feedback cycles of living systems.
Discursive politics in-forms, through semiosis, organic reality.
As biosemioticians (I am including myself here), we could ask ourselves how we
can foster constructive relations with others, attentive to the multiple social and culturaldifferences, conditions, situations, that shape our understanding of living systems –
without falling into the trap of a Bsemiocentric bias ^. We should learn to read with
others (i.e. non-biosemioticians), grasp their insights, their languages, their stories.Hang around, so to speak, in the margins of biosemiotics, and engage in interdisciplin-ary dialogue. If biosemioticians are serious in their ambitions of naturalizing what theyknow of biological reality –i.e. that it expresses itself through embodied and situated
recursivity, that it is mindful, processual, teleological, auto- and sympoietic –they must
see how others are also getting this poi nt across, through their own means. If
biosemioticians wish to fully engage themselves in questions concerning nature-cul-
ture, they could address issues that emerge from the dynamic, reciprocal relation
between biosemiosis and anthroposemiosis. A cultural turn in biosemiotics cannotleave core biosemiotics intact. Finally, it is not just a question of biosemioticiansbecoming fully engaged thinkers, embracing activism and interpreting/changing theworld (though this could be commendable); rather, the point is that biosemioticianscould put to profit their unique understanding of natural and cultural co-construction ofliving systems, in order to grasp how human discourses and actions impact on thoseliving systems.
Acknowledgements This manuscript was written during the winter semester of 2017, while teaching a
doctoral seminar entitled Living Signs. Biosemiotics and Its Margins at the Université du Québec à Montréal.
For various reasons, principally linguistic and cultural, many of the students, who were all very well advanced
and planning their dissertations, were engaging themselves with biosemiotics for the first time. Since the mainsubject of this seminar consisted in explicating living sign systems, we obviously read core and contemporarybiosemiotic texts. And yet, considering the background of our program (arts and humanities), I thought itwould be particularly relevant to also examine texts and issues outside of Bproper ^biosemiotics, but resolutely
engaged with questions pertaining to signs, meaning and interpretation in relation to life –what I referred to as
themargins of biosemiotics . We ended up doing something with and to biosemiotics that was not core practice,
and rather different from what is currently being done under the heading of cultural biosemiotics. I wish tothank the students who participated in this wonderful seminar: Audrey Bélanger, Ivan Bricka, Lucile Crémier,Raphaëlle Dionne, Rana Hatmal, François David Prud ’homme. I hope this seminar was as rewarding for them
as much as it was for me.
I would also like to thank the reviewers of this journal who meticulously read through early drafts of this
paper and whose comments helped me organise my thoughts.
References
Atwood, M. (1985). The handmaid ’st a l e . New York: Ballantine Books.
Bardini, T. (2017). Relational ontology, Simondon, and the hope for a third culture inside biosemiotics.
Biosemiotics, 10 (1), 131 –137.
Cannizzaro, S., & Cobley, P. (2015). Biosemiotics, politics and Th.A. Sebeok ’s move from linguistics to
semiotics. In E. Velmezova, K. Kull, & S. Cowley (Eds.), Biosemiotic perspectives on language and
linguistics (pp. 207 –223). Dordrecht: Springer.
Cobley, P. (2016). Cultural implications of biosemiotics . Dordrecht: Springer.
D e a c o n ,T .( 2 0 1 1 ) . Incomplete nature. How mind emerged from matter . New York: W.W. Norton & Company.Various Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 409
Deely, J. (2001). Four ages of understanding. The first postmodern survey of philosophy from ancient times to
the turn of the twenty-first century . Toronto: Toronto University Press.
Demaria, F., Schneider, F., Sekulova, F., & Martinez-Alier, J. (2013). What is degrowth? From an activist
slogan to a social movement. Environmental Values, 22 , 191–215.
Dias, T., Passini, R., Duarte, G., Sousa M. & Faundes, A. (2015). Association between education level and
access to safe abortion in a brazilian population. International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
128(3), 224 –227.
Dutton, Z. (2014). Abortion ’s racial gap. The Atlantic .https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/09
/abortions-racial-gap/380251/ A c c e s s e d6F e b2 0 1 7 .
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2017). Action plan for the woodland caribou ( Rangifer tarandus
caribou ), boreal population, in Canada –federal actions (proposed). Species at risk act action plan series .
Ottawa: Environment and climate Change in Canada.
Favareau, D. (2007). The evolutionary history of biosemiotics. In M. Barbieri (Ed.), Introduction to
biosemiotics. The new biological synthesis (pp. 1 –67). Dordrecht: Springer.
Favareau, D., Kull, K., Ostdiek, G., Maran, T., Westling, L., Cobley, P., Stjernfelt, F., Anderson, M.,
Tønnessen, M., & Wheeler, W. (2017). How can the study of the humanities inform the study ofbiosemiotics? Biosemiotics, 10 (1), 9– 31.
F o u c a u l t ,M .( 1 9 9 7 ) .B Il faut défendre la société ^. Cours au Collège de France (p. 1976). Paris: EHESS,
Gallimard, Seuil.
Francis, R. (2015). Domesticated. Evolution in a man-made world . New York: Norton.
Heidegger, M. (2008). The fundamental concepts of metaphysics. World, finitude, solitude. 1929 –1930 .
Translated from German by W. McNeill and N. Walker. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Heidegger, M. (2013). Nature, history, state. 1933 –1934. Translated from German by G. Fried and R. Polt.
W i t he s s a y sb yR .B e r n a n s c o n i ,P .G o r d o n ,M .H e i n z ,T .K i s i e l ,a n dS . Žižek. London: Bloomsbury.
Hope, J. (2017). Écrire et lire le caribou au lieu de l’ achever. The Goose 16(1). http://scholars.wlu.
ca/thegoose/vol16/iss1/1/ Accessed June 7
th2016.
International Planned Parenthood Federation (2015). Sexual and reproductive health and rights - the key to
gender equality and women ’s empowerment. Vision 2020 Report .http://www.ippf.org/resource/vision-
2020-gender-report . Accessed 8 Feb 2017.
Mäekivi, N., & Maran, T. (2016). Semiotic dimensions of human attitudes towards other animals: a case of
zoological gardens. Sign System Studies, 44(1/2), 209 –230.
Mortimer-Sandilands, C., & Erickson, B. (2010). Queer ecologies. Sex, nature, politics, desire . Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. (1992a). The law of mind. In N. Houser & C. Kloesel (Eds.), The essential Peirce. Selected
philosophical writings. Volume I (1867 –1893) (pp. 312 –333). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. (1992b). Evolutionary love. In N. Houser & C. Kloesel (Eds.), The essential Peirce. Selected
philosophical writings. Volume I (1867 –1893) (pp. 352 –371). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Peirce, C. (1998). The basis of pragmatism in the normative sciences. In Peirce Edition Project (Ed.), The
essential Peirce. Selected philosophical writings. Volume II (1893 –1913) (pp. 371 –397). Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2015). Making time for soil: Technoscientific futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science, 41 (5), 691 –716.
Redden, M. (2017). BGlobal gag rule ^Reinstated by Trump, curbing NGO abortion services abroad. The
Guardian .https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/23/trump-abortion-gag-rule-international-ngo-
funding Accessed 23 Jan 2017.
Skene, J. & Lewis, C. (2017). Plight of Val d ’Or caribou is wakeup call for Quebec. Natural Resource Defense
Council .https://www.nrdc.org/experts/plight-quebecs-woodland-caribou-highlight-val-dor Accessed
July 4th 2017.
Smith, J. (2017). Oklahoma lawmakers want men to approve all abortions. The Intercept .https://theintercept.
com/2017/02/13/oklahoma-lawmakers-want-men-to-approve-all-abortions/ Accessed 14 Feb 2017.
Sonfield, A., Hasstedt, K., Kavanaugh, M. & Anderson, R. (2013). The social and economic benefits of
women ’s ability to determine whether and when to have children. Guttmacher Institute. https://www.
guttmacher.org/sites/default/files/report_pdf/social-economic-benefits.pdf Accessed 8 Feb 2017.
Uexküll, J.v. (2010). A foray into the worlds of animals and humans, with A theory of meaning . Translated
from German by Joseph O ’Neil. Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press.
Uexküll, J. v. (2013). Darwin and the English morality. Translated from German by Morten Tønnessen.
Biosemiotics, 6 (3), 449 –471.410 Hope J.
Valenti, J. (2017). Calling pregnant women Bhosts ^?W e ’re in an anti-choice republican dystopia. The
Guardian .https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/feb/14/pregnant-women-hosts-anti-choice-
republican-dystopia Accessed 14 Feb 2017.
Wheeler, W. (2006). The whole creature. Complexity, biosemiotics and the evolution of culture . London:
Lawrence and Wishart.
Wheeler, W. (2016). Expecting the earth. Life, culture, biosemiotics . London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Wilson, T. (2017). White GOP lawmakers behind almost every anti-choice bill in 2017. Rewire .
https://rewire.news/artic le/2017/02/13/white-gop-lawmakers-beh ind-almost-every-a nti-choice-law-
2017/ Accessed 14 Feb 2017.Various Shapes of Cultural Biosemiotics 411
