Article
Progress in Human Geography
2022, Vol. 46(2) 605 –628
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissionsDOI: 10.1177/03091325211051021
journals.sagepub.com/home/phgVegan food geographies and the rise
of Big Veganism
Alexandra E Sexton 
Department of Geography, University of Shef ﬁeld, Shef ﬁeld, UK
Tara Garnett
TABLE, School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Jamie Lorimer 
School of Geography and Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Abstract
Veganism is the subject of an increasingly diverse body of social scienti ﬁc research, yet it remains relatively
understudied in geography. Meanwhile, contemporary cultural commentaries note how veganism has gone
mainstream, with critics warning of veganism ’s corporate nature –expressed in the rise of what we term ‘Big
Veganism ’. We argue that food geographers are well placed to examine these trends. We ﬁrst review vegan
studies work beyond geography that examines and critiques the mainstreaming of veganism. We focus onliterature that explores multiple contested modes of veganism, veganism as praxis in place and the rise of
corporate veganism as useful foundations for geographers to build on, particularly in light of currently unfolding
developments in vegan cultures and practice. Taking this work forward, we identify four conceptual traditionsfrom research in food geographies –following foodways ,alternative food networks and the cultural and material
politics of eating –to develop a ‘vegan food geographies ’programme that aims to advance critical geographic
work on veganism and the emerging implications of its contemporary mainstreaming.
Keywords
Vegan, food geography, alternative food networks, plant-based, mainstream
I The rise of Big Veganism
In a preview of global market trends, The Economist
declared that ‘2019 will be the year veganism goes
mainstream ’(Parker, 2018 ). This prophesy of the
‘year of the vegan ’was echoed across international
business and cultural commentary, with articles of-fering tips on how to launch vegan start-ups and how
to‘veganise ’existing companies ( Fox, 2017 ;Cook,
2019 ). The previous 12 months had seen unprece-
dented growth in sales of vegan products in NorthAmerica and Europe. In 2018, the US retail market
for plant-based foods grew by 20% to total $3.3billion in sales ( PBFA, 2018 ). In the UK, approxi-
mately 600,000 people identi ﬁed as ‘vegan ’and a
record number of people (250,000) reportedly took
Corresponding author:
Alexandra E Sexton, Department of Geography, University ofShefﬁeld, Winter Street, Shef ﬁeld S3 7ND, UK.
Email: a.sexton@shef ﬁeld.ac.uk

the Veganuary pledge to go vegan throughout Jan-
uary in 2019 ( Smithers, 2019 ). UK high street re-
tailers from Waitrose to Greggs launched their ownvegan product ranges ( Calnan, 2019 ;Monaghan,
2019 ) and vegan brands were some of the biggest
acquisitions by global livestock product companies(e.g. The Vegetarian Butcher by Unilever ( Michail,
2018 ; see also Good Food Institute, 2019 ). Online,
#vegan and #plantbased have become leading foodhashtags on Instagram (used in 115 million and 36.3million posts, respectively, at time of writing). Vegancelebrities (Lewis Hamilton, Arianna Grande) andvegan in ﬂuencers (Deliciously Ella, BOSH!) are
becoming a lucrative element of the cultural econ-omy of food ( Goodman and Jaworska, 2020 ).
While it is important to keep these economic
trends in perspective with the continued dominanceof global animal food systems, they re ﬂect a dis-
cernible shift in the historical position of veganism atthe margins of Western culture. Veganism andvegetarianism are some of the oldest ‘alternative ’
practices in meat-centred or ‘carnist ’(Joy, 2011 ) food
cultures ( Spencer, 1996 ;Iaccobo and Iaccobo, 2004 ),
with well-documented connections to Victorian
programmes of religious reform and women ’s suf-
frage ( Leneman, 1999 ;Maurer, 2002 ), and more
recent countercultural, anarchist, Rastafarian and alt-right movements ( Forchtner and Tominc, 2017 ;
Waldstein, 2016 ;Werkheiser, 2013 ;White, 2017 ).
While vegans have often faced ridicule and exclusion(Cole and Morgan, 2011 ;Doyle, 2016 ), recent stories
portray veganism as exciting and hopeful ( Pendergrast,
2016 ). Veganism has become cool: an aspirational
lifestyle for younger, urban and wealthier demo-graphics ( Nguyen, 2017 ). Veganism is also in-
creasingly presented by scientists and in mainstreammedia as the sensible antidote to the health impacts ofmeat consumption, and to the ecological impacts ofconventional livestock production ( Godfray et al.,
2018 ;Poore and Nemecek, 2018 ).
Enthusiasts suggest that this mainstreaming of
veganism has the potential to enact signi ﬁcant eth-
ical, ecological and health changes to an agri-foodsystem increasingly understood as broken ( Friedrich,
2020 ;Dutkiewicz and Dickstein, 2021 ). Meanwhile
critics caution that this mainstreaming risks dilutingthe radical ethics of veganism, and argue that it ischaracterised by notable continuities and consoli-
dations of who is developing, producing and prof-iting from new vegan products ( White, 2018 ;Clay
et al., 2020 ). These debates centre on the emergence
of what we term ‘Big Veganism ’: the recent turn by
‘Big Food ’and ‘Big Agriculture ’(Stuckler and
Nestle, 2012 ) to veganise their offerings and bring
vegan products into mainstream spaces of food
production and consumption. This model of veg-anism ’s mainstreaming is evidenced by the kinds of
developments described at the opening of this paperthat have seen the biggest names in food and agri-culture over recent years increasingly incorporatevegan options into their operations through directinvestment, acquisitions and even corporate re-
branding.
1Regular headlines attest to global net-
works of commodity plant-based (e.g. soya, wheat,pea) and biotechnological ingredients ( Stephens
et al., 2018 ) being mobilised by agri-businesses to
meet the growing demand for high-tech, ersatz,‘ultra-processed ’foods, like the ﬂagship Impossible
Burger and plant-based milks ( Mylan et al., 2019 ;
Sexton, 2018 ;Clay et al., 2020 ;Tziva et al., 2020 ).
This model is grounded in the prevalent neo-
liberal politics of individual food choice ( White,
2018 ) and carnist food cultures ( Joy, 2011 ), in
which fetishized, often expensive products aremarketed primarily to privileged audiences thatcelebrate white ‘shredded ’bodies and the welfare of
charismatic animals ( Harper, 2012 ;Wright, 2015 ;
Doyle, 2016 ). Alternative versions of lower-tech,
minimally-processed and socially embedded vegan
foodways are noticeably absent from the Big Veganmodel. While examples of these alternative veganofferings can be found in more niche food andhealth retailers (e.g. Hodmedod ’sP u l s e sa n d
Grains, and Riverford Organic in the UK), BigVeganism has arguably emerged as the signi ﬁcant
driving force of the current mainstreaming of vegan
identity, practice and products in Europe and North
America. The considerable cultural and ﬁnancial
power it continues to amass at pace is de ﬁning the
politics of possibility ( Guthman, 2008 )o fw h a t
contemporary veganism is, who it is for, the ge-ographies and scales it encompasses, and whatkinds of alterity to conventional food systems it candeliver ( White, 2018 ).606 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
These trends in vegan mainstreaming and its
possible futures raise important questions for foodgeographers. Geography ought to be well placed toexplore such developments given the longstandinghistory of work on alternative food networks andtheir mainstreaming ( Guthman, 2003 ;Watts et al.,
2005 ;Harris, 2009 ;Goodman et al., 2012 ;Slocum
and Cadieux, 2015 ). But veganism is largely absent
from geographic enquiry, with a few notable ex-ceptions in work on animal geographies ( Twine,
2014a ), radical geographies ( V´eron, 2016 ;White,
2017 ) and alternative food economies ( Hahn and
Bruner, 2012 ), including a nascent programme for
a new ﬁeld of ‘vegan geographies ’(Hodge et al.,
forthcoming ). A recent collaborative paper by Morris
et al. (2021) outlines a timely and comprehensive
social science and humanities research agenda forstudying the ‘challenges of moving beyond animal-
based food systems ’. The authors note the disparate
nature of existing research on the cultures, practices,politics and ethics of eating animals, and within thiscorpus highlight that work on vegetarianism andveganism has been largely consumption-oriented
(ibid, 2). We observed a similar orientation in our
search of literatures on vegan mainstreaming. Wefound most of this work largely concentrated in theinterdisciplinary ﬁeld of vegan studies ( Wright
2015 ), which has remained mostly separate from
core food geography debates. In this article, weidentify avenues for how geography can both engagewith and extend this existing work –particularly by
drawing on conceptual traditions in food geography
that view production and consumption as mutuallyco-constitutive ( Lockie and Kitto, 2000 ;Goodman
D., 2004 ;Kneafsey et al., 2021 ). We build directly on
Morris et al. (2021) andHodge et al. ’s (forthcoming)
agenda-setting work by exploring what geography,andfood geography more speci ﬁcally, can offer re-
search on how transitions away from animal-based
food systems are currently being framed and mate-
rialised. We refer to this complementary researchprogramme as vegan food geographies .
We begin by reviewing the extensive scholarship
on veganism beyond the admittedly porous disci-plinary boundaries of geography, focussing on workthat explores and critiques the mainstreaming ofveganism in Western Europe and North America.This literature identi ﬁes multiple contested modes of
veganism, explores veganism as praxis in place andcautions against the rise of corporate veganism. Thiswork provides useful foundations for geographers tobuild on, particularly in light of currently unfoldingdevelopments in vegan cultures and practice. Theunprecedented speed and scale of vegan main-
streaming in recent years calls for more critical en-
gagement with the current shifts in politicaleconomic, material, cultural and moral structures ofvegan foodways. As we and others identify (e.g.Morris et al., 2021 ), a key component of this requires
a broadening of the consumption-oriented nature ofmuch previous vegan studies work. The followingsections explore how vegan scholarship might be
extended in these ways through engagement with the
conceptual and empirical concerns of food geogra-phies, focussing on work that: follows and placesfoods; critically examines the alterity of food net-works, and explores the cultural and material politicsof eating. We draw these literatures together inconclusion to outline future pathways of vegan foodgeographies research that further engages geographic
work on food with vegan scholarship and practice.
Within this broader agenda, we highlight the emer-gence of Big Veganism as a particularly timelysubject for geographers to critically engage withgiven its growing prominence in contemporaryfoodways, and its implications for the spatial, po-litical economic and cultural (re)ordering of globalfood networks.
II Vegan studies and the politics
of mainstreaming
Veganism as ethics and social practice has been the
subject of an increasingly formalised and diversebody of social science research. History ( Spencer,
1996 ;Leneman, 1999 ;Iacobbo and Iacobbo, 2004 ),
critical race and gender studies ( Harper, 2010 ;Polish,
2016 ;Brueck and McNeil, 2020 ), cultural theory
(Adams, 1990 ;Giraud, 2021 ;Wright, 2015 ), soci-
ology ( Cherry, 2006 ;Greenebaum, 2012 ;Wrenn,
2017 ), media and communication studies ( Cole
and Morgan, 2011 ;Doyle, 2016 ), philosophy
(Francione, 2012 ), market studies ( Fuentes andSexton et al. 607
Fuentes, 2017 ) and psychology ( Sneider and Te
Molder, 2004 ) are just some of the multi-
disciplinary strands that make up an emerging
ﬁeld of ‘vegan studies ’(Wright, 2015 ). While a more
exhaustive review is beyond the scope of this paper(see Giraud, 2021 for an in-depth history of vegan
academic-activist traditions), we focus here on threekey strands of this work as a useful starting point for
understanding the contemporary vegan moment.
1 Multiple veganisms
Recent work in vegan studies has sought to map and
critique the diversity of claims and practices that get
subsumed by the label veganism. The UK VeganSociety de ﬁnes veganism as:
A philosophy and way of living which seeks to exclude
–as far as is possible and practicable –all forms of
exploitation of, and cruelty to, animals for food,clothing or any other purpose; and by extension, pro-
motes the development and use of animal-free alter-
natives for the bene ﬁt of animals, humans and the
environment. In dietary terms it denotes the practice ofdispensing with all products derived wholly or partlyfrom animals.
While this de ﬁnition may seem familiar and un-
controversial to readers of this journal, it emergesfrom, and seeks to bridge, longstanding philosoph-
ical and political deliberations within vegan schol-
arship and activism over what constitutes authenticvegan praxis ( Greenebaum, 2012 ). There are a broad
range of de ﬁnitions, motivations and everyday
practices amongst vegan communities in the UK andUS (Cherry, 2006 ) and this diversity leads to debate.
For example, as Greenebaum notes, the identitymarkers of ‘health ’,‘environmental ’and ‘ethical ’
vegan –and more recent labels like ‘vegan curious ’,
‘ﬂexitarian ’and ‘plant-based ’– are‘not merely
descriptive differences; they are value-laden withinthe vegan community ’(2012 , 130).
Health veganism has historically proven more
effective at achieving widespread public acceptancein the US ( Maurer, 2002 ). Moreover, recent market
data shows that concerns for personal health and theenvironment rather than animal welfare are driving
recent vegan adoption in the UK and US ( Shoup,
2019 ;Pendergrast, 2016 ). While some scholars and
activists welcome any reductions in animal-basedconsumption regardless of motivation, ﬁnding hope
i nt h ep r o s p e c to fm o r eq u i c k l yr e d u c i n gt h es y s t e m i charms of factory farming through veganism ’sp a r t -
nerships with agri-food corporates and high-tech start-
ups (Friedrich, 2020 ;Dutkiewicz and Dickstein, 2021 ),
others argue that veganism should not be divorced fromanimal rights. They strongly advocate for a universalvegan ethic of total animal liberation ( Regan, 1983 ;
Francione, 2012 ). For vegan writer Gary Francione
(2016 ,n p ) ,v e g a n i s mi s ‘ﬁrst and foremost about
nonviolence to other sentient beings ’. As an advocate
for a universal abolitionist a pproach, he sees veganism
as a choice that all persons ‘can make today –right now
–if we believe that animals matter morally ’(ibid). He
expresses the shared concern of vegan abolitionists thatthe mainstreaming of veganism is leading to the di-lution and splintering of authentic vegan praxis.
Yet the quest for an authentic vegan ethics based
on the single issue of animal rights or animal welfare
has been questioned in recent work in vegan studies.Drawing on ecofeminist and anarchist theories,critical vegan scholars have challenged the privilegebound up in universal abolitionist perspectives. Forexample, Warkentin (2012 , 500) denounces the
universal prescription of a ‘pure’vegan lifestyle,
arguing that a democratic vegan ideology andscholarship should allow ‘for rigorously considered
grays rather than demanding all-encompassing black
or white positions ’. Similarly, Twine notes that ‘there
is much diversity within veganism ’in terms of
motivations and practice, and suggests that ‘it should
not be assumed simply that [veganism] is always achoice for non-violence ’(Twine, 2014b , 192). His
argument builds directly on the in ﬂuential work of
Adams (1990) ;Harper (2010 ,2011 ,2012) and others
who spotlight the power relations within main-
streamed vegan praxis that intersect class, race andgender, with concerns for ecologies and differentspecies ( Hamilton, 2016 ;Polish, 2016 ;Gaard, 2017 ).
The intellectual activism in this work has been
instrumental in pushing the storying of veganismbackwards in time to challenge the primacy oftenafforded to the founding of the UK Vegan Society in608 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
1944 ( Brueck and McNeil, 2020 ). It also aims to look
outwards to encompass a broader diversity of cul-tural, socioeconomic and gendered practices ofveganism. For example, critics of the white aestheticsand politics of mainstream veganism advocate for‘race consciousness ’(Harper, 2012 ) and more in-
tersectional approaches to vegan scholarship to re-
dress the erasure of underrepresented voices –
particularly people of colour –from the intellectual
traditions of veganism ( Harper 2010 ). They aim to
push at the boundaries of what authentic veganpractice looks like in order to legitimise more plu-ralistic models of vegan eating.
2 Veganisms as praxis in place
Vegan activists and vegan studies scholars have longexplored veganisms as praxis in place ( White and
Cudworth, 2014 ;Doyle, 2016 ;V´eron, 2016 ;Martin,
2019 ). A recurring methodological approach is to
offer ﬁrst-hand researcher testimonies of the affec-
tive, physical places of farm animal life, includinglivestock auction rooms ( Gillespie, 2018 ), slaugh-
terhouses ( Lockwood, 2018 ) and farm animal
sanctuaries ( Tulloch, 2018 ). These accounts inten-
tionally pay attention to the emotional responses ofthe witness (the researcher) and the witnessed (theanimals), with particular emphasis on grief, fear andanger ( Oliver 2020 ).Gillespie (2018) notes that
witnessing has been a longstanding format of animalactivism –for example, through vigils and under-
cover videos. As an academic method, witnessing is
similarly political in making visible and translatingthe suffering embedded within modern foodways.These accounts accentuate emotion and the ‘sensing
body ’(Longhurst et al., 2008 ), and build on earlier
work that mobilised ethnographic testimony tohighlight the central role of place and space in theordering, obscuring and making kill-able of animals
in different food systems (e.g. Vialles, 1994 ;Taylor
and Fraser, 2017 ).
This work on witnessing-in-place also extends to
research on the social injustices and broader eco-logical harms experienced by certain human bodieswithin the spaces of animal-free food systems(Harper, 2011 ;White, 2018 ). Commentators from
beyond vegan studies note how many forms ofviolence and injustice continue in food supply chains
even when animals are removed. Examples includestudies of the marginalisation of small-scale avocadofarmers in Colombia ( Serrano and Brooks, 2019 ), the
ecological and social injustices associated with ar-able monocultures ( Shiva, 1993 ;Green and Foster,
2005 ) and the labour and sexual exploitation expe-
rienced by migrant workers in horticultural sectors in
Europe and the US ( Holmes, 2013 ;Palumbo and
Sciurba, 2015 ). Recognising the spectrum of sys-
temic exploitation within both animal and plant-based foodways has formed a core strand ofvegan-anarchist critiques against the ‘vegan-as-
consumption ’approach (explored below) to vegan
mainstreaming ( White, 2018 ). It also speaks to on-
going efforts to reconcile the focus of animal rights
on the welfare of individual animals with environ-mental ethics which considers the well-being of non-human animals, including livestock, as part of alarger ecosystem of soils, waters and plants. Wheresome have seen promise in building a moremultispecies-focused ethics ( Warkentin, 2010 ),
others ﬁnd their normative positions to be ultimately
irreconcilable ( Faria and Paez, 2019 ).
3 Corporate veganism
These intersectional and place-based approaches aim
to make space for multiple veganisms. But it hasbeen highlighted in discussions on vegetarianism thatthe inclusivity achieved through an expanded
‘cognitive praxis ’(Morris and Kirwan, 2006 ) pres-
ents a dilemma for those who wish to take a politicalposition on how, and by whom, such movementsshould be mainstreamed. For example, critics cautionagainst the increasing adoption of health veganism asthe commercial pathway through which agri-foodcorporates market vegan offerings, often as morecostly products targeted at wealthier health-
conscious consumers. They suggest such trends
risk advancing what ( White, 2018 ), 2 terms ‘cor-
porate veganism ’that neutralises the movement ’s
anti-establishment aim ‘to usher in a more ethical,
peaceable, and non-violent world ’. These neutralis-
ing efforts are apparent in the agri-food industry ’s
recent uptake of ‘plant-based ’over ‘vegan ’as their
favoured product descriptor due to the former beingSexton et al. 609
seen as more palatable to a broader consumer base
(Sexton, 2018 ;Clay et al., 2020 ).Giraud (2021) is
similarly critical of this emergent ‘plant-based cap-
italism ’that has seen individuals and corporate
brands exploiting the now fashionable vegan identitywithout any deeper commitment to systemic ethicalliving (see also Reed, 2020 ). These commentators
speak for a wider movement in vegan studies calling
for urgent critical re ﬂection on this corporatized
direction of travel.
These tensions are about who veganism is for, but
they also raise questions about who is deemed to be alegitimate agent of change on behalf of the vegancause, and at what scale. For example, Wrenn cham-pions the power of vegan consumption as a site of
individual political resista nce, yet cautions against
vegan movements operating solely through consumer-based action. She notes the risk of ‘capitalist co-
option and moral disillusionment ’(2011 , 22) that
such approaches can engender, and notes the po-tential for systemic oppressions to remain unchal-lenged if consumer action is not complemented byother forms of advocacy, such as policy change and
public education. Wrenn also raises a recurring debate
about the ‘efﬁcacy and ethical consistency ’(2011 ,1 8 )
of purchasing vegan products from mainstream brandswho derive the majority of their pro ﬁts from the
exploitation of non-human animals, and the potentialfor veganism to act as a kind of greenwashing thatabsolves such brands from addressing the intersec-tional harms that uphold their competitive advantage
(Singer, 2017 ). The work of vegan-anarchist scholars
has done much to bring critical focus to the speci ﬁ-
cally social institutions and political economies thatsustain these harms, and to caution against prioritisingindividual consumptive acts as the only effectivemeans by which to bring about more peaceable living(Dominick, 2015 ;White, 2015 ;Milburn, 2016 ).
Taken together these three strands of vegan studies
offer a valuable foundation for critically exploring
vegan mainstreaming. However, the critical foci onthe spaces of vegan production and veganism as in-dividual practice has tended to cleave to a production-consumption binary. The majority of studies focusprimarily on vegan praxis at the individual rather thansystem level, and of those examining vegan foodpractices few consider broader agri-food debates onthe spatial, political economic and material politics
associated with animal-free eating and productionnetworks. A similar production-consumption binaryhas historically characterised agri-food scholarship,but it has since been challenged by work in foodgeographies ( Lockie and Kitto, 2000 ;Goodman D.,
2004 ;Kneafsey et al., 2021 ). This literature helps
identify the ‘double-edged sword ’(Smart, 2004 )
that characterises the ‘vegan-as-consumption ’trend
(White, 2018 ) as one commonly experienced when
alternative food networks encounter the market-based, individualistic paradigm of the mainstream(Goodman et al., 2012 ). Food scholars have begun
to highlight the need for greater consideration ofthese tensions, speci ﬁcally concerning the potential
impacts of transitioning to plant-based operations at
the farm and processing levels ( Burton, 2019 ;
Lonkila and Kaljonen, 2021 ;
Tziva et al., 2020 ), and
via different production methods ( Green and Foster,
2005 ). We see considerable scope for extending the
analytical foundations offered by vegan studiesthrough further engagement with work in foodgeographies, building on recent interdisciplinary
(Morris et al., 2021 ) and vegan geographies ( Hodge
et al., forthcoming ) research programmes to explore
transitions beyond animal-based food systems.
III Engaging food geographies:
Following, alterity and the culturaland material politics of eating
Although veganism remains a marginal concern in
food geography, there is copious relevant scholar-ship within this sub ﬁeld of geography that explores
the potential and pitfall s of mainstreaming what
were once alternative ways of farming and eating.Here we identify four key strands from literature infood geographies that extend the foundational in-
terests of vegan studies. These include the con-
ceptual traditions of following food through
networks and places of its production and con-sumption, critiquing the alterity of alternative food
networks, and unpacking the cultural andmaterial
politics of how things become food. We focus
primarily on avenues that support further criticalwork on the speci ﬁc issue of Big Veganism, but it is610 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
hoped the themes we identify can be taken beyond
this topic by food geographers to consider con-temporary vegan praxis more broadly.
1 Following and placing vegan foods
In their manifesto for vegan geographies, Hodge
et al. (forthcoming) argue for viewing veganism as
an inherently spatial praxis. They make a compellingcase for how geographers can extend vegan studiesscholarship by attending to the geographies, scalesand situatedness of veganism within political, cul-tural and economic networks, and by tracing unequalspatial patterns in its bene ﬁts and impacts. Two
tactics stand out for delivering this promise. The ﬁrst
is to engage the conceptual and methodological
tradition in geography of ‘following ’food ( Cook,
2006 ) that traces the networks of spaces, people and
things connected by production, processing, distri-bution and consumption. This approach has providedrich accounts of the hidden spaces, practices andpolitical economies that bring foodstuffs from distantgeographies to the shelves and menus of mainstream
Western retailers. Exempla ry work has followed sugar
(Mintz, 1986 ), papayas ( Cook, 2004 ), wine ( Kleine,
2008 ), hot pepper sauce ( Cook and Harrison, 2007 ),
coffee ( Coles, 2016 ), wheat ( Head and Atchison, 2016 )
and Fair Trade bananas ( Wilson and Jackson, 2016 ).
This approach works in a complementary vein to theautoethnographies of l ivestock production ( Gillespie,
2018 ;Lockwood, 2018 ), witnessing the distances
travelled by everyday foodstuffs and the lives and
experiences of people behind their production anddistribution. Following food products works in simi-larly intimate and political ways to expose the eco-logical and human exploitation within the commoditychains that underpin modern food systems. Suggestedavenues for further geographic work include un-covering the geographies of Big Veganism beyond our
focus in this paper on trends in the Global North. For
example, by whom and where are supply chains andout-of-sight labour forces being mobilised in order to
sustain and grow Big Veganism in the Global North?What impacts are these new and/or existing networkshaving on local ecologies and communities? To whatextent are consumption trends in the Global Southpursuing a similar trajectory to those in the North?
2A second tactic is to attend to how an inability to
witness and follow such commodity chains high-lights the purposefully hidden injustices that upholdthem ( Hulme, 2017 ), for example in work on the
heavily guarded interiors of slaughterhouses andfactory farms ( Taylor and Fraser, 2017 ). This focus
includes the places of food production that have been
made invisible due to both their physical location and
the political economies of their institutionalisedknowledge practices. For example, recent geographicwork on soils reveals the knowledge politics that haverendered soil ecosystems as a passive surface to bemapped, owned and worked upon ,r a t h e rt h a n with
(Krzywoszynska and Marchesi, 2020 ). Advocating
instead for a relational approach to soils, this work
offers valuable avenues for vegan-focussed scholar-
ship to literally go deeper into the subterranean placesthat support Big Veganism. By ‘embedding atten-
tiveness ’(ibid, 199), this conceptual and methodo-
logical approach extends critical enquiry into non-human labour and care to the hard-to-access, lesssense-able and ‘uncharismatic ’non-human lifeforms
within Big Vegan foodways ( Puig De la Bellacasa,
2015 ;Beacham, 2018 ;Krzywoszynska, 2020 ).
An attention to place also paradoxically helps to
reveal the ‘placelessness ’of some of the world ’s
most ubiquitous food ingredients ( Atchison et al.,
2010 ), including the unspeci ﬁed starches, gums and
preservatives that are now increasingly appearing inmainstream vegan products ( Wilson, 2019 ). This
methodological approach brings a critical focus to
the broader political economies of vegan main-
streaming that risk locking-in (non)human harms. Italso examines the growing ‘displacement ’(Cook and
Crang, 1996 ) of vegan food through its reduction into
anonymous industrial ingredients, such as the so-called ‘superfoods ’(Loyer and Knight, 2018 ) and
‘charismatic nutrients ’(Kimura, 2013 ) promoted by
those making plant-based eating both pro ﬁtable and
palatable.
Following mainstream vegan food also reveals the
distinctive split in the recent activities of conven-
tional agribusinesses. While the giants of global food
processing and ingredient production (like TysonFoods and Cargill) have hedged their bets on plant-based trends ( Piper, 2019a ), resistance has been
voiced by both small-scale farmers and the powerfulSexton et al. 611
lobby groups that speak for ruminant meat and dairy
farming in both the UK and US. The relationshipsbetween place and food have become a key battle-ground within these debates, in which claimed linksbetween livestock, landscapes and producers justifydeeply held values about what constitutes ‘real’,
‘simple ’and ‘good ’food ( Sexton et al., 2019 ).
Notions of terroir and embeddedness abound in these
narratives, re ﬂecting the centrality of place in shaping
popular perceptions of the q uality and physical makeup
of foodstuffs ( Mans ﬁeld, 2003 ;Winter, 2003 ;Morris
and Kirwan, 2006 ;Sexton, 2020 ). While we note that
the care-full embeddedness of conventional livestockproduction evoked in these narratives does not alwaysreﬂect realities on the ground, t heir centrality to a recent
backlash against veganism amongst certain farming
communities invites further critical exploration.
Some attribute this backlash to a simple resistance
to change and an adherence to out-dated values(Hannan, 2020 ). Without dismissing these factors
outright, we suggest a more fruitful avenue is tounderstand why farmers farm and why some self-identi ﬁed‘conscious consumers ’are starting to
question the redemptive promises of mainstream
vegan products ( Piper, 2019b ). Work across rural and
food geographies has documented the diverse rangeof personal motivations behind UK farming, espe-cially in the face of the sustained economic lossesexperienced by many in the sector over recent de-cades ( Food Ethics Council, 2017 ). For example,
Garforth et al. (2006) found that while economic
drivers were ranked as important amongst the UK
farmers surveyed, a strong sense of stewardship,connection to place and familial heritage wereequally, if not more important. There is great scope,we contend, for vegan studies to engage with suchwork to further understand the place-based hopes,fears and values that are seen to be at stake amongstfarming communities with the rise of veganism –
both in its ‘Big’and alternative forms –particularly
regarding the physical, economic and cultural shiftsin land use and community identity it could catalyse.
Future work following and placing plant-based
foods might build on the approaches to witnessing-in-place from vegan studies we reviewed above toexplore the experiences of farmers, pickers and otherlabourers involved in the production networks of BigVeganism. A focus on the grief, fear and anxiety of
those working within modern food systems, bothanimal and ‘post-animal ’, would help understand the
structural violence that perpetuates modes and scalesof farming that are often in con ﬂict with the values of
producers. For example, recent reports of the sys-temic mental health crisis in conventional UK
farming ( Tasker, 2020 ), and the emotive stories of
livestock-turned-vegan farmers ( Sharman, 2019 ),
attest to the uncomfortable and often unwanted lock-ins associated with modern livestock farming(Rebanks, 2020 ), and necessarily complicate the
growing vili ﬁcation of individual farmers by some
within vegan communities for what are system-levelfailures ( Brown, 2019 ). Moreover, there is little
empirical enquiry to date on the experience of those
working in the new spaces of post-animal foodproduction, from the supply chains of the latest plant-based analogues to the current laboratories andimagined ‘
meat breweries ’of the emerging cellular
agriculture sector ( Mammoser, 2016 ;Stephens et al.,
2018 ).
2 The alterity of vegan mainstreaming
Ad e ﬁning feature of recent vegan mainstreaming
and the high-tech alternative protein products drivingthese trends has been their framing in media, cor-porate and advocacy narratives as the ‘better ’al-
ternative for multiple bene ﬁciaries: from animals and
ecologies, to individual and societal health ( Morris
et al., 2018 ;Sexton et al., 2019 ). There is a rich
literature in food geographies that critically examinescomparable claims for the alterity of certain foods,and which can help develop the concerns of inter-sectional vegan studies with the promises and risks ofmultiplying veganisms. Work on alternative foodnetworks (AFNs) provides valuable empiricalcomparisons of the processes inherent to main-
streaming niche food networks and the tensions and
contradictions that often arise. Examples of the latterinclude common tendencies towards ‘unreﬂexive ’
(DuPuis and Goodman, 2005 ),‘defensive ’(Winter,
2003 ) and exclusionary outcomes ( Hayes-Conroy
and Martin, 2010 ;Goodman, 2004 ;Lockie, 2013 ),
and an ultimate failure to meaningfully reimagine,reform or disrupt the models of agri-food capitalism612 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
they once stood against ( Goodman et al., 2012 ;
Guthman, 2008 ). This critical work also draws at-
tention to the fascist and elitist heritage of someAFNs, such as the organic movement ( Reed, 2001 ).
ForMaye et al. (2007) , the label alternative has
become empty; a catch-all term for generalisedpromises of (non)human bene ﬁts. In response, at-
tempts have been made to more precisely qualify
alterity through discernible metrics and analyticalframeworks. For example, Watts et al. (2005)
characterise AFNs along a spectrum from ‘weaker ’
to‘stronger ’, distinguishing between systems that
place emphasis on reimagining either the foodproduct (weaker) or the networks of its production,distribution and broader socioecological services
(stronger) (see also Maye et al., 2007 ;Harris, 2009 ;Si
et al., 2015 ). Such critiques view AFNs based on
individual products as the weaker model for achievingradical change due to their susceptibility to corporateappropriation. According to this analysis, recenttrends in vegan mainstreaming have largely followeda weaker model of alterity given their neoliberal,market-based characteristics ( White, 2018 ).
Others have sought to move beyond categorising
alterity according to any simpli ﬁed binary with
‘conventional ’agriculture ( Whatmore et al., 2003 )
and instead aim to acknowledge the heterogeneity,power dynamics and situatedness of different AFNs(Sonnino and Marsden, 2006 ;Holloway et al., 2007 ;
Wilson, 2013 ). In different ways this work enables
critical yet hopeful appraisals of AFNs based on a
‘reading for difference rather than dominance ’
(Gibson-Graham, 2006 , xxxi). Such an approach
does not seek to dismiss existing criticisms ofmainstreamed AFNs and their tendency to reproducerather than challenge conventional power structures(Guthman, 2008 ;Lockie, 2013 ;Slocum and
Cadieux, 2015 ). But neither does it take this fail-
ure as the grounds for outright dismissal of the po-
tential for alternative models (like the rise of
veganism) to simultaneously enable other politicaltrajectories ( Harris, 2009 ).
Collectively this work on alterity in food geog-
raphies offers a re ﬂexive approach for critical re-
search that encourages consideration of what BigVeganism and its associated alternative proteinproducts are claiming to be alternative to. BigVeganism has to date been characterised by explicit
alliances with ‘conventional ’agri-food industry, yet
it simultaneously claims to be alternative or at leastdisruptive. The recent acquisitions of vegan start-upsby multinational livestock companies such as TysonFoods are a case in point. Most of these takeovershave been actively sought by vegan food companies
in the name of creating an ‘alternative ’food system
that can quickly reach mainstream scales and spaces.Incumbent livestock companies have receivedwidespread praise from many (though not all) veganscholars and activists who have long opposed con-ventional animal agri-business ( Chiorando, 2020 ;
Friedrich, 2020 ;Dutkiewicz and Dickstein, 2021 ).
Such evolutions in the way alterity is being oper-
ationalised through Big Vega nism, and the new ethical,
spatial and political economic openings being created
offer timely foci for critical food geography (cf.Goodman and Sage, 2014 ). This research would build
on recent geographic work that examines the onto-logical battlegrounds that h ave seen the alterity of al-
ternative proteins challenge d in legal as well as cultural
domains ( J¨onsson, 2016 ;Stephens et al., 2019 ). It also
speaks to related studies on the economic geographies
of vegan food tech start-ups in Silicon Valley, which areremaking veganism according to the logics and spacesof the high-tech industry (e.g. M o u a te ta l . ,2 0 1 9 ;
Guthman and Biltekoff, 2020 ;J¨onsson, 2020 ;Sexton,
2020 ).
3 The cultural politics of vegan eating
The question of how alterity is being mobilised in the
mainstreaming of veganism is linked to the questionof who bears the responsibility for materialising thistransition. White ’s (2018) characterisation of veg-
anism-as-consumption identi ﬁes how individual
consumers and market competition are upheld as thecentral protagonists in Big Vegan models of food
system transition. Food geographers have long
questioned this model of political change, in whichsocietal ills are made the responsibility of individualsto solve through their everyday consumption deci-sions ( Guthman, 2003 ;Goodman, 2004 ;Johnston,
2008 ). While not dismissing the collective in ﬂuence
and personal empowerment individual food choicecan achieve, many food geographers haveSexton et al. 613
highlighted how particularly people of colour,
women and lower-income groups disproportionatelybear the responsibility and blame for making ‘good ’
or‘bad’choices ( Slocum, 201 1;Mans ﬁeld, 2012 ).
As such, attention is de ﬂected from system-level
issues and the burden of responsibility is shiftedaway from state and corporate actors ( Welch et al.,
2018 ). The governmentalities associated with this
model of ‘responsibilising ’the citizen-consumer
(Johnston, 2008 ) have been shown in multiple ca-
ses to cultivate problematic and disempoweringimaginaries of ‘good ’eaters and ‘good ’eating
(Guthman, 2003 ;Minkoff-Zern, 2014 ;Gibson and
Dempsey, 2013 ;Sexton, 2018 ).
In response, Roe (2006a) and others have en-
couraged relational approaches that challenge the
claimed ef ﬁcacy of individual consumers as agents of
systemic change. Undermining the prevalent modelof food choice as a set of discrete, free and rationalacts, these approaches draw attention to whatGoodman (2016) terms the ‘extra-ordinariness ’of
food in the repertoire of daily consumptive practices.This work highlights how food is embedded within
habituated regimes that shape the pre-cognitive,
emotional and multi-sensory dimensions of eating(cf. Hayes-Conroy and Hayes-Conroy, 2008 ;
Jackson et al., 2020 ). Such work complicates the
assertion made by vegan scholars such as Francione
(2016 , np) that veganism is a choice all persons ‘can
make today –right now ’. It develops the concerns of
intersectional vegan studies scholars to sketch rela-
tional ethics that are attuned to the embodied politics
of food ( Carolan, 2011 ) and to reveal how networks
of spaces, things, visceral experiences and politicaleconomic structures shape the capacity for any givenindividual to enact a care-full ethics in their dailyfood decisions.
Meanwhile, geographic studies on the cultural
politics of food, race, class and gender ( Slocum and
Saldanha, 2016 ;Ram´ırez, 2015 ;Jones, 2019 ;Reese,
2019
) offer valuable means for deepening the
analysis of authenticity and intersectionality in ex-isting vegan studies. For example, reports suggest anotable rise in meat reduction and abstentionamongst non-white communities in the US overrecent years ( McCarthy and Dekoster, 2020 ). A
growing range of non-pro ﬁt and for-pro ﬁt ventures,digital movements (#blackvegan) and cultural events
(e.g. Black VegFest) have emerged to support andcelebrate veganism within black communities in boththe UK and US that champions affordable, accessibleand nutritionally-rich plant-based foods. Men arealso increasingly showing interest in veganism(BUPA, 2018 ;Henderson, 2018 ). While research
shows many men still feel they need social per-
mission from peers to reduce their meat consumption(Roe, 2018 ), there has been a discernible shift to-
wards a masculine aesthetic of veganism –achieving
its own moniker of ‘heganism ’–that purports to
challenge the historic social stigma of plant-baseddiets as being overtly feminine and nutritionallydeﬁcient (cf. Adams, 1990 ;Asher and Cherry, 2015 ;
Greenebaum and Dexter, 2018 ). The radical potential
of heganism has, however, been criticised for furtherreinforcing rather than dismantling the problematicidentities associated with male veganism ( Randall,
2018 ). The hegan aesthetic has also meant that men
increasingly occupy the cultural spaces of main-stream veganism that have predominantly been heldby (white) women, and in many of its forms it ad-
vances elitist versions of veganism as an often ex-
pensive consumptive lifestyle that risks excludingthose without the means to buy into costly productsand experiences (cf. Giraud, 2021 ).
Approaches from food geography help critique
the political openings and closings enabled by thesetrends in the cultural politics of food, including thoseperpetuating problematic racial, class and gendered
stereotypes (see Priestley et al., 2016 on the Thug
Kitchen cookbook). The concurrence of the rise of
Big Veganism with the #MeToo movement and
worldwide Black Lives Matter protests offers atimely moment for exploring the potential shifts inthe cultural politics and geographies of vegan rep-resentation. Drawing on geographic studies of socialmovements (e.g. Arenas, 2014 ;Nicholls, 2007 ;
Pickerill and Chatterton, 2006 ) and feminist and
black food geographies ( Garth and Reese, 2020 ;
Hamilton, 2020 ;Hayes-Conroy and Hayes-Conroy,
2008 ;Jones, 2019 ;Reese, 2019 ), there are also
critical questions to ask about how issues of gender,class and racial (in)justice are manifesting within theboardrooms, supply chains and other spaces of BigVeganism.614 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
Finally, food geography is well placed to un-
derstand the central place of different media in thecultural politics of vegan mainstreaming. For ex-ample, the rise of digital food and lifestyle in ﬂu-
encers have enabled the ‘celebritisation ’(Johnston
and Goodman, 2015 ) of vegan activism and pro-
motion, opening up veganism as a new frontier of
exposure, controversy and commodi ﬁcation across
physical and digital spaces. The proliferation ofvegan ﬁlms and the rise of vegan ‘shock docs ’–such
asCowspiracy, 2014 ;Forks over knives, 2011 ;The
Game Changers, 2019 –also appears to have played
a signi ﬁcant role in recent years in shaping repre-
sentations of veganism and the planetary issues itaims to solve ( Christopher et al., 2018 ). Further
exploration of these vegan media trends could draw
on geographic work on the relationship betweencelebrities, media, food and social activism ( Barnes
2017 ;Phillipov and Goodman, 2017 ), and the
emerging ﬁeld of digital (food) geographies
(Schneider et al., 2017 ;Ash et al., 2018 ).
4 Materialising veganism: things becoming
‘vegan ’food
The materialist turn ( Whatmore, 2006 ) has led to a
renewed focus within food geographies on the
physical as well as the cultural and discursive net-
works that shape everyday food-eater relations. A
nascent sub ﬁeld of this literature has emerged,
concerned with ‘the geographies of edibility ’(House,
2018 ), examining the material processes of how
‘things become food ’(Roe, 2006a ); that is, how food
is made asmatter and made tomatter through claims
of betterness and alterity ( Evans and Miele, 2012 ).
Many recent studies within this sub ﬁeld are con-
cerned with foods that promise some form of societal
and planetary salvation, such as genetically-modi ﬁed
foods ( Roe, 2006b ), or the latest generations of al-
ternative proteins including edible insects, cell-cultured meat and plant-based products ( House,
2018 ;Sexton, 2018 ;Stephens, 2021 ). This re-
search builds directly on research of historic foodtrends and the ways animals have been made ediblein diverse times and places ( Douglas, 1966 ;Vialles,
1994 ). It reveals how edibility is contingent,changeable and ‘co-produced by a diverse range of
actors ’(House, 2018 , 83).
Geographic work on edibility offers valuable
conceptual and empirical insights for exploring howan increasingly diverse range of things, from stemcells, to pea protein, to ‘thin air ’(Chowdhury, 2019 ),
are being remade as vegan food. These developments
demonstrate the ‘transgressive ’and‘boundary-cross-
ing’nature of food ( Goodman and Sage, 2014 ). They
invite enquiries into the stra tegies of edibility formation
and how these are reorganising the physical, politicaleconomic and ontological dimensions of the foodsystem. This invitation has been taken up by anemerging ﬁeld of research spanning food geography
(J¨onsson, 2016 ;Sexton, 2018 ;Mouat and Prince,
2018 ), media studies ( Johnson, 2019 ) and the social
studies of science ( Stephens, 2013 ;J¨onsson et al.,
2019 ). This work unpacks how alternative proteins
transgress the established bi ological, legal and cultural
categories of animal foodstuffs like meat and milk. Itreveals how challenging these seemingly stable cate-gories enables broader reimaginings of the spatial andpolitical order of the food syst em, catalysing collabo-
rations between previously distinct industries (e.g. Big
Tech and Big Food) ( Guthman and Biltekoff, 2020 ;
Sexton, 2020 ) and historically opposed ideological
positions (e.g. vegan activis m and the global livestock
industry) ( Sexton et al., 2019 ;Broad, 2019 ).
Studies of edibility also reveal the distinct visceral
politics ( Hayes-Conroy and Hayes-Conroy, 2008 )
that are emerging around these novel foodstuffs.
Hedonistic notions of pleasure and good taste are
being mobilised through Big Vegan narratives toconstruct new foodstuffs as the responsible anddelicious alternatives to conventional animal-sourced products. Similar trends have been ob-served in other AFNs like the Slow Food movement(Hayes-Conroy and Martin, 2010 ), where an appeal
to good taste is seen to offer potential for everyday
political action against agri-industry. In contrast,
Clay et al. (2020) argue that recent efforts to turn
plants into milk (or mylk) represent a form of‘palatable disruption ’. Their analysis explores how
making vegan food palatable for mainstream tastesinvolves transforming plants so that they simulate thematerial properties of meat and dairy: making mylkthat pours, creams and froths, and burgers that bleed,Sexton et al. 615
sizzle and deliver a chewable ‘mouth feel ’. In this
way, both the ethical discomfort of desiring animalfoods and the sensory discomfort (i.e. texture, bittertastes) many people associate with plant and fungi-based alternatives are backgrounded. However, theauthors caution that consumers are ‘encouraged to
care about the environment, health, and animal
welfare enough to adopt mylks but to ultimately
remain consumers of a commodity food ’(ibid, 2; see
also Mylan et al., 2019 ). Mainstream plant milks as
such ﬁt the mould of ‘non-disruptive disruptions ’
(Goldstein, 2018 )–that is, claiming solutions to
systemic problems that merely serve to repair andmaintain the capitalist status quo. This analysis raisesimportant questions about who stands to bene ﬁt from
mass-produced, ersatz commodity vegan foodstuffs.
We see geographic work on visceral politics as a
natural complement to the critical feminist turnwithin vegan studies reviewed above as it drawsfurther attention to how bodies are categorised,represented and made responsible through main-stream vegan discourses. Attention to the visceralpolitics of Big Veganism invites us to follow these
discourses into and through the body, to explore the
‘ways that bodies deal with discourses ’(Hayes-
Conroy and Hayes-Conroy 2008 , 469) and how
sensory experiences are entangled in the corporateand political agendas of Big Veganism (cf. Carolan,
2011 ). Yet it also offers a conceptual and method-
ological lens for exploring the hopeful ways in whichbodies can resist such co-option. Accounts of dieting
and weight loss ( Heyes, 2006 ) and autoethnographic
encounters with recent vegan foodstuffs ( Sexton,
2016 ) document the ways in which sensory expe-
riences and expectations can act as a powerful barrierto agri-food industry ’s‘battle for mouths, minds and
markets ’(Lang and Heasman, 2015 ). Mobilising a
visceral approach to read for difference over domi-nance (cf. Gibson-Graham, 2006 ) helps identify
openings to counter some of the problematic material
and political economic directions of Big Veganism –
for example, using a visceral approach to ask howand by whom the ‘good ’taste of recent vegan
foodstuffs is experienced, why some people are re-sisting them, who is able to resist them in favour of
‘real’animal products or wholefood plant-based
ingredients, and who bene ﬁts from the particularcultivation of tastes through Big Veganism? More
speciﬁcally on this latter point, who bene ﬁts from
mainstream vegan eating remaining largely de ﬁned
by processed burgers, nuggets and ready meals inplace of wholefood plant-based diets?
Understanding edibility and taste as networked
beyond the individual also helps extend work in vegan
studies on consumer behaviour. For example, Jackson
et al. ’s (2020)
study of taste as something that is
publicly shared further highlights the role of supportiveenvironments and peer groups in sustaining commit-ment to vegan praxis. Moreover, a prominent char-acteristic of Big Veganism has been the performance ofedibility through high-pro ﬁle and purposefully public
tasting events and marketing materials ( Stephens and
Ruivenkamp, 2016 ). Collectively these events have
worked to position a new generation of vegan foodsnot only as eatable but also enjoyable ( Sexton, 2018 ),
speciﬁcally using the public presentation of celebrities,
business moguls and food industry ﬁgures tasting these
novel foods on our behalf ( Stephens, 2021 ). We might
think of these highly mediated events as a kind ofvisceral witnessing that works to encourage subjects,
through notable conduits, to accept and desire these
vegan foodstuffs.
A focus on social context also helps understand the
salience of the rise of veganism as a barometer ofbroader social anxieties. Food geographers have oftentaken crises as a generative analytic for understandingsocial norms and practices, in work spanning concernsover global food shortages ( Belasco, 2006 ), con-
tamination and disease ( Law and Mol, 2008 ), to the
disconnection of modern food systems ( Jackson,
2015 ).Sexton (2018) argues that the burgeoning
demand for alternative proteins represents a materi-alisation of broader anxieties about the contemporaryenvironmental crisis captured under the zeitgeist labelof the Anthropocene. Here vegan foods are normal-ised as therapeutic edible solutions that ensure plan-
etary salvation, while simultaneously remaining kind
to capitalist systems and carnist food cultures.
IV Vegan food geographies
At the time of writing, the fast-food companyKentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) is in the headlines asthe latest global meat behemoth to pin its future to616 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
high-tech cell-cultured and plant-based meat alter-
natives ( Young, 2020 ). The company joins a growing
list of livestock, food processing and retail giantswho are hedging their bets on animal-free food trends(Piper, 2019a ). For some within vegan communities,
this latest expression of Big Veganism is to be ap-plauded for offering rapidly scalable transitions away
from industrial animal agriculture ( Friedrich, 2020 ).
For others, such developments represent uneasypartnerships that neglect the radical ethics and tenetsof vegan praxis ( White, 2018 ;Davis, 2019 ;Giraud,
2021 ). While these debates continue, what seems
increasingly clear is that many agri-food incumbentsdo not see veganism as a passing consumer fad; asone analyst reported, ‘it’s time has come ’(Hooker,
2018 ). The cultural, material and political economic
effects of its rising popularity are already being feltacross the global food system.
Vegan mainstreaming raises a set of timely
questions for scholars concerned with the social,animal and environmental consequences of the foodsystem. In this paper we have demonstrated that foodgeographers are particularly well placed to answer
these questions and to interrogate the different vegan
food futures that are on the table. We propose thecomplementary sub ﬁeld of vegan food geographies
as a key component of recent agenda-setting researchprogrammes ( Morris et al., 2021 ;Hodge et al.,
forthcoming ) that can critically interrogate contem-
porary transitions away from animal-based foodsystems. In this paper we have outlined some pre-
liminary avenues for vegan food geographies re-
search that draw together and develop the commoninterests and concepts of vegan studies and foodgeographies. For example, we suggest that concep-tual concerns with embeddedness and terroir (Winter2003) and the methodological tools of following(Cook, 2004 ) offer potential for further emplacing
Big Veganism. These avenues prompt questions of
how places feature in the practices and rhetoric of Big
Veganism, and where and by whom the promisedbeneﬁts are being realised. A particular theme we
highlight for further critical research is the vision ofplacelessness in the narratives of some recentproducts that promise the liberation of animalfoodstuffs from the land (and its associated con-straints) through the use of stem cell and planttechnologies ( Sexton et al., 2019 ;Guthman and
Biltekoff, 2020 ). Geographers need to ask what
this imagined liberation means for the future of ruralspaces ( Burton, 2019 ) and the people and ecologies
they support. Conversely, should we think of BigVeganism as not entirely a vision of placelessness butrather one built around different places, such as the
synthetic biology lab, the urban farm and the Silicon
Valley start-up?
Critical work on race, gender, class and alterity
across vegan studies and food geographies ( Hayes-
Conroy and Hayes-Conroy, 2008 ;Harper, 2010 ;
Goodman et al., 2012 ;Reese, 2019 ) also raises
timely questions about the emerging cultural politicsof Big Veganism. What has the rise of Big Veganism
and its associated ‘alternative ’products done to
understandings of alterity and the mainstream? Is itcreating new political openings and challenges fordoing ‘good ’food ( Johnston et al., 2011 )? Whose
labour and cultural identities support Big Veganism?Who remains visible or hidden in its representations,and who is able or unable to access its bene ﬁts and
opportunities?
Furthermore, we suggest that new materialist
approaches can help develop longstanding concernswith vegan food and eating in cultural studies, whileraising a new set of questions. How might taste andedibility be used to understand resistance to veg-anism by certain producer and consumer groups?What do the processes by which things are beingmade ‘vegan food ’
reveal about the anxieties, cul-
tural politics and political economies of conventional
animal foodstuffs? What are the long-term conse-quences of cultivating vegan tastes through fast-foodproducts and upscaling vegan foodways through thespaces and networks of agri-food incumbents?
We have focussed primarily on themes that are
relevant to contemporary trends of vegan main-streaming, yet there is much scope for vegan food
geographies to look beyond these speci ﬁc develop-
ments to other temporalities and contexts of veganpraxis. Likewise, we encourage future work to ex-pand the geographical scope of our analysis beyondEurope and North America. Big Veganism is ma-terialising across global geographies and we areconscious that alternative versions of vegan andvegetarian diets are widespread in other parts of theSexton et al. 617
world, that these diets are changing sometimes as
consequences of Northern trends, and that meat andplant consumption is driven by a wider and morediverse set of cultural and political tensions than wecan review here. For example, vegetarianism andmeat abstinence have been heralded and contested asnational virtues in both India and China for very
different reasons ( Jha, 2004 ;Staples, 2020 ). There
are diverse vegan food geographies emerging bothrelated to and beyond Big Veganism that are worthyof wider examination.
While by no means exhaustive, our review es-
tablishes foundational avenues for a sub ﬁeld of vegan
food geographies that we hope will extend recentcritical geographic and social science work on veg-
anism broadly and on the speci ﬁc issue of its main-
streaming. Zooming out from these suggestedresearch questions, we end the paper with threeoverarching aims for future vegan food geographiesresearch. First, that future work on Big Veganismattends to the relations between vegan food productionand consumption. Our spotlighting of geographicdebates on place, moral economies and cultural and
material politics offers starting points for considering
Big Veganism as more than a product of linear dy-namics; it is neither the outcome of a mechanisticchain of production from ﬁeld to fork, nor the result of
consumer-driven trends working backwards down thesupply chain. Rather, we encourage work in veganfood geographies to view Big Veganism as embeddedwithin networks of co-constitutive and often contested
political, cultural, ethical and material relations. Such
a relational approach can, we argue, help to overcomethe production-consumption binary that veganthinking (like agri-food studies before it) has at timesperpetuated, and instead encourage a more holisticcritique of the implications of veganism ’sc u r r e n t
mainstreaming. In doing so, vegan food geographiesencourages bi-directional lessons between these re-
search ﬁelds as a platform to consider how a broader
range of bodies, places, privileges and identities arebeing (re)made through Big Veganism, and to ex-amine the consequences of these dynamics for thepower geometries of food and the possibilities for ajust and sustainable plant-based food system.
The consequent second aim for vegan food ge-
ographies research is to understand Big Veganism asone possible version of mainstreamed veganism. By
this we mean to challenge the perceived inevitabilityof any AFN, including veganism, needing to adoptthe scales of operation and political economies of BigFood and Agriculture as the only means of ‘going ’
mainstream. Here we look to speci ﬁc work on al-
ternative food economies and responsible innovation
(Rose and Chilvers, 2018 ;Stilgoe, 2019 ) that has
explored different production systems and scales formaximising accessibility without compromising onoriginal principles and outcomes. For example, theidea of scaling up food production by number (i.e. alarge collective of smaller producers) rather than size(a small number of large producers) is one methodthat has been proposed ( Smaje, 2020 ). Growing
movements of intersectional community veganisms
and‘veganic ’(vegan organic) agriculture advance a
vision for veganism that is attentive to its spaces andnetworks of production, land and social reform, andthe possibilities of alternative economic models(Harper, 2016 ;White, 2018 ; Vegan Organic Net-
work
3).Broad (2019) andDutkiewicz (2019) also
offer alternative visions for how to support inno-
vation in high-tech vegan food products while em-
bedding principles of food justice and publicownership to mitigate corporate capture and mo-nopolisation. Future work on vegan food geogra-phies is well placed to further explore the potentialand limitations of these approaches in the context ofveganism and its mainstreaming.
Of course, a core commitment of work in food
geography as we have shown has been to make
visible the contradictions and harms that can still beperpetuated by even the most care-full ‘alternative ’
food networks, many of which become heightenedduring encounters with the mainstream ( Goodman
et al., 2012 ;Reese, 2019 ). This body of work en-
courages a critical view of all AFNs as they come tobe shaped by the dominant structures and logics of
the mainstream. It highlights the distinct ‘politics of
the possible ’(Guthman, 2008 ) that shape the extent
to which any AFN, including veganism, can achieveits radical potential as it encounters and becomesshaped by the mainstream –a politics that we
highlight here as a necessarily central concern forvegan food geographies research. Yet channellingGibson-Graham, we should temper a view of the618 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
mainstream as homogenous, everywhere and ines-
capable by ‘reading for difference rather than
dominance ’(2006 , xxxi). A vegan food geographies
approach should remain cautiously open to the po-litical possibilities that Big Veganism is creating.Analysis starts from where we are, treating the ex-isting situation ‘as a (problematic) resource for
projects of becoming; a place from which to build
something more desirable in the future ’(Gibson-
Graham, 2006 , xxxii). Taken together, an attention
to both the politics of the possible and a reading fordifference informs a vegan food geographies ap-proach that considers the surprising and hopefulpolitical openings generated by the trajectories of BigVeganism, while remaining critical of what is
overlooked and what might be achieved from other
versions of vegan mainstreaming.
Finally, a productive avenue for future work in
vegan food geographies would be to further unpack the‘big’in Big Veganism. As highlighted in our Intro-
duction, there has been considerable hype in culturaland business commentaries concerning the rise ofveganism in mainstream spaces of production and
consumption. While the rate of growth in much of these
trends has been rapid, the overall picture of veganism ineveryday practices remains relatively small in com-parison with the continued dominance of global animalfood systems. Empirical inves tigation and interrogation
of the ‘big’in Big Veganism would help to better
understand the geographies, temporalities and pro-cesses by which recent vegan mainstreaming is oc-
curring, which in turn has important implications for
assessing the present and fu ture impacts of transitions
away from animal-based food systems.
Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publicationof this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial
support for the research, authorship, and/or publication ofthis article: This research was funded by Wellcome Trust ’s
‘Our Planet Our Health ’Programme, and conducted
through the University of Oxford ’s Livestock,Environment and People (LEAP) project. Award number:
205212/Z/16/Z. Sexton was supported by a LeverhulmeTrust Early Career Research Fellowship (ECF-2020-105)during the ﬁnal review stages of the paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
constructive comments and engagement with this paper.
The work bene ﬁted greatly from discussions with fellow
participants at the ‘New Veg*nism ’workshop that was held
at the University of Oxford in 2019 and supported by theWellcome Trust-funded ‘Livestock, Environment and
People ’(LEAP) project. Many thanks also go to Mike
Goodman, Nathan Clay and George Cusworth for readingearlier drafts. We ﬁnally wish to give a special note of
gratitude to Clive Barnett for his invaluable guidance,
generosity and editorial expertise throughout the reviewprocess. It was such a pleasure to have worked with himeven in this small capacity. He will be very much missed.
Notes
1. For example in 2018, the CEO of global meat company
Tyson Foods announced plans to shift the company ’s
operations from meat production and processing tobecome a broader ‘producer of proteins ’(Little, 2018 ).
The company has since described itself as ‘The Protein
Company
TM’in several channels of its corporate
branding (cf. White, 2020 ).
2. Speci ﬁc thanks to one of our reviewers for helping to
develop this set of questions as a critical part of future
research on vegan food geographies.
3. See www.veganorganic.net
References
Adams CJ (1990) The Sexual Politics of Meat: A Vege-
tarian Critical Theory . New York, NY: Continuum.
Arenas I (2014) Assembling the multitude: Material ge-
ographies of social movements from Oaxaca to Oc-cupy. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 32(3): 433 –449.
Ash J, Kitchin R and Leszczynski A (2018) Digital turn,
digital geographies? Progress in Human Geography
42(1): 25 –43.
Asher K and Cherry E (2015) Home is where the food is:
Barriers to vegetarianism and veganism in theSexton et al. 619
domestic sphere. Journal for Critical Animal Studies
13(1): 66 –91.
Atchison J, Head L and Gates A (2010) Wheat as food,
wheat as industrial substance: Comparative geogra-
phies of transformation and mobility. Geoforum
41(2): 236 –246.
Barnes C (2017) Mediating good food and moments of
possibility with Jamie Oliver: Problematising celeb-rity chefs as talking labels. Geoforum 84: 169 –178.
Beacham J (2018) Organising food differently: Towards a
more-than-human ethics of care for the Anthro-
pocene. Organization 25(4): 533 –549.
Belasco W (2006) Meals to Come: A History of the Future
of Food . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Broad GM (2019) Plant-based and cell-based animal
product alternatives: An assessment and agenda for
food tech justice. Geoforum 107: 223 –226.
Brown J (2019) Online abuse and farm protests: the vegans
impacting on farmers ’mental health. Sustainable
Food Trust. Available at: https://sustainablefoodtrust.
org/articles/online-abuse-and-farm-protests-the-vegans-impacting-on-farme rs-mental-health/ (accessed 25 Jan-
uary 2021).
Brueck JF and McNeill ZZ (2020) Queer and Trans Voices:
Achieving Liberation through Consistent Anti-op-
pression . London: Sanctuary Publishers.
BUPA (2018) New research reveals turning 30, 40 or 50
pushes millions of Britons into a lifestyle overhaul.Bupa. Available at: https://www.bupa.com/newsroom/
news/zero-effect (accessed 25 January 2021).
Burton R (2019) The potential impact of synthetic animal
protein on livestock production: The new “war against
agriculture ”.Journal of Rural Studies 68: 33 –45.
Calnan M (2019) Waitrose Launches Vegan Barbeque Lines .
The Grocer. Available at: https://www.thegrocer.co.uk/
own-label/-waitrose-launches-vegan-barbecue-lines/
593029.article (accessed 22 January 2021).
Carolan MS (2011) Embodied Food Politics . Farnham:
Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
Cherry E (2006) Veganism as a cultural movement: A
relational approach. Social Movement Studies 5(2):
155–170.
Chiorando M (2020) KFC Wins Major Award for its Vegan
Burger amid Plant-Based Boom. Plantbased News.
Available at: https://plantbasednews.org/lifestyle/food/
vegan-kfc-wins-award/ (accessed 22 January 2021).Chowdury H (2019) Meat ’Made from Thin Air? Finland
Develops Protein Powder for Human Food Made from
Captured CO
2. The Telegraph. Available at: https://
www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2019/07/08/meat-
made-thin-air- ﬁnland-develops-protein-powder-human-
food/ (accessed 25 January 2021).
Christopher A, Bartkowski JP and Haverda T (2018) Por-
traits of veganism: A comparative discourse analysis of
a second-order subculture. Societies 8(3): 55.
Clay N, Sexton AE, Garnett T, et al (2020) Palatable
disruption: The politics of plant milk. Agriculture and
Human Values 37: 1 –18.
Cole M and Morgan K (2011) Vegaphobia: Discourses of
veganism and the reproduction of speciesism in UK
national newspapers. The British Journal of Sociology
62(1): 134 –153.
Coles B (2016). Ingesting places: Embodied geographies
of coffee. In: Abbots EJ and Lavis A (eds). London:
Routledge, pp. 255 –271. Why we eat, how we eat:
Contemporary encounters between food and bodies
Cook I (2004) Follow the thing: Papaya. Antipode 36(4):
642–664.
Cook I and Crang P (1996) The world on a plate: Culinary
culture, displacement and geographical knowledges.
Journal of Material Culture 1(2): 131 –153.
Cook I and Harrison M (2007) Follow the Thing: “West
Indian Hot Pepper Sauce ”.Space and Culture 10(1):
40–63.
Cook I, et al. (2006) Geographies of food: following.
Progress in Human Geography 30(5): 655 –666.
Cook S (2019) Business Ideas for 2019: Plant-Based
Foods .Startups.co.uk . Available at: https://startups.
co.uk/business-ideas/plant-based-foods/ (accessed 22
January 2021).
Cowspiracy (2014). dir USA: Kip Andersen and Keegan
Kuhn, Appian Way Productions. [Film].
Davis C (2019) Big Meat heats up the plant-based protein
market. Medium , 29 June 2019. Available at: https://
chanapdavis.medium.com/big-meat-heats-up-the-plant-
based-protein-market-541553e263c4 . (accessed 25 Jan-
uary 2021)
Dominick B (2015) Anarcho-veganism revisited. In:
NocellaII AJ, White RJ and Cudworth E (eds).
Jefferson, NC: McFarland, pp. 23 –39.Anarchism
and Animal Liberation: Essays on complementaryelements of total liberation620 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
Douglas M (1966) Purity and Danger: An Analysis of
Concepts of Pollution and Taboo . London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul.
Doyle J (2016) Celebrity vegans and the lifestyling of
ethical consumption. Environmental Communication
10(6): 777 –790.
DuPuis EM and Goodman D (2005) Should we go “home ”
to eat?: Toward a re ﬂexive politics of localism.
Journal of Rural Studies 21(3): 359 –371.
Dutkiewicz J (2019). Socialize lab meat. Jacobin. Available
at:https://jacobinmag.com/2019/08/lab-meat-socialism-
green-new-deal (accessed 8 June 2021).
Dutkiewicz J and Dickstein J (2021) The Ism in Veganism:
The Case for a Minimal Practice-based De ﬁnition.
Food Ethics 6(1): 1 –19.
Evans AB and Miele M (2012) Between food and ﬂesh:
How animals are made to matter (and not matter)within food consumption practices. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 30(2): 298 –314.
Faria C and Paez E (2019) It ’s Splitsville: Why Animal
Ethics and Environmental Ethics Are Incompatible.
American Behavioral Scientist 63(8): 1047 –1060.
Food Ethics Council (2017) For Whom? Questioning the
Food and Farming Research Agenda . London: Food
Ethics Council.
Forchtner B and Tominc A (2017) Kalashnikov and
cooking-spoon: Neo-Nazism, veganism and a life-
style cooking show on YouTube. Food, Culture &
Society 20(3): 415 –441.
Forks over knives (2011) dir USA: Lee Fulkerson . Film:
Monica Beach Media.
Fox K (2017) Here ’s Why You Should Turn Your Business
Vegan in 2018. Forbes. Available at: https://www.
forbes.com/sites/katrinafox/2017/12/27/heres-why-
you-should-turn-your-business-vegan-in-2018/ (ac-
cessed 22 January 2021).
Francione GL (2012) Animal welfare, happy meat, and
veganism as the moral baseline. In: Kaplan DM(ed). Berkeley: University of California Press, pp.
169–189. The philosophy of food
Francione GL (2016) The meaning of “The world is
VEGAN! If you want it ”. The Abolitionist Approach.
Available at: https://www.abolitionistapproach.com/
14044-2/ (accessed 25 January 2021).
Friedrich C (2020) I’ve Not Eaten KFC since the 80s. Its
Plant-Based Chicken Nuggets Will Change that . The
Guardian. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/22/ive-not-eaten-kfc-
since-the-80s-its-plant-based-chicken-nuggets-will-
change-that . (accessed 22 January 2021).
Fuentes C and Fuentes M (2017) Making a market for
alternatives: marketing devices and the quali ﬁcation
of a vegan milk substitute. Journal of Marketing
Management 33(7–8): 529 –555.
Gaard G (2017) Critical Ecofeminism . Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books.
Gibson-Graham JK (2006) A Postcapitalist Politics .
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Garforth C, Rehman T, McKemey K, Yates C, Rana RB,
Green K, Wilkinson M, Beechener S, Hollis K andMcIntosh L (2006) Research to understand and modelthe behaviour and motivations of farmers in re-
sponding to policy changes (England)). Final report
of project EPES0405-17 commissioned by DEFRA.School of Agriculture, Policy and Development,University of Reading, Reading .
Garth H and Reese AM (2020) Black food matters: Racial
justice in the wake of food justice . Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Gibson KE and Dempsey SE (2013) Make good choices,
kid: Biopolitics of children ’s bodies and school lunch
reform in Jamie Oliver ’sFood Revolution .Children ’s
Geographies 13(1): 44 –58.
Gillespie K (2018) The Loneliness and Madness of Wit-
nessing: Re ﬂections from a Vegan Feminist Killjoy.
In: Probyn-Rapsey F and Gruen L (eds). New York,NY: Bloomsbury, pp. 76 –85.Animaladies: Gender,
Animals, and Madness
Giraud E (2021) Veganism: Politics, Practice and Theory .
London: Bloomsbury.
Godfray HCJ, Aveyard P, Garnett T, et al (2018) Meat
consumption, health, and the environment. Science
361: eaam5324.
Goldstein J (2018) Planetary Improvement: Cleantech
Entrepreneurship and the Contradictions of Green
Capitalism . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Good Food Institute (2019) State of the Industry Report:
Plant-Based Meat, Eggs, and Dairy . Washington DC:
Good Food Institute.
Goodman D (2004) Rural Europe redux? Re ﬂections on
alternative agro-food networks and paradigm change.Sociologia Ruralis 44(1): 3 –16.Sexton et al. 621
Goodman D, DuPuis EM and Goodman MK (2012) Al-
ternative Food Networks: Knowledge, Practice andPolitics . London: Routledge.
Goodman MK (2004) Reading fair trade: Political eco-
logical imaginary and the moral economy of fair tradefoods. Political Geography 23(7): 891 –915.
Goodman MK (2016) Food geographies I: Relational
foodscapes and the busy-ness of being more-than-food. Progress in Human Geography 40(2): 257 –266.
Goodman MK and Jaworska S (2020) Mapping digital
foodscapes: Digital food in ﬂuencers and the gram-
mars of good food. Geoforum 117: 183 –193.
Goodman MK and Sage C (2014) Food transgressions:
Ethics, governance and geographies. In: GoodmanMK and Sage C (eds). London: Routledge, pp. 1 –15.
Food Transgressions: Making Sense of ContemporaryFood Politics
Green K and Foster C (2005) Give peas a chance:
Transformations in food consumption and production
systems. Technological Forecasting & Social Change
72: 663 –679.
Greenebaum J (2012) Veganism, identity and the quest for
authenticity. Food, Culture & Society 15(1): 129 –144.
Greenebaum J and Dexter B (2018) Vegan men and
hybrid masculinity. Journal of Gender Studies 27(6):
637–648.
Guthman J (2003) Fast food/organic food: Re ﬂexive tastes
and the making of ’yuppie chow. Social & Cultural
Geography 4(1): 45 –58.
Guthman J (2008) Neoliberalism and the making of food
politics in California. Geoforum 39(3): 1171 –1183.
Guthman J and Biltekoff C (2020) Magical Disruption?
Alternative Protein and the Promise of De-materiali-
zation. Environment And Planning E: Nature and Space.
Hahn LK and Bruner MS (2012) Politics on your plate:
Building and burning bridges across organic, vege-tarian, and vegan discourse. In: Frye J and Bruner M(eds). London: Routledge, pp. 55 –70.The rhetoric of
food: Discourse, materiality and power
Hamilton AR (2020) The white unseen: On white su-
premacy and dangerous entanglements in geography.
Dialogues in Human Geography 10(3): 299 –303.
Hamilton C (2016) Sex, work, meat: The feminist politics
of veganism. Feminist Review 114(1): 112 –129.
Hannan J (2020) Meatsplaining: The Animal Agriculture
Industry and the Rhetoric of Denial . Sydney: Sydney
University Press.Harper AB (2010) Sistah Vegan: Black Female Vegans
Speak on Food, Identity, Health, and Society . New
York, NY: Lantern Books.
Harper AB (2011) Vegans of color, racialized embodiment,
and problematics of the “exotic ”. In: Alkon AH and
Agyeman J (eds). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
221–238. Cultivating food justice: Race, class, and
sustainability
Harper AB (2012) Going beyond the normative white
“post-racial ”vegan epistemology. In: Forson PW and
Counihan C (eds). New York, NY: Routledge, pp.
155–174. Taking food public: Rede ﬁning foodways in
a changing world
Harper A. B. (2016) Doing veganism differently: Ra-
cialized trauma and the personal journey towards
vegan healing. In: Hayes-Conroy A and Hayes-
Conroy J (eds). Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 133 –148.
Doing Nutrition Differently: Critical Approaches to
Diet and Dietary Intervention
Harris E (2009) Neoliberal subjectivities or a politics of the
possible? Reading for difference in alternative food
networks. Area 41(1): 55 –63.
Hayes-Conroy A and Hayes-Conroy J (2008) Taking back
taste: Feminism, food and visceral politics. Gender,
Place and Culture 15(5Hayes-Conroy A and Martin
DG (2010) Mobilising bodies: visceral identi ﬁcation in
the Slow Food movement. Transactions of the Institute
of British Geographers 35(2): 461269 –473281.
Head L and Atchison J (2016) Ingrained: A Human Bio-
Geography of Wheat . London: Routledge.
Henderson S (2018) Chris Hemsworth ’s new vegan diet is
saving the world. Men ’s Health . Available at: https://
www.menshealth.com.au/chris-hemsworth-vegan-diet
(accessed 25 January 2021).
Heyes CJ (2006) Foucault goes to weight watchers. Hy-
patia 21(2): 126 –149.
Hodge P, McGregor A, Narayan Y, et al (2021) Vegan
Geographies: Spaces beyond Violence, Ethics beyond
Speciesism .
Holloway L, Kneafsey M, Venn L, et al (2007) Possible
food economies: a methodological framework for
exploring food production –consumption relation-
ships. Sociologia Ruralis 47(1): 1 –19.
Holmes SM (2013) Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies: Migrant
Farmworkers in the United States . Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.622 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
Hooker L (2018) Tesco Aims to Make Dough Out of
Fashion for Veganism, BBC, 10 January 2018.Available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-
42619887 (accessed 25 January 2021).
House J (2018) Insects as food in the Netherlands: Pro-
duction networks and the geographies of edibility.Geoforum 94: 82 –93.
Hulme A (2017) Following the (unfollowable) thing:
methodological considerations in the era of highglobalisation. cultural Geographies 24(1): 157 –160.
Iacobbo K and Iacobbo M (2004) Vegetarian America: A
History . Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group.
Jackson P (2015) Anxious appetites: Food and consumer
culture, Vol. 2 . London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Jackson P, Evans D, Truninger M, et al (2020) Tasting as a
social practice: A methodological experiment in makingtaste public. Social & Cultural Geography 25: 1 –18.
Jha DN (2004) The Myth of the Holy Cow . New York, NY:
Verso Books.
Johnson H (2019) From ’meat culture ’to’cultured meat ’:
Critically evaluating the contested ontologies andtransformative potential of biofabricated animal ma-terial on culture and law. M/C Journal 22(2): 1 –5.
Johnston J (2008) The citizen-consumer hybrid: Ideolog-
ical tensions and the case of Whole Foods Market.Theory and Society 37(3): 229 –270.
Johnston J and Goodman MK (2015) Spectacular food-
scapes: Food celebrities and the politics of lifestylemediation in an age of inequality. Food, Culture &
Society 18(2): 205 –222.
Johnston J, Szabo M and Rodney A (2011) Good food,
good people: Understanding the cultural repertoire ofethical eating. Journal of Consumer Culture 11(3):
293–318.
Jones N (2019) Dying to Eat? Black Food Geographies of
Slow Violence and Resilience. ACME: An International
Journal for Critical Geographies 18(5): 1076 –1099.
J¨onsson E (2016) Benevolent technotopias and hitherto
unimaginable meats: Tracing the promises of in vitromeat. Social Studies of Science 46(5): 725 –748.
J¨onsson E, Linn ´e T and McCrow-Young A (2019) Many
meats and many milks? The ontological politics of aproposed post-animal revolution. Science As Culture
28(1): 70 –97.
J¨onsson E (2020) On breweries and bioreactors: Probing the
“present futures ”of cellular agriculture. Transactions
of the Institute of British Geographers
45(4): 921 –936.Joy M (2011) Why We Love Dogs, Eat Pigs, and Wear
Cows: An Introduction to Carnism . Newburyport,
MA: Red Wheel/Weiser.
Kimura AH (2013) Hidden Hunger: Gender and the
Politics of Smarter Foods . Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
Kleine D (2008) Negotiating partnerships, understanding
power: doing action research on Chilean Fairtrade winevalue chains. Geographical Journal 174(2): 109 –123.
Kneafsey M, Maye D, Holloway L, et al (2021) Geogra-
phies of Food: An Introduction . London: Bloomsbury.
Krzywoszynska A (2020) Nonhuman labor and the making
of resources: Making soils a resource through mi-crobial labor. Environmental Humanities 12(1):
227–249.
Krzywoszynska A and Marchesi G (2020) Towards a re-
lational materiality of soils. Introduction to the specialissue “Conceiving soils and humans in the Anthro-
pocene ”.Environmental Humanities 12(1): 190 –204.
Lang T and Heasman M (2015) Food Wars: The Global
Battle for Mouths, Minds and Markets . London:
Routledge.
Law J and Mol A (2008) Globalisation in practice: On the
politics of boiling pigswill. Geoforum 39(1): 133 –143.
Leneman L (1999) No animal food: the road to veganism in
Britain, 1909-1944. Society & Animals 7(3): 219 –228.
Little A (2018) Tyson Isn ’t Chicken. Bloomberg Busi-
nessweek. Available at: https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/features/2018-08-15/tyson-s-quest-to-be-your-
one-stop-protein-shop . (accessed 21 June 2021)
Lockie S and Kitto S (2000) Beyond the farm gate: pro-
duction-consumption networks and agri-food re-search. Sociologia Ruralis 40(1): 3 –19.
Lockie S (2013) Bastions of white privilege? Re ﬂections
on the racialization of alternative food networks. The
International Journal of Sociology of Agriculture andFood 20(3): 409 –418.
Lockwood A (2018) Bodily Encounter, Bearing Witness
and the Engaged Activism of the Global SaveMovement. Animal Studies Journal 7(1): 104 –126.
Longhurst R, Ho E and Johnston L (2008) Using ‘the body ’
as an ‘instrument of research ’: Kimch ’i and pavlova.
Area 40(2): 208 –
217.
Lonkila A and Kaljonen M (2021) Promises of Meat and
Milk Alternatives: An Integrative Literature Reviewon Emergent Research themes. Agriculture and Hu-
man Values 38: 625 –639.Sexton et al. 623
Loyer J and Knight C (2018) Selling the “Inca superfood ”:
Nutritional primitivism in superfoods books and macamarketing. Food, Culture & Society 21(4): 449 –467.
Mammoser G (2016) Why the meat factories of the future
will look like breweries. Vice. Available at: https://www.
vice.com/en/article/nzk43b/why-the-meat-factories-of-the-future-will-look-like-breweries (accessed 25 Janu-
ary 2021).
Mans ﬁeld B (2003) Spatializing globalization: A “geog-
raphy of quality ”in the seafood industry. Economic
Geography 79(1): 1 –16.
Mans ﬁeld B (2012) Environmental health as biosecurity:
“Seafood choices, ”risk, and the pregnant woman as
threshold. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 102(5): 969 –976.
Martin E (2019) Veganism, Race, and Soul Food: Eval-
uating Reproductions of Race in Vegan Spaces .
Wellesley College, US: Thesis.
Maurer D (2002) Vegetarianism: Movement or Moment?
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Maye D, Kneafsey M and Holloway L (2007) Introducing
alternative food geographi es. In: Maye D, Holloway L
and Kneafsey M (eds). Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 1 –20.Al-
ternative food geographies: representation and practice
McCarthy J and Dekoster S (2020) Nearly one in four in
U.S. have cut back on eating meat. Gallup. Available at:https://news.gallup.com/poll/282779/nearly-one-four-cut-back-eating-meat.aspx (accessed 25 January 2021).
Michail N (2018) Unilever Accelerates its ‘plant-Based
Journey ’with Vegetarian Butcher Buyout. FoodNa-
vigator.Com. Available at: https://www.foodnavigator.
com/Article/2018/12/20/Unilever-accelerates-its-plant-
based-journey-with-Vegetarian-Butcher-buyout (ac-
cessed 22 January 2021).
Milburn J (2016) Animal rights and food: Beyond Regan,
beyond vegan. In: Rawlinson M and Ward C (eds).London: Routledge, pp. 284 –294. The Routledge
Handbook of Food Ethics
Minkoff-Zern LA (2014) Knowing “good food ”: Immi-
grant knowledge and the racial politics of farmworker
food insecurity. Antipode 46(5): 1190 –1204.
Mintz SW (1986) Sweetness and Power: The Place of
Sugar in Modern History . New York, NY: Penguin
Books.
Monaghan A (2019) Greggs ’Vegan Sausage Rolls Fuel
Proﬁt Boom . The Guardian. Available at: https://www.
theguardian.com/business/2019/may/14/greggs-vegan-sausage-rolls-fuel-pro ﬁt-boom (accessed 22 January
2021).
Morris C and Kirwan J (2006) Vegetarians: uninvited,
uncomfortable or special guests at the table of thealternative food economy? Sociologia Ruralis 46(3):
192–213.
Morris C, Mylan J and Beech E (2018) Substitution and
food system de-animalisation: the case of non-dairy
milk. International Journal of Sociology of Agricul-
ture and Food 25(1): 490 –506.
Morris C, Kaljonen M, Aavik K, et al (2021) Priorities for
social science and humanities research on the chal-lenges of moving beyond animal-based food systems.Humanities and Social Sciences Communications
8(1): 1 –12.
Mouat MJ and Prince R (2018) Cultured meat and cowless
milk: On making markets for animal-free food.Journal of Cultural Economy 11(4): 315 –329.
Mouat MJ, Prince R and Roche MM (2019) Making value
out of ethics: the emerging economic geography oflab-grown meat and other animal-free food products.
Economic Geography 95(2): 136 –158.
Mylan J, Morris C, Beech E, et al (2019) Rage against the
regime: niche-regime interactions in the societalembedding of plant-based milk. Environmental In-
novation and Societal Transitions 31: 233 –247.
Nicholls WJ (2007) The geographies of social movements.
Geography Compass 1(3): 607 –622.
Nguyen S (2017) The Rise of Vegan Culture . Harvard
Magazine. Available at: https://harvardmagazine.com/
2017/07/the-rise-of-vegan-culture (accessed 22 Jan-
uary 2021).
Oliver C (2020) Beyond-human research: Negotiating
silence, anger & failure in multispecies worlds.
Emotion, Space and Society 35: 100686.
Palumbo L and Sciurba A (2015) Vulnerability to forced
labour and traf ﬁcking: The case of Romanian women
in the agricultural sector in Sicily. Anti-Traf ﬁcking
Review 5: 89 –108.
Parker J (2018) The Year of the Vegan. The World in 2019 .
The Economist.
PBFA (2018) Retail Sales Data 2018. Plant Based Foods
Association . Available at: https://www.plantbased
foods.org/marketplace/retail-sales-data-2018/ (accessed
17 August 2021).
Pendergrast N (2016) Environmental concerns and the
mainstreaming of veganism. In: Raphaely T and624 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
Marinova D (eds). Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp.
106–122. Impact of Meat Consumption on Health and
Environmental Sustainability
Phillipov M and Goodman MK (2017) The celebri ﬁcation
of farmers: celebrity and the new politics of farming.
Celebrity Studies 8(2): 346 –350.
Pickerill J and Chatterton P (2006) Notes towards au-
tonomous geographies: creation, resistance and self-management as survival tactics. Progress in human
geography 30(6): 730 –746.
Piper K (2019a) The unlikely partnership that might decide
the future of meat. Vox. Available at: https://www.
vox.com/future-perfect/2019/3/22/18273892/tyson-
vegan-vegetarian-lab-meat-climate-change-animals
(accessed 25 January 2021).
Piper K (2019b) Meatless meat is becoming mainstream —
and it ’s sparking backlash. Vox. Available at: https://
www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/10/7/20880318/
meatless-meat-mainstream-backlash-impossible-burger
(accessed 25 January 2021).
Polish J (2016) Decolonizing veganism: On resisting vegan
whiteness and racism. In: Castricano J and Simonsen R
(eds). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 373 –391.
Critical Perspectives on Veganism. The Palgrave
Macmillan Animal Ethics Series
Poore J and Nemecek T (2018) Reducing food ’s envi-
ronmental impacts through producers and consumers.Science 360(6392): 987 –992.
Priestley A, Lingo SK and Royal P (2016) “The worst
offense here is the misrepresentation ”:Thug Kitchen
and contemporary vegan discourse. In: Castricano J
and Simonsen R (eds). Cham: Palgrave Macmillan,
pp. 349 –371. Critical Perspectives on Veganism. The
Palgrave Macmillan Animal Ethics Series
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil:
Technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 691 –716.
Ram´ırez MM (2015) The elusive inclusive: Black food
geographies and racialized food spaces. Antipode
47(3): 748 –769.
Randall TE (2018) Heganism. Between the Species 22(1):
214–235.
Rebanks J (2020) English Pastoral: An Inheritance .
London: Penguin Books.
Reed M (2001) Fight the future! How the contemporary
campaigns of the UK organic movement have arisenfrom their composting of the past. Sociologia Ruralis
41(1): 131 –145.
Reed S (2020) “
Part-time ”Vegans Are on the Rise –And
“Real”Vegans Are Mad about it. InStyle . 3 March 2020.
Available at: https://www.instyle .com/beauty/health-
ﬁtness/vegans-mad-p art-time-vegans (accessed 22 Jan-
uary 2021).
Reese AM (2019) Black Food Geographies: Race, Self-
Reliance, and Food Access . Washington, DC: Chapel
HillUNC Press Books.
Regan T (1983) The Case for Animal Rights . Berkeley, CA:
The University of California Press.
Roe EJ (2006a) Things becoming food and the embodied,
material practices of an organic food consumer. So-
ciologia Ruralis 46(2): 104 –121.
Roe EJ (2006b) Material connectivity, the immaterial and
the aesthetic of eating practices: an argument for howgenetically modi ﬁed foodstuff becomes inedible.
Environment and Planning A 38(3): 465 –481.
Roe EJ (2018) Sun ’s Out, Buns Out: Exploring the alfresco
ritual of meat, ﬁre, man ’s work, and sustainability.
Global Food Security. Available at: https://www.
foodsecurity.ac.uk/blog/suns-out-buns-out-exploring-the-alfresco-ritual-of-meat- ﬁre-mans-work-and-
sustainability/ (accessed 25 January 2021).
Rose DC and Chilvers J (2018) Agriculture 4.0: Broad-
ening responsible innovation in an era of smart
farming. Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems
2(87): 1 –7.
Schneider T, Eli K, Dolan C, et al (eds) (2017). London:
Routledge. Digital food activism
Serrano A and Brooks A (2019) Who is left behind in
global food systems? Local farmers failed by Co-lombia ’s avocado boom. Environment and Planning
E: Nature and Space 2(2): 348 –367.
Sexton A (2016) Alternative proteins and the (non) stuff of
“meat ”.Gastronomica: The Journal of Critical Food
Studies 16(3): 66 –78.
Sexton AE (2018) Eating for the post-Anthropocene:
Alternative proteins and the biopolitics of edibility.
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers
43(4): 586 –600.
Sexton AE (2020) Food as Software: Place, Protein, and
Feeding the World Silicon Valley-style . Economic
Geography.
Sexton AE, Garnett T and Lorimer J (2019) Framing the
future of food: The contested promises of alternativeSexton et al. 625
proteins. Environment and Planning E: Nature and
Space 2(1): 47 –72.
Sharman J (2019) Sheep Farmer Felt So Guilty on Way to
Slaughterhouse He Drove Lambs to Sanctuary andBecame Vegetarian. Independent. Available at:
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/
sheep-farmer-vegetarian-lambs-sanctuary-slaughter-
meat-industry-dairy-devon-a8754056.html (accessed
25 January 2021).
Shiva V (1993) Monocultures of the Mind: Perspectives on
Biodiversity and Biotechnology . London: Zed Books.
Shoup ME (2019) Euromonitor: What ’s the driving force
behind plant-based eating? Foodnavigator.com .A v a i l -
able at: https://www.foodnavigator-usa.com/Article/
2019/05/17/Euromonitor-What-s-the-driving-force-
behind-plant-based-eating (accessed 22 January 2021).
Si Z, Schumilas T and Scott S (2015) Characterizing al-
ternative food networks in China. Agriculture and
Human Values 32(2): 299 –313.
Singer R (2017) Neoliberal backgrounding, the Meatless
Monday Campaign, and the rhetorical intersections of
food, nature, and cultural identity. Communication,
Culture and Critique 10(2): 344 –364.
Slocum R (2011) Race in the study of food. Progress in
Human Geography 35(3): 303 –327.
Slocum R and Cadieux KV (2015) Notes on the practice of
food justice in the US: understanding and confronting
trauma and inequity. Journal of Political Ecology
22(27): 27 –52.
Slocum R and Saldanha A (eds) (2016). London: Rout-
ledge. Geographies of race and food: Fields, bodies,
markets
Smaje C (2020) A small farm future: Making the case for a
society built around local economies, self-provi-
sioning, agricultural diversity and a shared earth .
London: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Smart A (2004) Adrift in the mainstream: Challenges
facing the UK vegetarian movement. British Food
Journal 106(2): 79 –92.
Smithers R (2019) Veganuary Ends on Record High with
250,000 Participants. The Guardian. Available at:
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/jan/
31/veganuary-record-high-participants-plant-based(accessed 22 January 2021).
Sneijder P and Te Molder HF (2004) ‘Health should not
have to be a problem ’: Talking health andaccountability in an internet forum on veganism.
Journal of Health Psychology 9(4): 599 –616.
Sonnino R and Marsden T (2006) Beyond the divide:
rethinking relationships between alternative andconventional food networks in Europe. Journal of
Economic Geography 6(2): 181 –199.
Spencer C (1996) The Heretic ’s Feast: A History of Veg-
etarianism . Lebanon, NH: UPNE.
Staples J (2020) Sacred Cows and Chicken Manchurian:
The Everyday Politics of Eating Meat in India . Se-
attle, WA: University of Washington Press.
Stephens N (2013) Growing meat in laboratories: The
promise, ontology, and ethical boundary-work of
using muscle cells to make food. Conﬁgurations
21(2): 159 –181.
Stephens N and Ruivenkamp M (2016) Promise and on-
tological ambiguity in the in vitro meat imagescape:
From laboratory myotubes to the cultured burger.
Science As Culture 25(3): 327 –355.
Stephens N, Di Silvio L, Dunsford I, et al (2018) Bringing
cultured meat to market: Technical, socio-political,
and regulatory challenges in cellular agriculture.
Trends in Food Science and Technology 78: 155 –166.
Stephens N, Sexton AE and Driessen C (2019) Making
sense of making meat: Key moments in the ﬁrst 20
years of tissue engineering muscle to make food.
Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems 3(45): 1 –16.
Stephens N (2021) Join our team, change the world: Ed-
ibility, producibility and food futures in cultured meat
company recruitment videos. Food, Culture & Society
11: 1 –17.
Stilgoe J (2019) Who ’s driving innovation? New tech-
nologies and the collaborative state . Cham, Swit-
zerland: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Stuckler D and Nestle M (2012) Big Food, Food Systems,
and Global Health. PLoS Med 9(6): e1001242.
Tasker J (2020) Farming faces mental health crisis, warns
charity. Farmers Weekly . Available at: https://www.
fwi.co.uk/business/business-management/health-and-
safety/farming-faces-mental- health-crisis-warns-charity
(accessed 25 January 2021).
Taylor N and Fraser H (2017) Slaughterhouses: The
Language of Life, the Discourse of Death. In: Maher
J, Pierpoint H and Beirne P (eds). London: Palgrave
Macmillan. The Palgrave International Handbook of
Animal Abuse Studies626 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
The Game Changers (2019) Louie Psihoyos. Dir . USA:
OPS Productions and ReFuel Productions. [Film].
Tulloch LK (2018) An Auto-ethnography of Anti-dairy
Vegan Activism in New Zealand. Animal Studies
Journal 7(2): 180 –214.
Twine R (2014a) Vegan killjoys at the table: Contesting
happiness and negotiating relationships with food
practices. Societies 4(4): 623 –639.
Twine R (2014b) Ecofeminism and veganism: Revisiting the
question of universalism. In: Adams CJ and Gruen L(eds). Ecofeminism: Feminist intersections with other
animals and the earth . New York: Bloomsbury, 191 –209.
Tziva M, Negro SO, Kalfagianni A, et al (2020) Under-
standing the protein transition: The rise of plant-based
meat substitutes. Environmental Innovation and So-
cietal Transitions 35: 217 –231.
V´eron O (2016) From Seitan Bourguignon to Tofu Blanquette:
Popularizing veganism in France with food blogs. In:Castricano J and Simonsen R (eds). Cham: PalgraveMacmillan, pp. 287 –305. Critical Perspectives on Veg-
anism. The Palgrave Macmillan Animal Ethics Series
Vialles N (1994) Animal to Edible . Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Waldstein A (2016) Studying the body in Rastafari rituals:
Spirituality, embodiment and ethnographic knowledge.
Journal for the Study of Religious Experience 2(1): 71 –86.
Warkentin T (2010) Interspecies etiquette: An ethics of
paying attention to animals. Ethics & the Environment
15(1): 101 –121.
Warkentin T (2012) Must every animal studies scholar be
vegan? Special Issue: Animal Others, Invited Sym-posium: Feminists Encountering Animals. Hypatia:
Journal of Feminist Philosophy 27(3): 499 –504.
Watts DCH, Ilbery B and Maye D (2005) Making re-
connections in agro-food geography: Alternativesystems of food provision. Progress in Human Ge-
ography 29(1): 22 –40.
Welch D, Swaf ﬁeld J and Evans D (2018) Who ’s re-
sponsible for food waste? Consumers, retailers andthe food waste discourse coalition in the United
Kingdom. Journal of Consumer Culture : 13: 1 –21.
Werkheiser I (2013) Domination and consumption: An
examination of veganism, anarchism, and ecofemi-nism. PhaenEx 8(2): 161 –184.
Whatmore S (2006) Materialist returns: practising cultural
geography in and for a more-than-human world.Cultural Geographies 13(4): 600 –609.Whatmore S, Stassart P and Renting H (2003) What ’s
alternative about alternative food networks? Envi-
ronment and Planning A 35: 389
–391.
White N (2020) The Protein CompanyTM: Meeting the
world ’s appetite. Tyson Foods: The Feed Blog.
Available at: https://thefeed.blog/2020/02/26/tyson-
foods-protein-company-feeding-the-world/ (accessed
21 June 2021).
White R (2015) Animal geographies, anarchist praxis, and
critical animal studies. In: Gillespie K and CollardR-C (eds). London: Routledge, pp. 31 –47.Critical
animal geographies: Politics, intersections, and hi-
erarchies in a multispecies world
White R and Cudworth E (2014) Taking It to the Streets:
Challenging Systems of Domination from Below.Counterpoints 448: 202 –219.
White RJ (2017) Rising to the challenge of capitalism and
the commodi ﬁcation of animals: Post-capitalism,
anarchist economies and vegan praxis. In: Nibert D(ed), Westport, CT: Praeger. Animal Oppression and
Capitalism
White RJ (2018) Looking backward/moving forward.
Articulating a “Yes, BUT! ”response to lifestyle
veganism, and outlining post-capitalist futures incritical veganic agriculture. EuropeNow 20: 1 –13.
Wilson AD (2013) Beyond alternative: Exploring the
potential for autonomous food spaces. Antipode
45(3): 719 –737.
Wilson B (2019) The trouble with fake meat. The Guardian .
Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/food/2019/
jan/27/the-trouble-with-fake-meat-beetroot-burgers-food-substitutes (accessed 25 January 2021).
Wilson M and Jackson P (2016) Fairtrade bananas in the
Caribbean: Towards a moral economy of recognition.Geoforum 70: 11 –21.
Winter M (2003) Embeddedness, the new food economy
and defensive localism. Journal of Rural Studies
19(1): 23 –32.
Wrenn CL (2011) Resisting the globalization of species-
ism: Vegan abolitionism as a site for consumer-based
social change. Journal for Critical Animal Studies
9(3): 9 –27.
Wrenn CL (2017) Trump veganism: A political survey of
American vegans in the era of identity politics. So-
cieties 7(4): 32 –45.Sexton et al. 627
Wright L (2015) The Vegan Studies Project: Food, Ani-
mals, and Gender in the Age of Terror . Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press.
Young S (2020) ‘Meat of the Future ’: KFC Is Developing
the World ’s First Lab-Grown Chicken Nuggets .I n -
dependent. Available at: https://www.independent.
co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/kfc-lab-grown-chicken-
nuggets-biomeat-3d-bioprinting-russia-a9629671.html
(accessed 25 January 2021).
Author biographies
Alex E Sexton is a Leverhulme Trust Early Career
Research Fellow in Geography at the University ofShefﬁeld. Her research examines the geographies,
politics and histories of food innovation, with a focuson cell-cultured and plant-based alternatives to an-imal-derived products. She is a Council Member of
the Food Ethics Council and a co-founder of Cul-
tivate, a multi-voiced forum that supports informeddiscussion of cellular agriculture and its implications
for food and society in the UK.
Tara Garnett is director of TABLE, a collaboration
between the University of Oxford, the SwedishUniversity of Agricultural Sciences and WageningenUniversity and Research. TABLE explores the evi-dence, assumptions, and values underpinning dif-ferent viewpoints on food systems controversiesthrough processes of dialogue, stakeholder engage-ment and analysis, its goal being to understand how
and why people disagree and where possible, to
identify areas of commonality.
Jamie Lorimer is Professor of Environmental Ge-
ography at the University of Oxford. His research
examines popular and scienti ﬁc understandings of
nature and the politics of managing biological life.Past projects have crossed scales from elephants tomicrobes, including relations of conservation, healthand agriculture.628 Progress in Human Geography 46(2)
