Article
Progress in Human Geography
2022, Vol. 46(1) 44 –66
© The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/03091325211054966
journals.sagepub.com/home/phgWeeds in action: Vegetal political
ecology of unwanted plants
Luc´ıa Argüelles 
Estudis d ’Economia i Empresa & Internet Interdisciplinary Institute (IN3), Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
Hug March 
Estudis d ’Economia i Empresa & Internet Interdisciplinary Institute (IN3), Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
This paper presents a vegetal political ecology of weeds. Weeds have barely been analysed in the burgeoning
ﬁeld of ‘more-than-human ’scholarship, this despite their ubiquity and considerable impact on human social
life. We review how geographical scholarship has represented weeds ’material and political status: mostly as
invasive plants, annoying species in private gardens and spontaneous vegetation in urbanized landscapes.Then, bringing together weed science, agronomic science and the critical geography of agriculture, we showhow weeds ecology, weeds management and the environmental problems which weeds are entangled havecritically shaped the industrial agriculture paradigm. Three main arguments emerging from our analysis openup new research avenues: weeds ’disruptive character might shape our understanding of human-plant
relationships; human-weeds relation in agriculture have non-trivial socio-economic and political implications;
and more-than-human approaches, such as vegetal political ecology, might challenge dominant modes of
considering and practicing agriculture.
Keywords
weeds, agriculture, more-than-human, vegetal political ecology, invasive plants, pesticides
I Introduction
Social scientists have explored how plants are ac-
tively present in different settings and how the bi-
ological characteristics of plants become essentialplayers in human social life ( Hall, 2011 ;Head and
Atchison, 2009 ;Hitchings, 2003 ;Jones and Cloke,
2002 ;Whatmore, 2002 ). Those characteristics or
material performances, what ’s been referred to as
plantiness ( Head et al., 2012 ), become entangled in
the more-than-human social life, and thus ‘become
capable of affecting, displacing and transforming
human bodies and conduct ’(Brice, 2014 : 946). Forexample, urban trees can act as relatively autono-
mous material presences shifting through time,
identity and place con ﬁguration ( Jones and Cloke,
2008 ). The lawn beauti ﬁes and shapes the meaning
of American backyards and their gardeners ’sub-
jectivities when taking care of it ( Robbins, 2007 ). In
Corresponding author:
Lucia Arguelles, Estudis d ’Economia i Empresa, Universitat
Oberta de Catalunya, Avda. Tibidabo 39-43, Barcelona 08035,Spain.Email: larguellesr@uoc.edu

the agriculture realm, certain crops have been studied
through this lens: cereal grains ’particular qualities,
of being legible and taxable, have been instrumentalin state-making projects ( Scott, 2017 ). On the con-
trary, cereals and other crops can be considered‘escape crops ’, that is, partly ungovernable due to
characteristics that allow them to be hidden or to
grow quickly ( Scott, 2000 ). In Paraguay, soya beans
led to regime change and a subsequent institutionalarrangement to govern them, under the pressure ofsocial movements claiming ‘la soja mata ’(soya kills)
(Hetherington, 2020a ). At a different scale, fruit
ripening can ‘precipitate a radical change in the
tempo of working and social life ’for the human
actors involved at farms ( Brice, 2014 : 951).
Inspired by plant geographies, we focus on weeds,
sparsely considered in more-than-human scholarshipdespite their ubiquity and considerable impact onhuman social life. Traditionally, weeds are de ﬁned as
‘herbaceous plant[s], not valued for use or beauty,
growing wild and rank, and regarded as cumberingthe ground or hindering the growth of superior veg-etation ’(Harlan, 2012 quoting the Oxford English
Dictionary). What makes a plant a weed is its unde-
sirable presence in human activities (social de ﬁnition)
and its capacity to propagate (ecological de ﬁnition).
Weeds ’‘biologically intimate ’relation with humans
(Harlan and De Wet, 1965 )i sr e ﬂected in the diverse
human interactions with these plants, whether inhumans surveying them, using them for aestheticalreasons, eating them, hoeing them or spraying them
with herbicides. The central argument of this paper is that
the interests and tensions over weeds ’management and
control, derived from weeds ’outstanding biological
capabilities, are at the heart of environmental politics atdifferent locales and scales. At the same time, suchdynamics contribute in fundamental ways to our un-derstanding of human-non-human relations.
From cultural geography to environmental an-
thropology through landscape research, weeds have
been mainly studied in their form as invasive or alienplants (e.g. Atchison and Head, 2013 ;Head and Muir,
2004 ;Robbins, 2004a ). In urban areas, weeds have
also attracted the attention of social scientists, forexample, as desired targets for urban foragers(McLain et al., 2014 ;Nyman, 2019 ;Poe et al., 2014 )
or as disturbing signs of abandonment ( Brownlow,2006 ;Falck, 2016 ;Patrick, 2014 ). In addition,
scholars studying human-plant relations in privategardens have often encountered weeds in gardeners ’
narratives ( Power, 2005 ;Robbins, 2007 ;
Sander-
Regier, 2009 ). Surprisingly, weeds in agriculture
have remained unexplored by critical geographicalscholarship even though they are cross-cutting to
many crucial dimensions studied in the ﬁeld–
biodiversity, soil erosion, debt, labour, pesticides orenvironmental governance and policy.
In the light of these gaps, in this paper, we develop
a vegetal political ecology of unwanted plants, at-tending to weeds ’worldmaking capabilities, with a
particular focus on agriculture but also tracing therole of weeds more broadly in human-nature rela-
tionships. While political ecology has paid increasing
attention to the active contributions of non-humans toenvironmental politics (such as Bakker, 1999 ;Barua,
2014 ;Jones et al., 2019 ;Kaika, 2004 ;Lyons, 2020 ;
Phillips, 2020 ;Sundberg, 2011 ), the agency of plants
has been largely neglected (with some notable ex-ceptions such as Robbins (2007) orHetherington,
2020a ). The scant scholarship on vegetal politics
(Head et al., 2014 ), exploring the role of plants ’
unique capacities in more-than-human geographies,in settings such as private gardens where particular,and quieter, politics are at play (e.g. Bhatti, 2006 ;
Hitchings, 2003 ;Power, 2005 ;Sander-Regier, 2009 ).
Consequently, Fleming has called for a ‘vegetal po-
litical ecology ’, considering ‘the impacts of plantiness
on human-plant encounters, like vegetal politics does,
but that further links this impact to resource politics
and other broader environmental contestations, likepolitical ecology does ’(Fleming, 2017 :2 7 ) .B y
paying attention to the impact of plants ’biological
characteristics on power-laden structures, this frame-work can bring the ecology to the front of politicalecology ( Turner, 2016 ;Walker, 2005 ).
The article proceeds as follows: Section II ex-
plains the nature and value of a political ecology
approach to weeds. Section III reviews weeds ’po-
litical relations as alien plants, as spontaneous veg-etation in urban areas and their fringes and as plantcompanions to hobby gardeners. Section IV contributesto the human-weeds scholarship by analysing weedsas a pervasive element in ind ustrial agriculture. We
consider the relations between weeds ’ecology, weeds ’Argüelles and March 45
management, the agrarian economy that weeds force,
and core environmental problems which they are en-tangled with (pesticide pollution, biodiversity loss and soilerosion). In section V, we discuss the contribution of thisvegetal political ecology of weeds along three threads ofdiscussion. These relate to the ways weeds can shape ourunderstanding of human-plant relationships, the centrality
of weeds in agriculture, and the opportunity to expand
more-than-human perspectives in agriculture. Last, weconclude by calling for new ways of thinking about
weeds and withweeds, paying attention to the barriers that
weeds impose and the interests that try to overcome those.
II Political ecology and weeds
Weed science studies weeds ’biological characteristics
and strategies to manage them ( Anderson, 1996 ;
Hatcher and Froud-Williams, 2017 ;Zimdahl, 2018 ;
Ziska and Dukes, 2011 ). Among the former, the
following is noteworthy: Weeds are highly repro-ductive. The number of seeds produced by a singleweed can be in the hundreds of thousands. Moreover,weeds have highly effective seed dispersal mecha-
nisms, from wind to animals, making them mobile and
difﬁcult to contain. Some are also capable of re-
producing underground by rhizomes. Weeds ’seeds
are capable of staying dormant in the soil for morethan 5 years. They germinate with changes in sunlight,humidity, pH, or oxygen, but particular adaptationsprevent them from germinating simultaneously. Theseadaptations of weeds demand long-term weeding
strategies rather than one-shot solutions. Moreover,
weeds are capable of evolving traits to survive harmfulstresses such as drought. Other weeds have developedmultiple mechanisms that can confer resistance tochemical herbicides.
These outstanding biological capabilities have
signiﬁcant consequences for human social life, cre-
ating interests and tensions over weeds ’management
and control. However, the disciplines studying weeds
interactions in human systems –primarily plants and
weed science, invasive plant science and agronomicscience –have mainly focused on weeds ’biological
characteristics and forms of containing them, leavingaside possible political implications (but see Kull, 2018 ;
Sumberg and Thompson, 2012 ). Political ecology, as
a cross-disciplinary framework for the study ofhuman-nature interactions, has historically politicised
human-plants interactions in ﬁelds such as forestry
resources (e.g. Springate-Baginski and Blaikie, 2014 ),
land degradation (e.g. Blaikie and Brook ﬁeld, 1987 ),
or biodiversity conservation (e.g. Vandermeer and
Perfecto, 2013 ). Concerning the latter, this includes
understanding how capitalism disciplining of nature
selects what is useful for its exchange value and
eliminates what is useless for capital accumulation(Giraldo, 2019 ). In addition, political ecology has
been used to unpack the social and material pro-duction of nature in cities or peri-urban environments,including parks (e.g. Argüelles et al., 2021 ), urban
gardens ( Calvet-Mir and March, 2019 ), or farmers ’
markets (e.g. Alkon, 2013 ). Part of this unpacking
relates to the study of how environmental narratives
are constructed and which effects they have on envi-ronmental change. For example, weeds (as a catego-risation used to describe and order nature) re ﬂect a
particular construction of the environment, bringing
further consequences to environmental governance.Last, political ecology recognises the interconnected-ness between spaces and scales and ecological, socio-
economic and political realms ( Guthman, 2019 ;Tsing,
2015 ). In the case of weeds, this is central, as we will
see in the next section.
With this lens, political ecology work on weeds
has mainly been an attempt to unpack ‘when and how
the quotidian movements of plants and processes ofecological and attendant social change –that is, their
occurrence and spread across landscapes –become
phenomena characterised as weeds or weed inva-
sions and thereby objects of contention and control ’
(Kull and Rangan, 2015 : 487, see also Binimelis
et al., 2009 ;Patrick, 2014 ;Robbins, 2007 ). The
vegetal political ecology lens ( Fleming, 2017 )w ea r e
undertaking in this paper focuses precisely on thosequotidian movements, on the spread across landscapes,to explain how weeds ’agency, or their more-than-
human capacities, gets entangled in the contentious
environmental politics around unwanted plants.
The following section reviews scholarship ex-
ploring weeds ’multiple connections in national bi-
osecurity programs, private gardens and urban andperi-urban greening programs, acknowledging thatthese interconnected realms have diffuse boundaries.As weed seeds travel across multiple spatialities,46 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
some of the dynamics, discourses and imaginaries
presented below are also trans-local.
III Current perspectives on
human-weeds relations
1 Weeds in national biosecurity plans
Invasive plant species have been equated to climate
change and soil erosion as major global threats(McGeoch et al., 2010 ;Vitousek et al., 1997 ). An in-
troduced plant species –accidentally or purposefully –
might change local ecosystems by consuming
groundwater, or making them more vulnerable to ﬁre
andﬂooding, ultimately causing important control and
eradication costs. While the phenomenon of invasionis not exclusively human-driven ( Mack et al., 2000 ), it
has intensi ﬁed by human mobility in the context of
global trade ( Hulme, 2009 ).
Invasiveness relates to three characteristics: ori-
gin, behaviour and impact ( Kull and Rangan, 2015 ).
The common narrative around invasive plants used
by conservation organisations and governmentssuggests that local plants are the victims of otherbiodiversity-threatening species. Massive amountsof funding and careers are supported by this narrative(Chew, 2015 ). The modern ﬁeld of invasion biology
has focused chie ﬂy on species and neglect the pro-
cesses favouring invasion ( Kull, 2018 ). However, a
more critical stand re ﬂects on how the status and
identi ﬁcation of any species as an invader, weed or
exotic are conditioned by structural circumstances,or, in other words, ‘it is not species, but sociobio-
logical networks that are invasive ’(Robbins, 2004a :
140).
Various social sciences accounts of invasive
species have drawn attention to the cultural bias on
the categorisations that underlay biosecurity programs
and expert knowledge, demanding a more pragmaticdamage assessment which is not only based onsupposedly straightforward ecological categorizations(Chew, 2015 ;Davis et al., 2011 ;Ernwein and Fall,
2015 ;Kull, 2018 ;Warren, 2007 ). For example,
classifying species as either ‘native ’or‘alien ’is one
of the organising principles of conservation. Still,the validity of this dualism has been questioned based
on, among others, the ‘ethical disjunction between the
promotion of a multicultural human society and thepersecution of “foreign ”species ’(Warren, 2007 :4 2 7 ) .
In other words, establishing plants ’categories based
on origin resonates with questions of national identityand exclusion of Others ( Alderman, 2004 ;
Foster and
Sandberg, 2004 ;Groening and Wolschke-Bulmahn,
2003 ;Olwig, 2003 , but see Mastnak et al., 2014 ,f o r
situating natives as the d isplaced plants from the
colonial era). Hence, the calls for widening ourtemporal perspectives to accept the new socio-natures,and maybe a post-wild world ( Collard et al., 2015 ;
Marris, 2013 ).
The application of instrumental and institutional ra-
tionality by the state apparatus to certain species pro-
duces ‘a scalar jump from weeds as a contextual, ﬁeld-
based relational perception by people-in-landscapes, to“Weeds-with-a-capital-W ”as a powerful and bureau-
cratic category ’(Kull and Rangan, 2015 : 491). In
Australia, species become ‘WoNS ’(currently 32 listed
on the Australian ‘Weeds of National Signi ﬁcance ’).
There are 36 species listed in the UK whose import,
breeding, or transportation are regulated by the state.
These are not isolated cases: from the 19
thcentury, as
part of the (agri)biopolitical effort ( Hetherington,
2020b ), the state deploys techniques, technologies and
discourses to assure invasive species are eradicated orcontrolled, usually through biosecurity programs that
work on public health, agricultural production andborders ( Atchison and Head, 2013 ;Barker, 2008 ;
Barker and Francis, 2021 ;Hinchliffe and Bingham,
2008 ). Scientists develop national invasive species
databases and complex weed risk assessment models.One discovery of weed control of ﬁcials patrolling
borders and ﬁelds can lead to ‘aircraft surveillance,
ministerial brie ﬁngs, DNA pro ﬁling, herbarium
collections, media releases, preparation of man-agement plans, and monitoring for the next twenty-
plus years ’(Lloyd and Vinnicombe, 2010 , cited in
Atchison and Head, 2013 : 958). Yet, homeowners
can‘perform weeds ’very differently when adopting
biosecurity measures in their gardens ( Doody et al.,
2014 , see also Head and Muir, 2004 ;Qvenild et al.,
2014 ).Argüelles and March 47
2 Weeds in private gardens
Human-plant scholars have particularly unpacked
the role of planty agencies (Head et al., 2012 ) in the
context of private gardens ( Bhatti, 2006 ;Hitchings,
2003 ;Longhurst, 2006 ;Power, 2005 ;Robbins, 2007 ;
Sander-Regier, 2009 ), often with ethnographic ap-
proaches in which people demonstrate everyday
embodied interactions with plants and weeds. Fromgardeners ’narratives, we know that ‘plants help es-
tablish, create and reaf ﬁrm people ’s hopes, needs and
desires, for example, for beautiful, tidy, or politicalgarden and the sense of place they associated with(….) It is in the midst of this dynamic relationship that
the practice of weeding is undertaken ’(Doody et al.,
2014 :1 2 7 ) .
The harmonious idea of people and plants
working together to produce gardens ( Bhatti, 2006 ;
Hitchings, 2003 ) can be disrupted when accounting
for how weeds can challenge, disrupt and unsettlepeople ’s visions and plans for their gardens ( Power,
2005 ). Weeding is also a social process, requiring
considerable mobilisation and investment of humanlabour ( Head and Muir, 2004 ;Sander-Regier, 2009 ).
Weeds are constantly experienced by gardeners,
creating dilemmas and forcing material practices thatoften confront established rules while troublingcitizens for having to choose how to deal with them(Doody et al., 2014 ;Head and Muir, 2004 ;Qvenild
et al., 2014 ;Robbins, 2007 ). The intimate relation of
gardeners with weeds leads to an appreciation forweeds ’ﬂuidity, beauty, or humour, questioning a
clear-cut de ﬁnition of weeds as undesirable ( Doody
et al., 2014 ;Sander-Regier, 2009 ).
A more structural view approaches the political
and socio-economic dynamics shaping human-weedsrelations in American backyards ( Robbins, 2007 ). For
example, Bormann et al. (2001) andRobbins and
Sharp (2009) point at how the chemical industry
played an essential role in the development of the
cultural ideal of a perfect ‘clean ’lawn and creating
demand for herbicides and other products. Thus,garden weeds are also the result of political-economicconditions under which that aesthetic is produced andpromulgated. Weeding gardens is not only an activitythat unites homeowners with their gardens but also apolitical act linked to the global agri-food industry(Robbins, 2007 ). In this regard, whether to weed or
not to weed emerge as the central issue of anti-lawn,
anti-(urban) monoculture movements in the Westernworld ( Robbins and Sharp, 2003 ).
Beyond urban and suburban private gardens,
weeds also inhabit gardens in urbanising rural en-vironments. For rural "amenity migrants" (non-
professional farmers), interacting with weeds is an
important part of their learning process towardsenvironmental stewardship ( Cooke and Lane, 2015 ;
Gill, 2014 ). Weeds also emphasise the need for
collective action and trust among this population,which might be especially self-interested when se-curing ecological qualities on their lands ( Cooke and
Lane, 2015 ;Graham, 2014 ). In turn, non-farming
rural migrants, performing land management
practices (e.g. weed management) in their proper-ties, shape rural ecologies in different ways. First,the fragmentation of the once agricultural space intosmaller parcels can complicate invasive species ’or
agricultural weeds ’control ( Klepeis et al., 2009 ).
Second, rural newcomers may be less familiar withecological management, less aware of local weed
species, and have less experience in practical land
management tasks such as weeding ( Cooke and
Lane, 2015 ;Curry et al., 2001 ).
3 Weeds in the urban and peri-urban ‘green ’
management
A recent post-humanism lens on urban environments
has focused on how ‘the vegetal ’adds new perspectives
to the politics of cities and urbanisation ( Gandy, 2013 ,
2019 ;Gandy and Jasper, 2019a ;Hinchliffe et al., 2005 ;
Hinchliffe and Whatmore, 2006 ;Tzaninis et al., 2020 ).
Such lens acknowledges that urban vegetal life isentangled to diverse dimensions of urban governance,such as municipal labour ( Ernwein, 2020 ;Heynen
et al., 2007 ;Krinsky and Simonet, 2017 ;Smith,
2020 ), class-based landscape relationships ( Foster,
2005 ;Patrick, 2014 ), or citizens ’participation broadly
(Ernwein and Matthey, 2019 ;Foster and Sandberg,
2004 ). Part of this ‘vegetal ’refers to spontaneous or
weedy vegetation.
In the modern urbanisation era, the making of
cleaner, healthier and safer cities to expand urban lifeimplied combating weeds. City dwellers and of ﬁcials48 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
often link weeds to infectious disease, pests, illegal
dumping, violent criminals or urban infrastructuredeterioration ( Falck, 2016 ;Robbins, 2007 ), suggest-
ing that ‘the signi ﬁcance of weeds in cities is not what
they do but, rather what they represent ’(Brownlow,
2006 : 242). Urban weeds are often ecologies of
neglect and disinvestment linked to uneven urban
development: the production of vacant land in dis-
invested areas favours the spread of weeds, which inturn, might shape further disinvestment by producingundesirable aesthetics and imaginaries ( Brownlow,
2006 ;Draus and Roddy, 2018 ;Falck, 2016 ). Ac-
cordingly, there are policies oriented to weeds ’con-
trol, such as the ‘weed laws ’in the U.S., which have
regulated the tolerable existence of unwanted plants
since the 19
thcentury ( Rappaport, 1992 ;Robbins,
2007 ;Robbins and Sharp, 2003 ). However, weeds
mean different things to different people, producingconﬂicts around their management in the public space.
Moreover, not all spontaneous plants are consideredequally attractive as some might be welcomedwhile others get displaced ( Foster, 2005 ;Foster and
Sandberg, 2004 ;Patrick, 2014 ).
In the new institutional turn towards urban green
infrastructures and nature-based solutions ( Garcia-
Lamarca et al., 2019 ;Kotsila et al., 2020 ;Wachsmuth
and Angelo, 2018 ), weeds are a con ﬂicted actor.
Weeds may be both a desired and planned element inurban nature interventions ( Pellegrini and Baudry,
2014 ) and the target of environmental management
directed to exterminate them, often with toxic
chemicals ( Blanchoud et al., 2004 ;Gutleben, 2020 ;
Pralle, 2006 ;Wallace et al., 2016 ). Urban weeds
opened up a controversial debate in 2015 when manymunicipal governments around the globe discussedthe banning of the herbicide glyphosate after itscategorisation as possibly carcinogenic by the In-ternational Agency for Research on Cancer ( Smyth,
2017 ;Wylie, 2015 ).
Weeds ’presence also serves ‘as a portal into
alternative interpretations of urban nature ’(Gandy
and Jasper, 2019b :6 ) .O n eo ft h e ﬁrst sites of
studying urban weeds were the bomb sites in thepost-war era, shifting the cultural and political sig-niﬁcance of urban wastelands ( Lachmund, 2003 ).
Cities ’histories and global connections are re ﬂected
in the urban ﬂora ( Sukopp, 2003 ). For example, asindustrialisation advanced and cities grew, the warmer
urban microclimatic conditions attracted Mediterra-nean plants to colder regions ( Stoetzer, 2018 ;Sukopp,
2008 ). More recently, spontaneous plants are being
integrated into parks ’design, creating safe havens for
biodiversity, reducing municipal gardening budgetwhile providing new types of ‘ecological aesthetics ’
appealing to the upper-classes ( Ernwein, 2020 ;Foster,
2005 ;Gandy, 2013 ;
Kowarik, 2018 ;Weber et al.,
2014 ). These newly desired urban ecologies are
shaped by certain spatial practices, such as the re-cently reinvigorated urban foraging ( Nyman, 2019 ;
Paddeu, 2019 ;Pellegrini and Baudry, 2014 ;Poe et al.,
2014), off-leash dog walking ( Foster and Sandberg,
2004 ), or the rise of community gardens ( Cabral et al.,
2017 ;Schmelzkopf, 1995 ;Tornaghi, 2014 ).
The particular socio-natures of peri-urban areas
make weed management a complex endeavour(McLaren et al., 2016 ). These are patchy and dy-
namic landscapes in the fringes of the urban andsuburban fabric, often enclosing or near wild areasand where weeds ﬁnd bare or underdeveloped spaces
to colonise ( Casella and Vurro, 2013 ;Grella et al.,
2018 ). Here, the governance of environmental
amenities, such as green belts or natural parks,overlaps with recreation, tourism, farming, or in-dustry. Yet, inhabitants of these diverse areas (e.g.farmers, ranchers and suburban dwellers) might ﬁnd
common ground in their fear of weeds but disagree inweed management strategies ( Klepeis and Gill, 2016 ;
but see Davis and Carter, 2014 ).
To summarise, we have reviewed how ‘humans
and weeds go together ’(Kull and Rangan, 2015 :
497) in national biosecurity plans, private gar-dens, and the management of urban and peri-urban green spaces. Yet, there is at least onemore arena where weeds ’agency becomes per-
ceptible and capable of affecting human activitiesand probably in the most direct way: agricultural
ﬁelds. Weeds, a broad plant categorisation of
ubiquitous presence, compete with crops for water,nutrients, soil and sunlight. This competition is atthe heart of a massive mobilisation of human efforton agriculture. The next section develops a vegetalpolitical ecology of weeds and their worldmakingcapabilities: how weeds ’more-than-human natures
affect modern industrial agriculture.Argüelles and March 49
IV Vegetal political ecology of weeds
in industrial agriculture
In this section, we explore how weeds condition the
modern agri-food paradigm ( FitzSimmons, 1986 ;
Goodman et al., 1987 ;Mitchell, 2012 ;Weis, 2007 )
deﬁned as ‘the group of businesses, farmers, and
institutions focused on maximising agricultural output
using industrial methods and logic ’(Gray and Gibson,
2013 : 86). We consider industrial agriculture as a
dynamic network, composed of a ‘heterogenous mix
of human and non-human components ’(Gray and
Gibson, 2013 : 87), a system, we shall argue, is irre-
mediably shaped by the unique capacities of weeds.Throughout the section, we highlight how three ex-
pressions of weediness (i.e. reproduction, dormancy
and adaptation capabilities) conditioned the ‘industrial
agricultural network ’by shaping the broader web in
which weeds and agricultural farming (farminghereinafter) are embedded.
1 Weeds on farms
In agricultural ﬁelds, shared resources such as light,
water and nutrients are captured prominently byweeds, which tend to have a negative impact on thephysical yield of the crop. They also interfere withmaintenance and harvest operations. Moreover, weedsmight reduce the quality of the produce, for instance,by producing undesirable substances that mix withharvested cereal. The presence of weeds creates
problems in fresh vegetable production, in which
produce homogeneity is a requirement: weeds dis-rupt the uniformity of crops and can change crop ’s
standardised aesthetics (lettuce grows tall rather thanwide if competing for light with high weeds). Weedscan also host crop pests and pathogens, attractingvertebrates (e.g. rodents, birds) and invertebrates(e.g. insects) predators. Weed seeds are a source of
nitrogen and carbon, which stimulate detrimental
bacteria and fungi. Moreover, a bad weed invasionnot only decreases crop yield and increases weedingcosts, but it might also even reduce land values fordecades (as no one would rent a ﬁeld infested with
weeds) ( Norsworthy et al., 2012 ).
Consequently, weeds are crucial in farms ’
economy, as humans mobilise their efforts to securecrops ’growth. Much of agricultural labour is
dedicated to weeding, and it was even more in thepast: ‘Before the onset of chemical control for
weeds, most of the work on the farm [in summer]was hoeing ( …) Without mechanisation, the size of a
farmer ’s holding and yield was determined by how
well (and how fast) a family could weed its land ’
(Ziska and Dukes, 2011 :1 ) . Zimdahl (2018) argues
that more human labour may be expended onweeding than on any other human enterprise.Moreover, farmers plan many farming operations tohelp crops to get ahead of weeds. Accordingly,weediness affects how farmers choose which cropsto grow and when (e.g. deciding not to plant carrotsin the summer due to weed pressure) or which
farming practices to adopt (e.g. fertilisation or crop
sequence). This might ultimately shape farmers ’
identities ( Gray and Gibson, 2013 ).
In organic farming, weeds are one of the top
constraints to pesticide-free production ( Liebman
and Davis, 2015 ;Marshall et al., 2003 ;Müller,
2020 ). Organic ﬁelds tend to have more weed
seeds on the soil, although organic growers spend
more money on weed control than any other crop
input ( Albrecht, 2005 ;Graziani et al., 2012 ). Some
organic farmers integrate particular weeds on theirﬁelds’margins or even between cultivation beds.
This practice reduces labour while also taking ad-vantage of the bene ﬁcial qualities of (certain)
weeds. For example, weeds ’roots bind the soil
together, avoiding erosion. Weeds can increase
fertility in different ways (e.g. weeds with deep
roots take nutrients from deeper in the ground,making them available on the plant surface), andthey are used to attract auxiliary fauna, which helpprevent some plagues. In addition, weeds mightbring important repairin g functions to damaged
soils ( Ducerf, 2010 ).
Weeds ’signiﬁcant effects at farms irremediably
upscale into the broader agri-food system. In the
remainder of this section, we analyse three majorevents ( Brice, 2014 after Bastian, 2012 ) in modern
agricultural history where weeds, or weediness, havebeen particularly crucial in constructing and ad-vancing the industrial agriculture paradigm. Theseare the chemical treadmill, the advance of GMOs,and the spread of superweeds.50 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
2 The agriculture chemical treadmill
The struggle against weeds is as ancient as crop
cultivation ( Gasquez et al., 2019 ;Krahmer, 2016 ;
Timmons, 2005 ). For many centuries the hand, the
digging-stick and the prehistoric hoe were used for
that struggle. Until not that time ago, weeds were not
seen as a problem necessarily, and weed control wasassumed as part of the agricultural routine ( Krahmer,
2016 ;Timmons, 2005 ). During the early 20th
century, organic chemistry (based on elements likecopper, sulphur or lead) and later inorganic chemistrystarted replacing the hoe and the human hand inWestern agriculture. Currently, most of the herbicides
used in agriculture and related industries are highly
selective, differentiating between crops and weedsattending to morphological, physiological or meta-bolic characteristics, and each of them is best suitedfor the control of a speci ﬁc weed associated with a
particular crop. Not all these technologies were de-veloped to deal with weeds at ﬁrst: the 20th-century
pesticide revolution emerged with the war industry as
many chemicals arising in the war era were available
to farmers as cheap side-products ( Guthman, 2019 ;
Robbins et al., 2001 ;Romero, 2016a ,2016b ). To-
wards the end of the 20th century, petrochemicalcompanies produced agrochemicals on a large scaleand were widely marketed to households and farmers.
Industrialised agriculture and liberalised food
markets, helped by the availability of cheap pesti-
cides and the new agronomic sciences, gave shape to
the new modern agriculture paradigm. This paradigmencourages farmers to maximise the frequency of themost pro ﬁtable crops, leading to less cultivated di-
versity. Crop selection is based on pro ﬁt and not on
optimal ecological conditions, erasing one of themost ancient weeding techniques, crop rotation,which allows for varying timings and weeding
strategies, interfering with the cycle of different types
of weeds. ( Leighty, 1938 ;Liebman and Dyck, 1993 ).
This abandonment exacerbated the dependence onmitigation methods. In addition, mechanisation andcredit allowed for the expansion of farms to a vastscale. The consequences of the monocropping andintensi ﬁcation are poorer soils, weaker crops unable to
compete with weeds, and better conditions for soil
and air-borne diseases ( Guthman, 2019 ;Oskam et al.,1998)–creating a ‘chemical treadmill ’in which an ag-
rochemical establishes the need for another ( Clunies-Ross
and Hildyard, 2009 ).While chemistry (pesticides and
oil) facilitated weeding in terms of labour, it did noteradicate weeds: weeding methods had to be appliedin every ﬁeld every season, which demanded the
design of an intensi ﬁed and simpli ﬁed agricultural system
that would save labour costs. At the same time, weeds were
enhanced by industrial agriculture by intensifying irrigationor activities involving machinery, which favours seedmovements. Moreover, some weeds were introducedby industrial agriculture itself: many of the most per-nicious weeds were cultivated because of their virtues(e.g. forage crops such as Johnson grassland orkudzu).
The adoption of herbicide technology during the
industrial agri-food expansion was accompaniedby conceptual changes in weeds ’deﬁnition and
role within the production system. In the mid-20
th
century, after discovering the herbicide 2,4-D and thedevelopment of agricultural services for farmers en-gaged in commercial crop production, weeds wererepresented as a problem that ought to be managed by
agricultural technicians an d a limiting factor for the
industrialisation process. In other words, ‘weeds are an
“enemy ”to be defeated in the ongoing effort to
dominate nature ’(Binimelis et al., 2009 :6 2 7 ,a n ds e e
(Williams (2020) for how weeds are also discoursively
entangled in efforts to domi nate agrarian racialized
conﬂicts). Such subjugation is present in the standard
terminology for referring to weeds, including words
such as ‘control ’,‘eradication ’,‘ﬁght’,‘wipe out ’,o r
‘weapon ’(Binimelis et al., 2009 , see also Atchison and
Head, 2013 ). This rhetoric reminds the war ’sm a c h i n e
inﬂuence in creating the agrochemical industry and,
hence, industrial agriculture. The narrative re ﬂects and
continuously recon ﬁgures the imaginaries and actual
practices around weeds in modern agriculture, for-getting the more symbiotic relations with weeds, also
used as food, medicine, or source of minerals ( Hall,
2011 ;Mabey, 2012 ). Therefore, the chemical tread-
mill re ﬂects an addiction to weeds ’removal (killing
them) and creation (categorising them and favouring theconditions to spread). In the next subsection, weuntangle how this chemical dependence was intensi ﬁed
with the development of Genetically Modi ﬁed Organ-
isms (GMOs).Argüelles and March 51
3 The GMOs-glyphosate formula as a
weeding method
Glyphosate, the most used herbicide in the world,
was patented by Monsanto in 1974. The patent ex-pired in 2000, decreasing its price and favouring itswidespread usage. Glyphosate is a non-selective
herbicide that plants absorb mostly through foliage
and transport to growing points, from where plantsare killed. Before GMOs, glyphosate was applied toﬁelds pre-seeding and pre-emergence (3 –5 days after
seeding, before the crop seeds have germinated).This helped to control weeds at the beginning of thecrop life when plants are more vulnerable to com-peting species.
In the 1990s, GMOs were developed as a method
for weeding management. Herbicide-resistant crops,in particular glyphosate-resistant (GR) crops or,commercially, ‘Round Up Ready ’crops, have been
‘one of the most quickly adopted farming technol-
ogies in modern history ’(Service, 2007 : 1114), as it
allowed farmers to more ef ﬁciently control weeds.
Since then, the use of GR crops greatly expanded in
the U.S., where crops accounted for 89%, 91% and
94% of cultivated corn, cotton and soya beans in2020 ( Economic Research Service, 2020 ) and else-
where ( Binimelis et al., 2009 ;Hetherington, 2020a ;
McAfee, 2008 ). Weed scientists considered the
GMO-glyphosate formula ‘the most effective and
inexpensive weed management technology in his-tory’(Duke, 2018 : 1027, see also Baylis, 2000 ;Dill,
2005 ;Duke and Powles, 2008 ). As GR crops meant
the simpli ﬁcation of weed-control methods ( Owen
and Zelaya, 2005 ), farmers ’relations with weeds
were so simpli ﬁed that they became ‘weed illiter-
ates’, forgetting the knowledge around non-chemical
methods ( Binimelis et al., 2009 : 631).
The management of weeds through GR crops
caused an important impact on seed production and
distribution and, ultimately, on the whole agricultural
system ( Howard, 2015 ;Kloppenburg, 1990 ;Müller,
2006 ). GR crops allowed agrochemical corporations
to expand their market beyond pesticides, takingcontrol of the seed market, and growing vertically.Through weeds ’biological traits and by shapingfarmers ’concern with them, these companies have
been able to control the agricultural system and thedifferent alternatives and discourses that mightemerge from it, such as no-till farming.
Tillage prepares the soil for seeding by removing
weeds established in the previous season while ho-mogenising and oxygenating the soil. However,
tillage disturbs soil structure and conditions, en-
couraging dormant seeds in the seedbank to ger-minate. No-till is a cultivation method that aims atsuppressing weeds ’emergence by avoiding soil
movement. No-till farming is celebrated as a solutionto solve erosion and climate change, as it favoursmore robust soil structures and does not release soil ’s
naturally-stored carbon. The recent resurgence of this
method has reinforced the expansion of the industrial
agriculture paradigm, increasing the speed of ﬁ
eld
preparation (a single herbicide application is fasterthan two passes of tillage equipment) what favourslarger, more intensive farms. There is a timidmovement of organic no-till, but most of the no-tillfarming is practised today by conventional grainfarmers. Indeed, the technique remains dependent on
herbicides since most no-till farmers use glyphosate
in several phases: pre-seeding, post-seeding and evenas a pre-harvest desiccant for drying out cropsquicker and evenly ( Friedrich and Kassam, 2012 ;
Shaner and Beckie, 2014 ).
The celebration of no-till farming has contributed
to institutionally expand the idea of ‘living soils ’in
agriculture ( Granjou and Phillips, 2019 ;Puig De la
Bellacasa, 2015 ), which work to preserve soil biota,
including worms and other soil organisms ( Müller,
2020 ). But the technique ’s current reliance on chemical
herbicides makes it very aggressive with those or-ganisms and birds or insects, dependent on above-ground biodiversity. In addition, the farmers andfarmworkers who apply the herbicides take on speci ﬁc
health risks. These dilemmas represent the complex
imaginaries of agriculture ’s sustainability that farmers
have to navigate ( Dentzman, 2018 ;Gray and Gibson,
2013 ;Müller, 2020 ). In the following subsection, we
relate how the appearance of glyphosate-resistantweeds might have helped to propel more sustain-able weeding practices.52 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
4 Superweeds outsmart
herbicidal technologies
As part of the constant adaptation for survival, weeds
can develop resistance to herbicides by biologicaland genetic mechanisms prompted by the regular andrepeated application of the same herbicide in one
ﬁeld (Adler, 2011 ). The widespread use of glyphosate
led to the adaptation of several weeds to this sub-stance. The ﬁrst glyphosate-resistance weed, Lolium
rigidum Gaud , was found in Australia only four years
after introducing glyphosate-resistance GMOs in thecountry, in 1996. Today, around 40 glyphosate-resistantweeds are spread in 37 countries, affecting 34 differentcrops ( Heap and Duke, 2018 ). As some weeds become
resistant to glyphosate or other herbicides, they take
advantage of their favoured position and ﬁll the space
left by other weeds, expanding quickly in the ﬁelds.
Today, millions of acres in the U.S., Argentina orBrazil (top glyphosate users) are affected by what isincreasingly known as ‘superweeds ’.
The widespread adoption of the GMO-glyphosate
formula placed ‘unprecedented pressure on weeds,
creating an ideal environment under which resistant
weeds could quickly develop ’(Bain et al., 2017 :2 1 9 ) .
The appearance of superweeds involved weeds ’bi-
ological traits for adaptation. It was also accompaniedby governmental agricultural technicians and retailersof agrochemical products who downplayed herbicideresistance issues and were reluctant to recommendalternative methods ( Bonny, 2016 ;Mortensen et al.,
2012 ). The phenomenon is tightly connected to both
the widespread adoption of glyphosate-dependent no-tillage as a promise for sustainability ( Mortensen et al.,
2012 ;Soane et al., 2012 ) and to policies and regu-
latory systems prone to favour chemical use despiteknowledge of associated risks, and which continu-ously under-enforces pesticides ’codes ( Galt, 2008 ;
Jansen, 2017 ;Tosun et al., 2019 ;Guthman, 2019 ). In
addition, alternatives to the use of herbicides might
also be limited by labour availability ( Egan, 2014 )o r
pressure from landowners ( Norsworthy et al., 2012 ).
The consequences of superweeds are wide-reaching.
They increase the production cost of farmers and de-crease their yields ( Livingston et al., 2015 ). Super-
weeds make herbicide management practices a‘common pool nature ’(Shaner and Beckie, 2014 :1330) in which harmful practices of one farmer (by
overusing one single herbicide and planting mono-crops year after year) affect all growers in the samebioregion. Because of emerging resistance, farmershave to adapt to work differently, and some return totillage practices as glyphosate and other herbicidesturn ineffective. Meanwhile, the response of agro-
chemical companies has been to combine herbicide-
resistant traits to allow for more and varied herbicideapplications. On the ground, this means increasingglyphosate doses or using more toxic herbicides (suchas Dicamba, 2-4D and others) to kill those superweeds orto pair with GMO seeds (i.e. creating new herbicide-resistant crops). While superweeds might open themarket for developing new herbicides, they might
have delayed the expansion of other GMO crops such
as wheat, which has been expected for decades ( Dill,
2005 ). In a way, they might have inclined the direction
of agriculture towards the opposite direction than re-search was pointing at ( Vanloqueren and Baret, 2009 ).
Experts agree that the expansion of superweeds
signals a critical juncture for conventional agriculture(Adler, 2011 ;Beckie and Hall, 2014 ;Mortensen
et al., 2012 ;
Union of Concerned Scientists, 2013 ).
In other words, it is suggested that ‘the most daunting
threats to glyphosate ’s dominance and Roundup sales
are not health concerns or lawsuits but weedsthemselves ’(Cohen, 2019 : no page number). As the
appearance of glyphosate-resistant weeds was fore-seen and avoidable, agrochemical corporations mighthave lost some credibility. It is expected that some
governmental agricultural technicians and regional
policies, as they realise that ‘managing herbicide-
resistant weeds solely with herbicides is doomed tofailure ’(Beckie and Hall, 2014 : 44), set more eco-
logical weed management practices as policy pri-orities. National policies are moving towards moresustainable practices. Since 2019, Germany andMexico have announced the phasing out of glyph-
osate. Austria has approved a partial ban and France
has declared to have the same intention. In 2020, theEuropean Commission released Farm to Fork, settingthe objective of reducing pesticides use by 50% in10 years. In the U.S., where pesticide regulation isless strict, the judicial procedures against Monsanto-Bayer ( Cohen, 2020 ) might in ﬂuence future pesticide
policies. For now, in November 2020, the U.S.Argüelles and March 53
Environmental Protection Agency released the draft of a
biological evaluation of glyphosate, which con ﬁrms the
herbicide ’s negative impacts on endangered species and
habitats. Changes such as these ones might contribute inuncertain ways to the shifting geographies of glyphosateproduction and use ( Werner, in press ).
To sum up, this vegetal political ecology reveals
how agro-industrial weeds are entangled to farmers,
chemicals, soil, crops, agri-food companies, gov-ernmental agricultural technicians or the state. In thecontext of industrial agriculture, these relationshipsare forced into a complex equilibrium. The vegetalpolitical ecology of agro-industrial weeds untangleshow agricultural practices, technologies and regu-lations adapted to weeds ’biological traits and what
this means, on a more fundamental level, about the
relation between farming and their more-than-humancomponents, unwanted ﬂora in this case. On the one
hand, it encourages weeds scientists and agrarianscholars to rethink how weeds have been implicatedwith agricultural practices and socio-political andeconomic structures over a long period and acrosschanging contexts. On the other hand, it urges ge-
ographers of food and agriculture to acknowledge
how food is produced in a subtler form, paying at-tention to more-than-human actors in the food system.
V The persistent lives of weeds
After having reviewed how weediness relates toborder controls, and impact upon the management ofurban and peri-urban green spaces, private gardensand industrial agriculture, this vegetal political ecol-ogy of weeds may open up three interrelated threads ofdiscussion: 1) How weeds shape the understanding ofhuman-plants relationships; 2) The centrality of weedsin agriculture; 3) The move towards a more-than-
human geography in agriculture.
1 How weeds can shape our understanding of
human-plant relationships
Human-plants scholarship has pointed out that some
of‘the most embodied garden encounters come
between humans and plants they are trying to get ridof, the plants that will not behave themselves ’(Head
and Atchison, 2009 after Zagorski et al., 2004 ). Isour relationship with weed s different from trees,
crops or ornamental ﬂowers? And if so, how? Relational
accounts tend to represent the more-than-human as aconstructive or pliant agent, almost domesticated. Here,plants allow for food, feed and ﬁbre, for human settle-
ments and state-making processes; trees create place-making and contribute to affective and emotional re-
sponses from humans; technologies co-construct our
society at the same time that we develop technolo-gies, and so on.
On the contrary, weeds tend to trouble human
lives. Weeds grow faster, produce more seeds andspread farther than other plants –and in that sense,
weeds ’material performances also re ﬂect the en-
tangled relations among plant species ( Tsing et al.,
2020 ). Their fast reproduction and growth allow
them to spread (grow, reproduce and grow again) in asingle growing season in agricultural sites or placeslaid bare by ﬁres and ﬂoods or occupied by ‘local ’
species. Dormant weed seeds can extend weed in-fection on ﬁelds for decades –echoed in the popular
expression ‘1y e a r ’s seeding makes 7 years ’
weeding ’–imposing a particular tempo on farms and
elsewhere. It is weeds ’materiality, their weediness,
that makes them uncooperative, making an analogywith Karen Bakker (2005) approach to water. How-
ever, while Bakker talked about water as an ‘unco-
operative commodity ’, weeds, differently from other
plants, are not commodities. They are not valued, andtheir unproductive nature is at the heart of their in-surgent and disruptive character.
Other troubled relationships with non-human
companions have been explained elsewhere, eitheras pathogens, microbes and viruses ( Crosby, 2004 ;
Del Casino, 2018 ;Guthman, 2019 ;Paxson, 2008 ),
slugs ( Ginn, 2014 ) or mosquitoes and other insects
(Beisel, 2010 ;Beisel et al., 2013 )–creatures that have
been de ﬁn e da ss t u b b o r n( Marder, 2013 ), monstrous
(Ginn, 2014 ), or fugitive ( Robbins, 2004b ). Weeds,
and all the species with undomesticated lives, pose
ethical, technical, or health barriers to the advance ofhuman social life; they ‘shout challenges to stability ’
(Tsing, 2017 : 4). And for that reason, these creatures
are at the heart of human-nature relations, and wecan learn from them about the constant contradic-tion embedded in our understanding of and inter-action with nature.54 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
We acknowledge these relations are dynamic,
heterogeneous and open to change. The valorisationof weeds by emerging urban sustainability ap-proaches (including green infrastructures or nature-based solutions in cities) is an exciting sign, howeversmall, of how weeds got to be seen as co-productionagents of urban natures. In other words, weeds ’‘feral
charisma ’(Lorimer, 2007 ), their wild and chaotic
nature might be interpreted as a positive quality. Thisturn might signify an opening towards a differentrelationship with weeds, one that might even ques-tion the assumption that weeds are always unwantedplants. Critical invasive science is also questioning howplants become weeds and why ( Kull, 2018 ;Warren,
2007). In private gardens, homeowners do not always
kill, but they also care for and reproduce invasive plants
(Doody et al., 2014 ;Head and Muir, 2004 ). Those
‘ﬂexible boundaries ’reﬂect our cultural production of
wanted and unwanted nature, or as Lorimer put it, thatwe are ‘deciding among multiple biodiversities or
multinatural futures ’(Lorimer, 2012 :6 0 1 ; Lorimer,
2006 ). While it is beyond the scope of this article, we
acknowledge that there are diverse ways that people
from western and non-western cultures relate to wild
plants –many of them so-called weeds –through for-
aging, medicine, culinary traditions or ecological man-agement. Many of these practices have been erased byhistorical dynamics of land dis possession, industrialisation
or capital accumulation, as well as by power imbalanceson discourses over nature that have historically deemedcertain practices inferior ( Anderson, 2013 ;Kawa,
2016 ;Kimmerer, 2020 ). Many of these exclusionary
dynamics are closely related to the development of in-dustrial agriculture that we narrate in the previous section.
Those ﬂexible boundaries manifest in agriculture
too. Certain weeds (e.g. nutgrass or Cyperus rotundus )
can be weeded with harvesting machinery, certaincrops become weeds when they grow spontaneously,and many ancient crops have evolved to weeds. In
addition, in some forms of organic farming, weeds are
favoured and appreciated because of some bene ﬁcial
properties to the soil and auxiliary fauna. Paradoxically,because of this appreciation and the reluctance to usefaster and cheaper chemical methods to eradicate them,farmers embrace more complex relations with weeds(Liebman and Dyck, 1993 ;Müller, 2006 ). This trou-
bled relation, rooted in weeds ’material performances,might be at the heart of the gap between conventional
and organic agriculture (notwithstanding the differentapproaches within organic farming, not to mentionagroecology), even if this aspect is recurrently ignoredby Alternative Food Networks and food systemsscholars. This point brings us to the second thread ofdiscussion: the centrality of weeds in agriculture.
2 The centrality of weeds in agriculture
In this paper, we have paid attention to agro-industrialweeds, moving beyond the shared vision of weeds asdisruptors of landscape ecologies and actors in bio-security efforts. Instead, weeds on farms are veryoften indigenous species inhabiting human-disturbed
farmland. Far from national biosecurity plans, lists
and categories, weeds on farms are controlled by aquotidian yet planned strategy by farmers andfarmworkers who incorporate weed management intheir daily or weekly routine and within the rest offarming operations. Yet, this intimate farmer-weedrelation is tied to signi ﬁcant political-economic and
agrarian consequences. And maybe for that reason,
weeds on farms are not outside the control of the
state, that occurs, for example, in the routine mon-itoring of governmental agricultural techniciansadvising weeding techniques. While we have fo-cused here on the entanglements of agro-industrialweeds with the political economy of industrial ag-riculture, more work is needed to understand theintimate human-plant relationship occurring in ﬁelds
(what Brice, 2014 orFleming, 2017 do at vineyards
and orchards).
We have untangled how weeds maintain a dia-
lectical relationship with modern agriculture: whileapparently insurgent as they disrupt agriculturalpractices, weeds have decisively contributed to theconstruction of the industrialised agricultural systemas we know it. Weeds became a bottleneck to the
expansion of industrial agriculture in the 20
thcen-
tury. Still, this limitation boosted industrial agricul-ture: The persistent lives of weeds gave agrochemicalplayers a steady control over the agricultural systemas they were able to advance the use of monocrops,herbicides or GMOs, which were to become thepillars of the industrial agriculture paradigm. At thesame time, weeds also resisted, and continue to resist,Argüelles and March 55
the biological homogeneity of agricultural ﬁelds
those agro-chemical players seek. That is, despite thedisciplining of inconvenient ﬂora favoured and ex-
panded by industrialised agriculture, intensive agri-cultural practices have been unable to sti ﬂe weeds ’
ability to affect change. In other words, unwantedplants keep growing and keep having to be weeded,
and they continue causing economic losses and
environmental trouble.
As superweeds mutate quickly to adapt to her-
bicides, they put into question the most extended andtaken-for-granted farming practices (such as chemicalweeding, GR crops or conventional no-till farming).Indeed, not only adaptation but weediness broadlyconstantly challenges four quintessential character-
istics of industrial agriculture: homogeneity, predict-
ability, calculability and control ( Haraway, 2015 ).
Therefore, as the double role attributed to trees ’
graftability ( Fleming, 2017 )o rg r a i n s ’traceability
(Scott, 2000 ,2017 ), and other non-humans ( Robbins,
2004b :2 3 4 –235), weeds ’persistent reproduction
contributes to both undermining and supporting thecomplex, power-laden and multi-scalar networks of
relations that constitute today ’s industrial agriculture.
3 More-than-human geography in agriculture
Last, the paper shows the possibilities that more-
than-human geography opens in the ﬁeld of agriculture.
The recent ‘following ’plants type of study see crops
and food –strawberries ( Guthman, 2019 ), potatoes
(Nally and Kearns, 2020 ), or almonds ( Reisman,
2020 )–as sites and sources of human struggles
embedded in the economics and politics of agri-foodsystems and other dimensions of human life. Thesesorts of studies have opened the space for integratingmore material approaches in the social sciencesstudies of agriculture, still scarce despite having beingclaimed to be studied for so long ( Goodman, 2001 ;
Marsden, 2000 ;Watts and Scales, 2015 ).
So far, even when focused on pesticides or GMOs,
critical geography and political ecology barely touchupon weeds as an entangled actor (with some excep-tions, such as Bain et al., 2017 ;Binimelis et al., 2009 ;
Dentzman, 2018 ;Müller, 2020 ). And yet, current
analysis for just, diverse and sustainable agri-foodsystems tend to exclude more-than-human actors (e.g.Koretskaya and Feola, 2020 ;Sonnino and Marsden,
2006 ;Moragues-Faus et al., 2020 ;Thompson and
Scoones, 2009 ). However, there is no place like ag-
riculture where plants ’capacities are more explicit,
where humans ’reliance on them is more apparent, and
where ‘plants contend with stronger ﬂows of power ’
(Fleming, 2017 : 27). Since agriculture and agrarian
economies are so fundamentally tied to material
conditions (those of seeds, crops, soils, weeds) ( Mann
and Dickinson, 1978 ), a sensitivity to learning to
perceive non-humans ’capacities to affect human
bodies and activities becomes more than appropriatefor teasing out agricultural relations, dynamics andtensions, as Brice (2014) has carefully shown. More-
over, a closer engagement with ecological processes in
agriculture can be particularly insightful for under-
standing lived experiences, motivations and problemsof those who are more tied to such ecology on a day-to-day basis, that is, farmers and farmworkers.
In that sense, vegetal political ecology reveals as
an excellent framework for the understanding ofmore-than-human interactions in agriculture. Thepower of the framework comes from the three actions
it tries to connect: 1) attending to particular plants ’
capacities –such as fruit ripening, trees ’graftability,
or weeds ’dispersal –and the intimate human-plant
relations they enact; 2) connecting these with dif-ferent human practices (weather watching, maturitytesting, weeding or tilling); and 3) linking plants ’
characteristics and human practices to a broadersystem of resource and environmental politics.
Vegetal political ecology becomes a ground on which
political consideration of human-plant relations mightchallenge dominant modes of thinking and practicing
agriculture.
VI Conclusion
So far, in-depth considerations of the political
ecology of weeds have mostly centred around the
ways weeds are managed or critiques of how theseare produced by classi ﬁcations (e.g. Atchison and
Head, 2013 ;Bain et al., 2017 ;Kull and Rangan,
2015 ). We develop a vegetal political ecology of
weeds by expanding on these political ecologyperspectives and attuning to weeds ’actual ecology.
We do so by paying attention to how weeds ’unique56 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
capacities (reproduction, dormancy and adaptation to
external conditions) interrupt and recon ﬁgure dif-
ferent dynamics and processes, such as urban de-velopment, biosecurity plans, backyard gardening,and especially, farming.
In particular, we have untangled how weeds ’
active materialities have been signi ﬁcantly in ﬂuential
in advancing the industrial agriculture paradigm by
enacting key events such as the chemical treadmill,the consolidation of the GMOs-glyphosate strategyand the recent expansion of superweeds. At thesame time, weeds continue challenging this sameparadigm by their ability to multiply, wait and adapt.While critical geography accounts of food and agri-culture have paid little attention to the role of weeds
on farms, in this article, we place weeds as an actor
interacting with GMOs, agrochemicals, soil, farmers,in such a way that, as weeds get shaped by agri-culture, agriculture is re-constituted –if partly –by
weeds. This vegetal political ecology makes clearthat the task of making agriculture more environ-mentally and socially sustainable entails changingthe way we deal with weeds, as well as rethinking
what weeds mean to us.
To sum up, weeds and humans chase each other in
a biologically intimate relationship that is ubiquitousand persistent. This vegetal political ecology of weedsresponds to pressing needs to re-construct our en-tanglements with non-human actors. We do so byhighlighting an undisciplined agency that has oftenbeen understudied in geography research. The dis-
ruptive human-weeds relation is revelatory from a
relational perspective for providing a way to unpackapparent convivialities and stabilities while openingmore loose understandings of relationality. It also callsattention to the barriers that unwanted plants imposeand the powerful interests that try to overcome thoseeither by changing or controlling weeds ’ecological
characteristics of the institutional systems that govern
them.
Acknowledgments
We thank Gilad Buzi for enthusiastically sharing with us
relevant insights into weed dynamics in agricultural ﬁelds.
We are very grateful to Noel Castree and the three anony-mous reviewers who helped us to improve this paper.Declaration of con ﬂicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential con ﬂicts of interest
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publicationof this article.
Funding
This work contributes to Luc ´ıa Argüelles ’Juan de la Cierva
Formación fellowship (FJC2018-036460-I) awarded by theSpanish Ministry of Science and Innovation.
ORCID iD
Lucia Arguelles https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1024-0289
Hug March https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2549-0803
References
Adler J (2011) The growing menace from superweeds.
Scienti ﬁc American 304(5): 74 –79.
Albrecht H (2005) Development of arable weed seedbanks
during the 6 years after the change from conventionalto organic farming. Weed Research 45(5): 339 –350.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3180.2005.00472.x .
Alderman DH (2004) Channing cope and the making of a
miracle vine. Geographical Review 94(2): 157 –177.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2004.tb00165.x .
Alkon AH (2013) The socio-nature of local organic food.
Antipode 45(3): 663 –680. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8330.
2012.01056.x .
Anderson K (2013) Tending the Wild: Native American
Knowledge and the Management of California ’s Natural
Resources . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Anderson WP (1996) Weed Science: Principles and Ap-
plications . 3rd ed. Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN: West
Pub. Co.
Argüelles L, Cole HVS and Anguelovski I (2021) Rail-to-
park transformations in 21st century modern cities:Green gentri ﬁcation on track. Environment and
Planning E: Nature and Space : 251484862110100.
DOI: 10.1177/25148486211010064 .
Atchison J and Head L (2013) Eradicating bodies in invasive
plant management. Environment and Planning D: Society
and Space 31(6): 951 –968. DOI: 10.1068/d17712 .
Bain C, Selfa T, Dandachi T, et al. (2017) ’Superweeds ’or
’survivors ’? Framing the problem of glyphosate re-
sistant weeds and genetically engineered crops.Argüelles and March 57
Journal of Rural Studies 51: 211 –221. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jrurstud.2017.03.003 .
Bakker K (1999) The politics of hydropower: Developing
the Mekong. Political Geography, 18(2):2 09-232.doi:10.1016/S0962-6298(98)00085-7
Bakker K (2005) Neoliberalizing Nature? Market Envi-
ronmentalism in Water Supply in England and Wales.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers95(3): 542 –565. doi: 10.1111/j. 1467-8306.2005.00474.x .
Barker K (2008) Flexible boundaries in biosecurity: Ac-
commodating gorse in aotearoa New Zealand. Envi-
ronment and Planning A: Economy and Space 40(7):
1598 –1614. DOI: 10.1068/a4062 .
Barker K and Francis R (2021). Routledge Handbook of
Biosecurity and Invasive Species . England, UK:
Routledge. ISBN 9780815354895.
Barua M (2014) Bio-geo-graphy: Landscape, dwelling,
and the political ecology of human-elephant relations.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space
32(5): 915 –934. DOI: 10.1068/d4213 .
Bastian M (2012) Fatally confused. Environmental
Philosophy 9(1): 23 –48. DOI: 10.5840/envirophil
2012913 .
Baylis AD (2000) Why glyphosate is a global herbicide:
Strengths, weaknesses and prospects. Pest Management
Science 56(4): 299 –308. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1526-
4998(200004)56:4<299::AID-PS144>3.0.CO;2-K .
Beckie HJ and Hall LM (2014) Genetically-modi ﬁed
herbicide-resistant (GMHR) crops a two-edged
sword? An Americas perspective on development
and effect on weed management. Crop Protection 66:
40–45. DOI: 10.1016/j.cropro.2014.08.014 .
Beisel U (2010) Jumping hurdles with mosquitoes?. En-
vironment and Planning D: Society and Space 28(1):
46–49. DOI: 10.1068/d2706wsf .
Beisel U, Kelly AH and Tousignant N (2013) Knowing
insects: Hosts, vectors and companions of science.
Science As Culture 22(1): 1 –15. DOI: 10.1080/
09505431.2013.776367 .
Bhatti M (2006) ’When I ’m in the garden I can create my
own paradise ’: Homes and gardens in later life. The
Sociological Review
54(2): 318 –341. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1467-954X.2006.00616.x .
Binimelis R, Pengue W and Monterroso I (2009)
"Transgenic treadmill": Responses to the emergenceand spread of glyphosate-resistant johnsongrass inArgentina. Geoforum 40(4): 623 –633. DOI: 10.1016/
j.geoforum.2009.03.009 .
Blaikie, P and Brook ﬁeld, H (eds), (1987). Land Degra-
dation and Society . 0 ed. England, UK: Routledge.
DOI: 10.4324/9781315685366 .
Blanchoud H, Farrugia F and Mouchel JM (2004) Pesticide
uses and transfers in urbanised catchments. Chemo-
sphere 55(6): 905 –913. DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.
2003.11.061 .
Bonny S (2016) Genetically modi ﬁed herbicide-tolerant
crops, weeds, and herbicides: Overview and impact.
Environmental Management 57(1): 31 –48. DOI: 10.
1007/s00267-015-0589-7 .
Bormann FH, Balmori D and Geballe GT (2001) Re-
designing the American Lawn: A Search for Envi-ronmental Harmony . 2nd ed. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Brice J (2014) Attending to grape vines: Perceptual
practices, planty agencies and multiple temporalities
in Australian viticulture. Social & Cultural Geogra-
phy15(8): 942 –965. DOI: 10.1080/14649365.2014.
883637 .
Brownlow A (2006) An archaeology of fear and envi-
ronmental change in Philadelphia. Geoforum 37(2):
227–245. DOI: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2005.02.009 .
Cabral I, Keim J, Engelmann R, et al. (2017) Ecosystem
services of allotment and community gardens: ALeipzig, Germany case study. Urban Forestry &
Urban Greening 23: 44 –53. DOI: 10.1016/j.ufug.
2017.02.008 .
Calvet-Mir L and March H (2019) Crisis and post-crisis
urban gardening initiatives from a Southern Europeanperspective: The case of Barcelona. European Urban
and Regional Studies 26(1): 97 –112. DOI: 10.1177/
0969776417736098 .
Casella F and Vurro M (2013) Ailanthus altissima(tree of
heaven): Spread and harmfulness in a case-studyurban area. Arboricultural JournalTaylor & Francis
35(3): 172 –181. DOI: 10.1080/03071375.2013.
852352 .
Chew MK (2015) Ecologists, environmentalists, experts,
and the invasion of the ’second greatest threat ’.In-
ternational Review of Environmental History 1. DOI:
10.22459/IREH.01.2015.02 .
Clunies-Ross T and Hildyard N (2009) The Politics of
Industrial Agriculture. Available at: http://site.ebrary.
com/id/10798775 (accessed 23 December 2020).58 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
Cohen P (2019) Roundup Weedkiller Is Blamed for Can-
cers, but Farmers Say It ’s Not Going Away. The New
York Times, 20 September. Available at: https://www.
nytimes.com/2019/09/20/business/bayer-roundup.html(accessed 23 January 2020).
Cohen P (2020) Roundup Maker to Pay $10 Billion to Settle
Cancer Suits .T h eN YT i m e s . https://www.nytimes.
com/2020/06/24/business/roundup-settlement-lawsuits.html (accessed 23 January 2020).
Collard R-C, Dempsey J and Sundberg J (2015) A man-
ifesto for abundant futures. Annals of the Association
of American Geographers 105(2): 322 –330. DOI: 10.
1080/00045608.2014.973007 .
Cooke B and Lane R (2015) How do amenity migrants
learn to be environmental stewards of rural land-scapes? Landscape and Urban Planning 134: 43 –52.
DOI: 10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.10.006 .
Crosby AW (2004) Ecological Imperialism: The Biolog-
ical Expansion of Europe, 900 –1900 . 2nd ed. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. DOI: 10.
1017/CBO9780511805554 .
Curry GN, Koczberski G and Selwood J (2001) Cashing
out, cashing in: Rural change on the south coast ofWA. Australian Geographer 32(1): 109 –124. DOI:
10.1080/00049180020036268 .
Davis D and Carter J (2014) Finding common ground in
weed management: Peri-urban farming, environ-mental and lifestyle values and practices in southeast
QLD, Australia. The Geographical Journal 180(4):
342–352. DOI: 10.1111/geoj.12034 .
Davis MA, Chew MK, Hobbs RJ, et al. (2011) Don ’t judge
species on their origins. Nature 474(7350): 153 –154.
DOI: 10.1038/474153a .
Del Casino VJ (2018) Social geography(ies) III. Progress
in Human Geography 42(2): 286 –296. DOI: 10.1177/
0309132516681702 .
Dentzman K (2018) “I would say that might be all it is, is hope ”:
The framing of herbicide resistance and how farmers
explain their faith in herbicides. Journal of Rural Studies
57: 118 –127. DOI: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2017.12.010 .
Dill GM (2005) Glyphosate-resistant crops: History, status
and future. Pest Management Science 61(3):
219
–224. DOI: 10.1002/ps.1008 .
Doody BJ, Perkins HC, Sullivan JJ, et al. (2014) Per-
forming weeds: Gardening, plant agencies and urbanplant conservation. Geoforum 56: 124 –136. DOI: 10.
1016/j.geoforum.2014.07.001 .Draus P and Roddy J (2018) Weeds, pheasants and wild
dogs: Resituating the ecological paradigm in post-industrial detroit. International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research 42(5): 807 –827. DOI: 10.1111/
1468-2427.12627 .
Ducerf G (2010). L’encyclop´ edie Des Plantes Bio-Indicatrices
Alimentaires Et M ´edicinales: Guide De Diagnostic Des
Sols.V ol. 1. 3nd ed. Briant, France: Promonature.
Duke SO (2018) The history and current status of
glyphosate. Pest Management Science 74(5):
1027 –1034. DOI: 10.1002/ps.4652 .
Duke SO and Powles SB (2008) Glyphosate: A once-in-a-
century herbicide. Pest Management Science 64(4):
319–325. DOI: 10.1002/ps.1518 .
Economic Research Service (2020) Adoption of geneti-
cally engineered crops in the U.S. Available at: https://
www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/adoption-of-genetically-
engineered-crops-in-the-us/ (accessed 28 December
2020).
Egan JF (2014) Herbicide-resistant crop biotechnology:
Potential and pitfalls. In: Ricroch A, Chopra S and
Fleischer SJ (eds) Plant Biotechnology . Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 143 –154. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-06892-3_12 .
Ernwein M (2020) Bringing urban parks to life: The more-
than-human politics of urban ecological work. Annals
of the American Association of Geographers 111:
559–576. DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2020.1773230 .
Ernwein M and Fall JJ (2015) Communicating invasion:
Understanding social anxieties around mobile spe-
cies. Geogra ﬁska Annaler: Series B, Human Geog-
raphy 97(2): 155 –167. DOI: 10.1111/geob.12071 .
Ernwein M and Matthey L (2019) Events in the affective city:
Affect, attention and alignment in two ordinary urban
events. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space
51(2): 283 –301. DOI: 10.1177/0308518X18757509 .
Falck ZJS (2016)
Weeds. An Environmental History of
Metropolitan America . Pittsburgh, PA: Univ. of
Pittsburgh Press.
FitzSimmons M (1986) The new industrial agriculture: The
regional integration of specialty crop production. Eco-
nomic Geography 62(4): 334. DOI: 10.2307/143829 .
Fleming J (2017) Toward vegetal political ecology: Kyr-
gyzstan ’s walnut-fruit forest and the politics of
graftability. Geoforum 79: 26 –35. DOI: 10.1016/j.
geoforum.2016.12.009 .Argüelles and March 59
Foster J (2005) Restoration of the don valley brick works:
Whose restoration? Whose space?. Journal of Urban
Design 10(3): 331 –351. DOI: 10.1080/1357480050
0297702 .
Foster J and Sandberg LA (2004) Friends or Foe? Invasive
Species and Public Green Space in Toronto. Geo-
graphical Review 94(2): 178 –198. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1931-0846.2004.tb00166.x .
Friedrich T and Kassam A (2012) No-till farming and the
environment: Do no-till systems require more
chemicals? Outlooks on Pest Management 23(4):
153–157. DOI: 10.1564/23aug02 .
Galt RE (2008) Beyond the circle of poison: Signi ﬁcant
shifts in the global pesticide complex, 1976-2008.
Global Environmental Change 18(4): 786 –799. DOI:
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.07.003 .
Gandy M (2013) Marginalia: Aesthetics, ecology, and
urban wastelands. Annals of the Association of
American Geographers 103(6): 1301 –1316. DOI: 10.
1080/00045608.2013.832105 .
Gandy M (2019) The ﬂy that tried to save the world:
Saproxylic geographies and other-than-human ecol-ogies. Transactions of the Institute of British Geog-
raphers 44(2): 392 –406. DOI: 10.1111/tran.12281 .
Gandy M and Jasper S (2019a) The Botanical City . Berlin,
Germany: Jovis Verlag GmbH.
Gandy M and Jasper S (2019b) The city as a botanical ﬁeld. In:
The Botanical City . Berlin, Germany: Jovis Verlag GmbH.
Garcia-Lamarca M, Anguelovski I, Cole H, et al. (2019)
Urban green boosterism and city affordability: Forwhom is the ’branded ’green city? Urban Studies .
004209801988533. DOI: 10.1177/0042098019885330 .
Gasquez J, Dron M and Delos M (2019) History of weeding
in major crops: from the ﬁrst seed to the spread of
chemical weeding. In: 24e Conf ´erence du COLUMA:
Journ ´ees internationales sur la lutte contre les mau-
vaises herbes, Orleans, France, 3 –5d´ecembre 2019.
V´eg´ephyl
–Association pour la sant ´ed e sv ´eg´etaux .
Gill N (2014) Making country good: stewardship and
environmental change in central Australian pastoral
culture. Transactions of the Institute of British Ge-
ographers 39(2): 265 –277. DOI: 10.1111/tran.12025 .
Ginn F (2014) Sticky lives: Slugs, detachment and more-
than-human ethics in the garden. Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 39(4): 532 –544.
DOI: 10.1111/tran.12043 .Giraldo OF (2019) Political Ecology of Agriculture:
Agroecology and Post-Development . 1st edition.
ChamImprint: Springer International PublishingSpringer.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-11824-2 .
Goodman D (2001) Ontology matters: the relational materiality
of nature and agro-food studies. Sociologia Ruralis 41(2):
182–200. DOI: 10.1111/1467-9523. 00177 .
Goodman D, Sorj B and Wilkinson J (1987) From Farming
to Biotechnology: A Theory of Agro-Industrial De-
velopment . Oxford, NY: Basil Blackwell.
Graham S (2014) A new perspective on the trust power
nexus from rural Australia. Journal of Rural Studies
36: 87 –98. DOI: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2014.06.010 .
Granjou C and Phillips C (2019) Living and labouring
soils: Metagenomic ecology and a new agriculturalrevolution?. BioSocieties 14(3): 393 –415. DOI: 10.
1057/s41292-018-0133-0 .
Gray BJ and Gibson JW (2013) Actor-networks, farmer
decisions, and identity. Culture, Agriculture, Food
and Environment 35(2): 82 –101. DOI: 10.1111/cuag.
12013 .
Graziani F, Onofri A, Pannacci E, et al. (2012) Size and
composition of weed seedbank in long-term organic
and conventional low-input cropping systems. Eu-
ropean Journal of Agronomy 39: 52 –61. DOI: 10.
1016/j.eja.2012.01.008 .
Grella C, Renshaw A and Wright IA (2018) Invasive weeds
in urban riparian zones: the in ﬂuence of catchment
imperviousness and soil chemistry across an urban-
ization gradient. Urban Ecosystems 21(3): 505 –517.
DOI:
10.1007/s11252-018-0736-z .
Groening G and Wolschke-Bulmahn J (2003) The native
plant enthusiasm: Ecological panacea or xenophobia?
Landscape Research 28(1): 75 –88. doi: 10.1080/
01426390306536 .
Guthman J (2019) Wilted: Pathogens, Chemicals, and the
Fragile Future of the Strawberry Industry . Critical
Environments: Nature, Science, and Politics 6 .
Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Gutleben C (2020) The pesticide-free city trend in public
spaces: creative ways to healthier landscapes. Envi-
ronnement Risques Sant ´e19(2): 113 –121. DOI: 10.
1684/ers.2020.1415 .
Hall M (2011) Plants as Persons: A Philosophical Botany .
SUNY Series on Religion and the Environment . Al-
bany: State University of New York Press.60 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
Haraway D (2015) Anthropocene, capitalocene, plantationo-
cene, chthulucene: making kin. Environmental Humanities
6(1): 159 –165. DOI: 10.1215/22011919-3615934 .
Harlan JR (ed). (2012) What is a weed? In: Crops & Man .
Madison, WI: American Society of Agronomy, Crop
Science Society of America, 83 –99. DOI: 10.2135/
1992.cropsandman.c4 .
Harlan JR and de Wet JMJ (1965) Some thoughts about
weeds. Economic Botany 19(1): 16 –24. DOI: 10.
1007/BF02971181 .
Hatcher, P and Froud-Williams, RJ (eds), (2017). In: Weed
Research: Expanding Horizons . Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Head L and Atchison J (2009) Cultural ecology:
emerging human-plant geographies. Progress in
Human Geography 33(2): 236 –245. DOI: 10.1177/
0309132508094075 .
Head L and Muir P (2004) Nativeness, invasiveness, and
nation in Australian plants. Geographical Review 94(2):
199–217. DOI: 10.1111/j.1931-0846. 2004.tb00167.x .
Head L, Atchison J and Gates A (2012) Ingrained: A
Human Bio-Geography of Wheat . Burlington, VT:
Farnham, SurreyAshgate.
Head L, Atchison J, Phillips C, et al. (2014) Vegetal
politics: belonging, practices and places. Social &
Cultural Geography 15(8): 861 –870. DOI: 10.1080/
14649365.2014.973900 .
Heap I and Duke SO (2018) Overview of glyphosate-
resistant weeds worldwide. Pest Management Sci-
ence 74(5): 1040 –1049. DOI: 10.1002/ps.4760 .
Hetherington K (2020a) The Government of Beans: Reg-
ulating Life in the Age of Monocrops . Durham: Duke
University Press.
Hetherington K (2020b) Agribiopolitics: the health of
plants and humans in the age of monocrops. Envi-
ronment and Planning D: Society and Space 38(4):
682–698. doi: 10.1177/0263775820912757 .
Heynen N, Perkins HA and Roy P (2007) Failing to grow
"their" own justice? The co-production of racial/genderedlabor and milwaukee ’s urban forest. Urban Geography
28(8): 732 –754. DOI: 10.2747/0272-3638.28.8.732 .
Hinchliffe S and Bingham N (2008) Securing life: the
emerging practices of biosecurity. Environment and
Planning A: Economy and Space 40(7): 1534 –1551.
DOI: 10.1068/a4054 .Hinchliffe S and Whatmore S (2006) Living cities: towards
a politics of conviviality. Science As Culture 15(2):
123–138. DOI: 10.1080/09505430600707988 .
Hinchliffe S, Kearnes MB, Degen M, et al. (2005) Urban
wild things: a cosmopolitical experiment. Environ-
ment and Planning D: Society and Space 23(5):
643–658. DOI: 10.1068/d351t .
Hitchings R (2003) People, plants and performance: on
actor network theory and the material pleasures of the
private garden. Social & Cultural Geography 4(1):
99–114. DOI: 10.1080/1464936032000049333 .
Howard PH (2015) Intellectual property and consolidation
in the seed industry. Crop Science 55(6): 2489 –2495.
DOI: 10.2135/cropsci2014.09.0669 .
Hulme PE (2009) Trade, transport and trouble: managing
invasive species pathways in an era of globalization.
Journal of Applied Ecology 46(1): 10 –18. DOI: 10.
1111/j.1365-2664.2008.01600.x .
Jansen K (2017) Business con ﬂict and risk regulation:
understanding the in ﬂuence of the pesticide industry.
Global Environmental Politics 17(4): 48 –66. DOI:
10.1162/GLEP_a_00427 .
Jones L, Heley J and Woods M (2019) Unravelling the
global wool assemblage: researching place and pro-
duction networks in the global countryside. Sociologia
Ruralis 59(1): 137 –158. DOI: 10.1111/soru.12220 .
Jones O and Cloke P (2008) Non-human agencies: trees in
place and time. In: Knappett C and Malafouris L (eds)
Material Agency . Boston, MA: Springer US, 79 –96.
DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-74711-8_5 .
Jones O and Cloke PJ (2002) Tree Cultures: The Place of
Trees and Trees in Their Place . Oxford; New York,
NY: Berg.
Kaika M (2004) City of Flows: Modernity, Nature, and the
City. 1st edition. Oxford, UK: Routledge. DOI: 10.
4324/9780203826928 .
Kawa NC (2016) Amazonia in the Anthropocene: People,
Soils, Plants, Forests . First edition. Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press.
Kimmerer RW (2020) Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous
Wisdom, Scienti ﬁc Knowledge, and the Teachings of
Plants . Minneapolis, Minnesota: Milkweed Editions.
Klepeis P and Gill N (2016) The paradox of engagement:
land stewardship and invasive weeds in amenity
landscapes. In: Taylor LE and Hurley PT (eds) A
Comparative Political Ecology of Exurbia . Cham:Argüelles and March 61
Springer International Publishing, 221 –243. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-29462-9_10 .
Klepeis P, Gill N and Chisholm L (2009) Emerging
amenity landscapes: invasive weeds and land subdi-vision in rural Australia. Land Use Policy 26(2):
380–392. DOI: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2008.04.006 .
Kloppenburg JR (1990) First the Seed: The Political Economy
of Plant Biotechnology . paperback edition. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 14921 –22000.
Koretskaya O and Feola G (2020) A framework for rec-
ognizing diversity beyond capitalism in agri-food
systems. Journal of Rural Studies 80: 302 –313.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jrurstud.2020.10.002 .
Kotsila P, Anguelovski I, Baró F, et al. (2020) Nature-based
solutions as discursive tools and contested practices in
urban nature ’s neoliberalisation processes. Environ-
ment and Planning E: Nature and Space 4: 252 –274.
DOI: 10.1177/2514848620901437 .
Kowarik I (2018) Urban wilderness: supply, demand, and
access. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 29:
336–347. DOI: 10.1016/j.ufug.2017.05.017 .
Krahmer H (2016) Weeds as crop companions. In: Atlas of
Weed Mapping . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Krinsky J and Simonet M (2017) Public Work and Urban
Governance in New York City . Chicago ; London: The
University of Chicago Press.Who Cleans the Park?
Kull CA (2018) Critical invasion science: weeds, pests, and
aliens. In: Lave R, Biermann C and Lane SN (eds) The
Palgrave Handbook of Critical Physical Geography .
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 249 –272.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-71461-5_12 .
Bryant R and Rangan H (2015) The international handbook
of political ecology. In: Bryant R (ed) The International
Handbook of Political Ecology . Cheltenham, UK: Ed-
ward Elgar Publishing. DOI: 10.4337/9780857936172 .
Lachmund J (2003) Exploring the city of rubble: botanical
ﬁeldwork in bombed cities in Germany after world
war II. Osiris 18: 234 –254. DOI: 10.1086/649386 .
Leighty CE (1938) Crop Rotation . Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
Liebman M and Davis AS (2015) Managing weeds in
organic farming systems: an ecological approach. In:
Francis C (ed) Agronomy Monographs . Madison, WI:
American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science So-
ciety of America, Soil Science Society of America,173–195. DOI: 10.2134/agronmonogr54.c8 .Liebman M and Dyck E (1993) Crop rotation and inter-
cropping strategies for weed management. Ecological
Applications 3(1): 92 –122. DOI: 10.2307/1941795 .
Livingston M, Fernandez-Cornejo J, Unger J, et al. (2015)
The Economics of Glyphosate Resistance Manage-ment in Corn and Soybean Production, ERR-184 .
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture,Economic Research Service.
Lloyd SG and Vinnicombe TL (2010) Mimosa Pigra L. - a
New Incursion into Western Australia . Christchurch,
New Zealand: -.
Longhurst R (2006) Plots, plants and paradoxes: con-
temporary domestic gardens in Aotearoa/New Zea-land. Social & Cultural Geography 7(4): 581 –593.
DOI: 10.1080/14649360600825729 .
Lorimer J (2006) What about the nematodes? Taxonomic
partialities in the scope of UK biodiversity conser-vation. Social & Cultural Geography 7(4): 539 –558.
DOI: 10.1080/14649360600825687 .
Lorimer J (2007) Nonhuman charisma. Environment and
Planning D: Society and Space 25(5): 911 –932. DOI:
10.1068/d71j .
Lorimer J (2012) Multinatural geographies for the An-
thropocene. Progress in Human Geography 36(5):
593–612. DOI: 10.1177/0309132511435352 .
Lyons KM (2020) Vital Decomposition: Soil Practitioners
and Life Politics . Durham, England: Duke University
Press.
Mabey R (2012) Weeds: the Story of Outlaw Plants .
London, UK: Pro ﬁle Books Ltd.
Mack RN, Simberloff D, Mark Lonsdale W, et al. (2000)
biotic invasions: causes, epidemiology, globalconsequences, and controlbicegc]2.0. Ecological Ap-
plicationsCO 10(3): 6892 –7710. DOI: 10.1890/1051-
0761(2000)010[0689:BICEGC]2.0.CO;2 .
Mann SA and Dickinson JM (1978) Obstacles to the de-
velopment of a capitalist agriculture. The Journal of
Peasant Studies 5(4): 466 –481. DOI: 10.1080/
03066157808438058 .
Marder M (2013) Plant-Thinking: A Philosophy of Vegetal
Life. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Marris E (2013) Rambunctious Garden: Saving Nature in a
Post-Wild World . Paperback ed. New York, NY:
Bloomsbury.
Marsden T (2000) Food matters and the matter of food:
towards a new food governance?
Sociologia Ruralis
40(1): 20 –29. DOI: 10.1111/1467-9523.00129 .62 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
Marshall EJP, Brown VK, Boatman ND, et al. (2003) The
role of weeds in supporting biological diversity withincrop ﬁelds*. Weed Research 43(2): 77 –89. DOI: 10.
1046/j.1365-3180.2003.00326.x .
Mastnak T, Elyachar J and Boellstorff T (2014) Botanical
decolonization: rethinking native plants. Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space 32(2): 363 –380.
DOI: 10.1068/d13006p .
McAfee K (2008) Beyond techno-science: transgenic
maize in the ﬁght over Mexico ’s future. Geoforum
39(1): 148 –160. DOI: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2007.06.
002.
McGeoch MA, Butchart SHM, Spear D, et al. (2010)
Global indicators of biological invasion: species
numbers, biodiversity impact and policy responses.
Diversity and Distributions 16(1): 95 –108. DOI: 10.
1111/j.1472-4642.2009.00633.x .
McLain RJ, Hurley PT, Emery MR, et al. (2014) Gathering
“wild”food in the city: rethinking the role of foraging
in urban ecosystem planning and management. Local
Environment 19(2): 220 –240. DOI: 10.1080/13549839.
2013.841659 .
Kennedy M, Butt A, Amati M, et al. (2016) Con ﬂict and
Change in Australia ’s Peri-Urban Landscapes. In:
Kennedy M, Butt A and Amati M (eds) Conﬂict and
Change in Australia ’s Peri-Urban Landscapes .0
edition. England, UK: Routledge. DOI: 10.4324/
9781315573366 .
Mitchell D (2012) They Saved the Crops: Labor, Land-
scape, and the Struggle over Industrial Farming inBracero-Era California . In: Geographies of justice
and social transformation 10. 1st edition. Athens:
University of Georgia Press.
Moragues-Faus A, Marsden T, Adlerov ´a B, et al. (2020)
Building diverse, distributive, and territorialized ag-
rifood economies to deliver sustainability and food
security. Economic Geography 96(3): 219 –243. DOI:
10.1080/00130095.2020.1749047 .
Mortensen DA, Egan JF, Maxwell BD, et al. (2012)
Navigating a Critical Juncture for Sustainable Weed
Management. BioScience 62(1): 75 –84. DOI:
10.
1525/bio.2012.62.1.12 .
Müller B (2006) Infringing and trespassing plants. Focaal
2006(48): 83 –98. DOI: 10.3167/092012906780646361 .
Müller B (2020) Glyphosate-A love story. Ordinary
thoughtlessness and response-ability in industrialfarming. Journal of Agrarian Change 21: 160 –179.
DOI: 10.1111/joac.12374 .
Nally D and Kearns G (2020) Vegetative states: potatoes,
affordances, and survival ecologies. Antipode 52(5):
1373 –1392. DOI: 10.1111/anti.12652 .
Norsworthy JK, Ward SM, Shaw DR, et al. (2012) Reducing
the risks of herbicide resistance: best managementpractices and recommendations. Weed Science 60(SP1):
31–62. DOI: 10.1614/WS-D-11-00155.1 .
Nyman M (2019) Food, meaning-making and ontological
uncertainty: exploring ’urban foraging ’and produc-
tive landscapes in London. Geoforum 99: 170 –180.
DOI: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.10.009 .
Olwig KR (2003) Natives and aliens in the national
landscape. Landscape Research 28(1): 61 –74. DOI:
10.1080/01426390306525 .
Oskam AJ, Vijftigschild RAN, Graveland C, et al. (1998)
Additional EU Policy Instruments for Plant Protec-tion Products: A Report within the Second Phase ofthe Programme: Possibilities for Future EC Envi-ronmental Policy on Plant Protection Products .
Wageningen, Netherlands: Wageningen Pers.
Owen MD and Zelaya IA (2005) Herbicide-resistant crops
and weed resistance to herbicides. Pest Management
Science 61(3): 301 –311. DOI: 10.1002/ps.1015 .
Paddeu F (2019) Waste, weeds, and wild food. EchoG ´eo
47. DOI: 10.4000/echogeo.16623 .
Patrick DJ (2014) The matter of displacement: a queer
urban ecology of New York City ’s High Line. Social
& Cultural Geography 15(8): 920 –941. DOI: 10.
1080/14649365.2013.851263 .
Paxson H (2008) Post-pasteurian cultures: the micro-
biopolitics of raw-milk cheese in the United States.Cultural Anthropology 23(1): 15 –47. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1548-1360.2008.00002.x .
Pellegrini P and Baudry S (2014) Streets as new places to
bring together both humans and plants: examples
from Paris and Montpellier (France). Social & Cul-
tural Geography 15(8): 871 –900. DOI: 10.1080/
14649365.2014.974067 .
Phillips C (2020) Telling times: more-than-human tem-
poralities in beekeeping. Geoforum 108: 315 –324.
DOI: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2019.08.018 .
Poe MR, LeCompte J, McLain R, et al. (2014) Urban
foraging and the relational ecologies of belonging.Social & Cultural Geography 15(8): 901 –919. DOI:
10.1080/14649365.2014.908232 .Argüelles and March 63
Power ER (2005) Human-nature relations in suburban
gardens. Australian Geographer 36(1): 39 –53. DOI:
10.1080/00049180500050847 .
Pralle S (2006) The "mouse that roared": agenda setting in
Canadian pesticides politics. Policy Studies Journal 34(2):
171–194. DOI: 10.1111/j.1541-0072. 2006.00165.x .
Puig de la Bellacasa M (2015) Making time for soil:
technoscienti ﬁc futurity and the pace of care. Social
Studies of Science 45(5): 691 –716. DOI: 10.1177/
0306312715599851 .
Qvenild M, Setten G and Sk ˚ar M (2014) Politicising plants:
dwelling and invasive alien species in domestic
gardens in Norway. Norsk Geogra ﬁsk Tidsskrift -
Norwegian Journal of Geography 68(1): 22 –33. DOI:
10.1080/00291951.2013.870599 .
Rappaport B (1992) Weed laws: a historical review and rec-
ommendations. Natural Areas Journal 12(4): 216 –217.
Reisman ED (2020) Orchard Entanglements: Political
Ecologies of Almond Production in California and
Spain . UC Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA.
Robbins P (2004a) Comparing invasive networks: cultural
and political biographies of invasive species. Geo-
graphical Review 94(2): 139 –156. doi: 10.1111/j.
1931-0846.2004.tb00164.x .
Robbins P (2004b) Political Ecology: A Critical Intro-
duction . Critical Introductions to Geography . Mal-
den, MA: Blackwell Pub.
Robbins P (2007) Lawn People: How Grasses, Weeds, and
Chemicals Make Us Who We Are . Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
Robbins P and Sharp J (2003) The lawn-chemical economy
and its discontents. Antipode 35(5): 955 –979. DOI:
10.1111/j.1467-8330.2003.00366.x .
Robbins P and Sharp JT (2009) Producing and consuming
chemicals: the moral economy of the American Lawn.
Economic Geography 79(4): 425 –451. DOI: 10.1111/
j.1944-8287.2003.tb00222.x .
Robbins P, Polderman A and Birkenholtz T (2001) Lawns
and toxins. Cities 18(6): 369 –380. DOI: 10.1016/
S0264-2751(01)00029-4 .
Romero AM (2016a) “From Oil Well to Farm ”: Industrial
Waste, Shell Oil, and the Petrochemical Turn (1927 –
1947). Agricultural History Society 90(1): 70 –93. doi:
10.3098/ah.2016.090.1.70 .
Romero AM (2016b) Commercializing chemical warfare:
citrus, cyanide, and an endless war. Agriculture andHuman Values 33: 3 –26. doi: 10.1007/s10460-015-
9591-1 .
Sander-Regier R (2009) Bare roots: exploring botanical agency
in the personal garden. TOPIA: Canadian Journal of
Cultural Studies 21: 63 –84. DOI: 10.3138/topia.21.63 .
Schmelzkopf K (1995) Urban community gardens as
contested space. Geographical Review 85(3): 364.
DOI: 10.2307/215279 .
Scott JC (2000) Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of
Peasant Resistance . New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press.
Scott JC (2017) Against the Grain: A Deep History of the
Earliest States . New Haven, CT: Yale agrarian
studies, Yale Univ. Press.
Service RF (2007) A growing threat down on the farm.
Science 316(5828): 1114 –1117. DOI: 10.1126/
science.316.5828.1114 .
Shaner DL and Beckie HJ (2014) The future for weed
control and technology. Pest Management Science
70(9): 1329 –1339. DOI: 10.1002/ps.3706 .
Smith A (2020) Sustaining municipal parks in an era of
neoliberal austerity: the contested commercialisationof gunnersbury park. Environment and Planning A:
Economy and Space . 0308518X2095181. DOI: 10.
1177/0308518X20951814 .
Smyth C (2017) What counts as expertise? The case of
glyphosate and Jasanoff ’s’three-body problem ’.
Environmental Law Review 19(3): 168 –182. DOI: 10.
1177/1461452917724137 .
Soane BD, Ball BC, Arvidsson J, et al. (2012) No-till in
northern, western and south-western Europe: a reviewof problems and opportunities for crop production andthe environment. Soil and Tillage Research 118:
66–87. DOI: 10.1016/j.still.2011.10.015 .
Sonnino R and Marsden T (2006) Beyond the divide:
rethinking relationships between alternative andconventional food networks in Europe. Journal of
Economic Geography
6(2): 181 –199. DOI: 10.1093/
jeg/lbi006 .
Springate-Baginski O and Blaikie P (2014) Forests People
and Power: The Political Ecology of Reform in South
Asia. Abingdon, UK: Earthscan.
Stoetzer B (2018) Ruderal ecologies: rethinking nature, mi-
gration, and the urban landscape in berlin. Cultural
Anthropology 33(2): 295 –323. DOI: 10.14506/ca33.2.09 .
Sukopp H (2003) Flora and vegetation re ﬂecting the urban
history of Berlin. Die Erde; Zeitschrift der Gesell-
schaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin 134(3): 295 –316.64 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
Sukopp H (2008) On the early history of urban ecology in
Europe. In: Marzluff JM, Shulenberger E, EndlicherW, et al. (eds) Urban Ecology . Boston, MA: Springer US,
79–97. DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-73412-5_6 .Urban Ecology
Sumberg JE and Thompson J (2012) Contested Agronomy:
Agricultural Research in a Changing World . New
York, NY: Routledge.
Sundberg J (2011) DiabolicCaminosin the Desert and cat
ﬁghts on the r ´ıo: a posthumanist political ecology of
boundary enforcement in the United States-Mexico
borderlands. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 101(2): 318 –336. DOI: 10.1080/
00045608.2010.538323 .
Thompson J and Scoones I (2009) Addressing the dynamics of
agri-food systems: an emerging agenda for social science
research. Environmental Science & Policy 12(4):
386–397. DOI: 10.1016/j.envsci.2009.03.001 .
Timmons FL (2005) A history of weed control in the
United States and Canada1. Weed ScienceCO 53(6):
7482 –7761. DOI: 10.1614/0043-1745(2005)053[0748:
AHOWCI]2.0.CO;2 .
Tornaghi C (2014) Critical geography of urban agriculture.
Progress in Human Geography 38(4): 551 –567. DOI:
10.1177/0309132513512542 .
Tosun J, Lelieveldt H and Wing T (2019) A case of
’muddling through ’? The politics of renewing
glyphosate authorization in the European Union.Sustainability 11(2): 440. DOI: 10.3390/su11020440 .
Tsing AL (2015) Mushroom at the End of the World: On
the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins . Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tsing AL (2017) The buck, the bull, and the dream of the
stag: some unexpected weeds of the anthropocene.
Suomen Antropologi: Journal of the Finnish An-
thropological Society 42(11): 3 –21.
Tsing AL, Deger J, Saxena AK, et al. (2020) Feral atlas: the
more-than-human anthropocene. Available at: http://
bibpurl.oclc.org/web/95602 http://feralatlas.org (ac-
cessed 6 January 2021).
Turner MD (2016) Political ecology II. Progress in
Human Geography 40(3): 413 –421. DOI: 10.1177/
0309132515577025 .
Tzaninis Y, Mandler T, Kaika M, et al. (2020) Moving
urban political ecology beyond the ’urbanization of
nature ’.Progress in Human Geography
45–252. DOI:
10.1177/0309132520903350 .Union of Concerned Scientists (2013) The Rise of Super-
weeds. Available at: https://www.ucsusa.org/resources/
rise-superweeds (accessed 10 January 2021).
Vandermeer JH and Perfecto I (2013) Breakfast of Biodi-
versity: The Political Ecology of Rain Forest Destruction .
2nd edition. Oakland, Calif: Food First Books.
Vanloqueren G and Baret PV (2009) How agricultural
research systems shape a technological regime that
develops genetic engineering but locks out agro-
ecological innovations. Research Policy 38(6):
971–983. DOI: 10.1016/j.respol.2009.02.008 .
Vitousek PM, D ’Antonio CM, Loope LL, et al. (1997)
Introduced species: a signi ﬁcant component of
human-caused global change. New Zealand Journal
of Ecology 21(1): 1 –16.
Wachsmuth D and Angelo H (2018) Green and gray: new
ideologies of nature in urban sustainability policy. Annals
of the American Association of Geographers 108(4):
1038–1056. DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2017.1417819 .
Walker PA (2005) Political ecology: where is the ecology?
Progress in Human Geography 29(1): 73 –82. DOI:
10.1191/0309132505ph530pr .
Wallace VH, Bartholomew C and Campbell JH (2016) Turf
Manager Response to Changing Pesticide Regula-
tions. HortScience 51(4): 394 –397. DOI: 10.21273/
HORTSCI.51.4.394 .
Warren CR (2007) Perspectives on the `alien ’versus
`native ’species debate: a critique of concepts, lan-
guage and practice. Progress in Human Geography
31(4): 427 –446. DOI: 10.1177/0309132507079499 .
Watts N and Scales IR (2015) Seeds, agricultural systems
and socio-natures: towards an actor-network theory
informed political ecology of agriculture. Geography
Compass 9(5): 225 –236. DOI: 10.1111/gec3.12212 .
Weber F, Kowarik I and S ¨aumel I (2014) A walk on the
wild side: perceptions of roadside vegetation beyondtrees. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 13(2):
205–212. DOI: 10.1016/j.ufug.2013.10.010 .
Weis AJ (2007) The Global Food Economy: The Battle for
the Future of Farming . London NY: Zed Books.
Werner M, Berndt C and Mans ﬁeld B The Glyphosate
Assemblage: Herbicides, Uneven Development, andChemical Geographies of Ubiquity. Annals of
American Association of Geographers . doi: 10.1080/
24694452.2021.1898322 , In press.
Whatmore S (2002) Hybrid Geographies: Natures Cultures
Spaces . 1 Oliver ’s Yard, 55 City Road . London EC1YArgüelles and March 65
1SP UK: SAGE Publications Ltd. DOI: 10.4135/
9781446219713 .
Williams B (2020) “The Fabric of Our Lives ”?: Cotton,
Pesticides, and Agrarian Racial Regimes in the U.S.South. Annals of the American Association of Ge-
ographers 111(2): 422 –439. doi: 10.1080/24694452.
2020.1775542 .
Wylie I (2015) Glyphosate Is a ‘probably Carcinogenic ’
Herbicide . Why do cities still use it? the Guardian ,2 1
April. Available at: http://www.theguardian.com/
cities/2015/apr/21/glyphosate-probably-carcinogenic-pesticide-why-cities-use-it (accessed 22 December
2020).
Zagorski T, Kirkpatrick JB and Stratford E (2004) Gardens and
the Bush: Gardeners ’Attitudes, Garden Types and
Invasives. Australian Geographical Studies 42(2):
207–220. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8470.2004.00260.x .
Zimdahl RL (2018) Fundamentals of Weed Science . Fifth
edition. London San Diego, CA Cambridge, MA: AP,Academic Press, an imprint of Elsevier.
Ziska LH and Dukes JS (2011) Weed Biology and Climate
Change . Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell.Author biographies
Luc´ıa Argüelles is a Juan de la Cierva postdoctoral
fellow at the Laboratory of Urban Transformationand Global Change (TURBA) at the Internet Inter-disciplinary Institute (IN3) at the UniversitatObertade Catalunya (UOC). She is also af ﬁliated to the
Faculty of Economics and Business (UOC) and she isa member of the Barcelona Lab for Urban Envi-ronmental Justice (BCNUEJ). She is interested in the
political ecologies operating in the agri-food system,
including those of weeds, pesticides and weedingpractices and technologies.
Hug March is an Associate Professor at the Faculty
of Economics and Business of the Uni-
versitatOberta de Catalunya (UOC) as well asresearch at the Laboratory of Urban Transforma-tion and Global Change (TURBA) at the InternetInterdisciplinary Institute (IN3), UOC. His re-search interests include political ecology of water,critical perspectives on urban sustainability and
nature-society relations.66 Progress in Human Geography 46(1)
