Thematic Collection Article
When Extracting
Is Not Subtracting:
Accounting for
Organism-technologies
as Stakeholders
in Microbial Resource
Extraction through
an Experiment
in Discursive Biomimicry
Erika Amethyst Szymanski1
Abstract
This paper concerns how digitizing biological resources enables disen-
tangling information technologies from biological bodies and, thus, from
response-abilities among creatures from which they are derived. Extracting
(digital) information from (biological) bodies makes it possible to stabilize,
freeze, circulate, and control that information independently from crea-
turely activities—multiplying, not subtracting from the originating material.
Such extractions tend to attenuate human interdependencies with other
1Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA
Corresponding Author:
Erika Amethyst Szymanski, Colorado State University, Williard O. Eddy Hall 345, 1773
Campus Delivery, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.
Email: erika.szymanski@colostate.eduScience, Technology, & Human Values
2024, Vol. 49(3) 555-577
ªThe Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/01622439211035449
journals.sagepub.com/home/sth

creatures even while expanding the scope of their utility as resources, to
the effect of limiting those who have a stake in their development to humans
alone. Where conventional natural resource extraction does violence to
places and those interdependent with them, digital resource extractions
may instead do violence to human capacities to recognize and act on
multispecies interdependencies. Here, I argue that choosing to realize
connections among organisms and organismal resources makes it possible
to envision how creatures may be stakeholders in their own development,
with joined ethical and epistemic consequences. I trace that possibility
through a case study of the essential laboratory yeast Saccharomyces cere-
visiae via the physical metaphor of snowflake yeast, an S. cerevisiae variant
that maintains multicellular connections as it reproduces.
Keywords
microbes, extraction, multispecies, yeast, bioeconomy
Introduction
The phrase “resource extraction” tends to bring up images of such ecolo-
gical atrocities as giant pits in the ground and long lines of scraped logs
leaving scarred land. Extraction also tends to bring up critical perspectives
on how extractivism entails violence to lands and people indigenous to
them. Yet, in an era in which many resources are neither physical nor
necessarily coupled to land, the question arises: to what extent do theoriza-
tions of natural resource extraction apply to “extracted” information
resources?
Biodiversity is becoming Norway’s “new oil,” with deep fjords mined
for new microbes—not for use as raw materials, but for genomes that might
encode the next breakthrough antibiotic (see Delgado’s article in this col-
lection; Taffel 2021). Scientists from the United States and Europe go
bioprospecting in exotic locations for novel microbial functions to funnel
into drug discovery pipelines. Meanwhile, more familiar microbes are being
exploited as “chassis,” or physical housings for genetic parts, toward devel-
oping a theoretically endless array of products and applications designed to
replace established technology with biotechnology.
In a (bio)economy in which fossil fuels are out and genes are in, such
modes of generating value are readily slotted into established economic
paradigms as evident equivalents for their predecessors (Birch 2017).556 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
Bioengineers have been criticized as wanting to revolutionize production
while changing nothing about consumption (Endy and Ginsberg 2020).
Meanwhile, Birch and Tyfield (2013) have pointed to “the fetishization
of all things ‘bio’” (p. 301) through which bio-driven reconfigurations of
actors are sometimes theorized without adequately considering how bio-
based modes of value generation differ from their predecessors along basic
economic lines. Their argument is that bio-assets and bio-commodities
often invoke fundamentally different financial paradigms. We should simi-
larly expect that biological materials made valuable as informational
resources will involve different material paradigms, compared to biological
materials made valuable as physical resources.
Information resources are decoupled from physical bodies, but informa-
tion is never entirely disembodied (Hayles 1999). Rather than construing
informational resources as representative of material things, we might
instead consider them as re-mediations, abstractions in a different modality
with different affordances. Through this lens, we might also ask how or
even whether these medializations are connected. A material-semiotic
response—consistent with the idea t hat information is never merely a
one-to-one translation or representation—is that they are connected when
those who enact them do the work to connect them, to associate them as
being or being about “the same thing” (Mol 2002). That is, there are choices
to be made.
My argument here is that doing the work to maintain connections among
creatures and resources that bud from them allows that creatures might
themselves have a stake in their own development. I further argue that
discussions of how to responsibly develop digital resources should keep
such possibilities open because this move opens a route toward realizing
questions about the “goods” of technology development as more-than-
human concerns (Latour 2004; Szymanski, Smith, and Calvert 2021). Mak-
ing decisions with the interests and well-being of other creatures in mind
requires listening to them—only possible if we first remember that deci-
sions involve creatures to whom we can listen—and then cultivating com-
municative capabilities with them. Und erstanding bio-informational
resource development as multiplying the practices through which we con-
nect with them affords possibilities toward bringing other-than-human
voices into conversations organized through Western worldviews, with
ethical and epistemic consequences.
I mobilize “extraction” as an actor’s category employed by social scien-
tists. Conventional resource extraction diminishes the supply of a material
at its origin and increases supplies of the resource derived from it. The sameSzymanski 557
does not hold for informational resources, wherein a microscopic quantity
of the original material may suffice to generate any quantity of associated
value. Joseph Millum (2010) observes that markets therefore apply to
genetic resources in a qualitatively different way because the first person
to sell an informational resource substantially reduces the value of the same
information owned by others. Focusing on the originating material rather
than the market system suggests an additional difference. Instead of sub-
tracting, these extractions add. They displace and transform bio-re-
mediations which add to the instantiations of a bio-informational thing,
or what we might do the work to make coherent as an organism-technology.
The voice of the “bio” is notably absent in discussing whose interests
count in the valuation and development of bio-resources, at least through
Western lenses of responsible research and fair benefits-sharing (contrast
Millum 2010 with Gudynas 2019). Other worldviews for organizing con-
versations about value—the Latin American concepts collectively known as
buen vivir, for example (Gudynas 2011; 2019)—make multiple varieties of
value legible, including those grounded in the perspectives of other-than-
humans. These strategies could inf orm modes of accounting for social
dimensions of information-based technologies, particularly given defini-
tions of “society” not restricted to humans exclusively (Latimer and Miele
2013). However, those connections are unlikely or impossible if creatures
are not connected with informational resources from which the “bio” has
been distanced. In contrast, maintaining connections among organisms and
the information technologies they promulgate ramifies conditions of possi-
bility for accounting for more-than-human modes of knowledge and care,
even within Western framings of “responsible” biotechnology develop-
ment. We do different things with organisms than with technologies, so
realizing something as an organism-technology has practical consequences.
Accomplishing this move requires choosing to hold onto living organ-
isms as the context for biotechnology development wherein biological parts
are defined in relation to biological wholes. I employ snowflake yeast, a
form of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae with a distinctive
growth habit (Ratcliff et al. 2015), as a physical metaphor for how
organism-technologies as assembla ges may be traced. Budding yeast’s
development, when viewed as a “multicellular” snowflake, exemplifies
how living things may simultaneously function as organisms, cells, tech-
nologies, physical and digital resources.
I begin by introducing snowflake yeast as a biological phenomenon.
Thereafter, my argument is organized as a series of buds, inspired by the
growth habits of budding snowflake yeast wherein each bud extends from558 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
and remains connected to its parent, aggregating without necessarily pro-
ceeding in straight lines or a single direction. To be clear, I am adamantly
not suggesting that humans should not manipulate yeast to extract value
from it. Rather, I am suggesting that the myriad technologies derived from
living things should not be cut apart to disentangle and commodify bio-
information resources at the expense of developing “simultaneously ethical
and epistemic” (Candea 2013, 107) capacities for realizing multispecies
interdependence in a bioeconomy-driven age (Calvert 2008; Frow 2013).
Snowflake Yeast
Budding yeasts, as a group, contrast with fission yeasts. Fission yeasts
reproduce by splitting down the midd le to form independent rod-shaped
cells. Budding yeasts, in contrast, re produce by pinching off bits of cyto-
plasm to form a small daughter cell that usually disconnects cleanly from
the mother cell.1Some genetic mutations, ho wever, lead to mother and
daughter cells remaining connected, g eneration after ge neration, forming
“snowflakes” that expand outward from a central progenitor (Ratcliff et al.
2015). Budding yeast does not bud in perfectly straight lines, and while
buds reliably emerge from one and only one end of a cell, a yeast snow-
flake as a multicellular entity grows in multiple directions, occupying
space as a clump rather than moving purposefully in one direction. Snow-
flake yeast are, in this way, an apt physical metaphor for how yeast has
expanded and aggregated as yeast-based resources have been extracted.
Snowflake yeast are a means of thinking through the shape of yeast devel-
opment without imputing either a singl e progressive trajectory to where its
development is going or any kind of subtraction upon the development of
something new.
Where the initiative in this association lies is not straightforward, for
yeast have domesticated humans as much as humans have domesticated
yeast (Katz 2012).2Many humans have become adept at caring for yeast,
and some—bakers, brewers, and winemakers, among others—have become
uniquely attuned to yeast’s needs. Such established human–yeast relations
have continued to change through bioengineering and its neighboring bio-
technologies. Employing yeast as a platform, a cell factory, and a chassis (as
is often the case in metabolic engineering and synthetic biology) tends to
position yeast as the thing being worked upon, not a thing doing work.
Imagining yeast as a computer program (Szymanski 2018a), as in the syn-
thetic yeast project discussed below, positions yeast as a source of infor-
mation, not a source of physical material and physical labor as yeast are inSzymanski 559
brewing and baking. These shifts have largely been enabled by genomics,
whole-genome sequencing, and the apparatuses of control produced
through the perception of comprehensive biological understanding they
afford (Stevens 2013; Szymanski, Vermeulen, and Wong 2019). Simulta-
neously, yeast’s “metabolic labor” (Beldo 2017) has done the heavy lifting
not only in traditional food and beverage production but in other industrial
fermentations to produce pharmaceutic als, biofuels, or alternative food
proteins. Yeast genomes have been extracted from yeast bodies, and
yeast-derived genetic parts from yeast genomes, to ramify additional value
chains. One yeast-working repertoire (Leonelli and Ankeny 2015) buds
from another.
As yeast is mobilized in differen t forms—as new buds emerge from
parents—the results are additive, not s ubtractive. Digitizing yeast, relo-
cating its genome from cells in Petri dishes to online databases, changes
the shape of yeast and possibilities for working with it everywhere.3
Simultaneously, these additions neither eliminate nor override the possi-
bility of working with yeast in ways that do not depend on genomics, even
as work with physical yeast bodies mus t be seen differently in relation to
these developments. Separating “y east” from yeast bodies expands the
r a n g eo fp e o p l ew h ow o r kw i t hy e a s t .T h es a m em o v em a k e si te a s i e r
to reduce yeast solely to their inst rumental value as defined through a
particular use. Disconnecting yeast’s value from yeast’s creatureliness
makes it easier to disco nnect human goods (or, properly, the goods of
specific humans) from oth er-than-human interdepe ndencies. In contrast,
retaining the conceptual morphology of the snowflake, so as to understand
organism-technologies as assemblages of diverse morphological
instances, enables holding onto human goods as necessarily entangled
with other-than-human goods.
The central progenitor in this particular snowflake is called S288C.
S288C is a standard laboratory strain of S. cerevisiae developed in the
late 1950s in Berkeley, California, by Robert Mortimer, then a young
medical physicist. Through Mortimer’s willingness to share and the
yeast’s winning personality—relia ble, easy to grow, undemanding—
S288C became a cornerstone of the yeast genetics community and the
foundation of its later digital instantia tions (Langer 2016). S288C is itself
a daughter of many mothers with a family tree that includes bakers and
brewers’ yeasts, yeasts found on disc arded fruit in domestic orchards, and
yeasts brought back on the rinds and peels of exotic produce from overseas
trips—a good reminder t hat microbes in the laboratory always connect to
microbes elsewhere.560 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
Bud—Digitizing Yeast by Sequencing the Yeast
Genome Enables Moving “Yeast” Online
When sequencing the complete genome of a eukaryote became a reasonable
technical proposition in the 1980s, yeast was an obvious choice.4S288C
had become a laboratory standard in the 1970s, fueled by Mortimer’s “stock
center,” which provided uniform cultures to researchers, such that geogra-
phically and temporally distant yeast researchers could share resources and
collate findings as if working on “the exact same cell” (Boone 2014, 436).
Sharing strains and resources facilitated the expansion of a community
working with that cell, plus collective resources that linked physical cells
with shared tools: genetic maps, biochemical markers, modes of molecular
manipulation, and specialized strains, among others. Such collective
resources encouraged the conceptual and physical organization of an inter-
national “yeast community” oriented around what could be described as a
single project: “the ‘solution’ of the organism” (Johnston 2000, 617).
Sequencing the yeast genome seemed possible not only because of the
traction obtained by the standardized cell but—as in so many model organ-
ism communities—because of the existing coordination of yeast labora-
tories around common resources and the ethos of cooperation firmly
established among them (Leonelli and Ankeny 2013). Extracting genome
from cell was, however, compelling in different ways to different agendas.
In the United States, yeast was seen as a pilot for the Human Genome
Project—a means of developing technologies to sequence a much larger and
more important genome with more speed and less expense. For the European
Community’s science directorate, where the project initially germinated,
yeast genome sequencing became an ideal solution to the perceived problem
that Europe was failing to compete with American and Japanese biotechnol-
ogy. As a “capacity building exercise” (Parolini 2018) distributed among
many European yeast laboratories, yeast could coordinate scientists across
Europe and provide steady work to nurture nascent private sequencing com-
panies, all while facilitating research–industry ties by developing an organ-
ism with clear economic value. And in Japan, yeast became tied to supporting
a state-of-the-art seque ncing center at RIKEN, Japan’s largest biology
research institute (Cook-Deegan 1994).
These three initially independent efforts became an intercontinental col-
laboration when leaders of the European project chose to prioritize com-
pleting a reference genome on time over completing a reference genome by
themselves (Langer 2016). What resulted was a complete and remarkably
high-quality reference genome for (more or less)5S288C and, through theSzymanski 561
initiative of the American contributors, a digital database providing access to
that sequence. From its release in 1996, the Stanford-based Saccharomyces
Genome Database (SGD) has maintained the reference sequence and collated
and curated a steadily expanding range of yeast genome-associated resources,
all fully accessible, freely shared, and entirely online. Where the locus of
yeast’s collective physical resources had been Mortimer’s physical repository
of yeast strains, the locus of yeast’s digital resources became the SGD.
Bud: Extracting the Genome from the Cell Enables
“Yeast” to Live Apart from Yeast Bodies
Subsequent to publication of the reference genome sequence, “the yeast
genome” came to index three distinct but connected phenomena: a physical
set of molecules housed within cells, a digital text available online, and a
historic event referenced as an important cultural touchstone in the scien-
tific literature (Szymanski, Vermeulen, and Wong 2019). In contrast to
working with a physical set of molecules, working with the digitized gen-
ome did not tie researchers to cells with any definite temporal or geographic
location. The S288C reference sequence was compiled from fragments
generated by nearly 600 (credited) individuals in ninety-four laboratories
across nineteen countries using varied techniques from manual Sanger and
Maxam-Gilbert sequencing to then-advanced automated ABI sequencers.
Those fragments were generated from several different cosmid and yeast
artificial chromosome (YAC) libraries built from distinct and geographi-
cally distant yeast cultures. Not until 2010, when researchers affiliated with
the SGD “resequenced” S288C from a single colony growing in Palo Alto,
could the reference genome be said to refer to any one physical yeast
community (Engel et al. 2013). The reference sequence did not represent
a set of physical molecules located in a yeast culture. It was a separate
informational resource with a life of its own, lived apart from yeast cells, a
“yeast” lineage that continued to replicate, expand, and diverge in silico
through maintenance work and other activities of humans and software
oriented around the sequence rather than any group of cells.
Bud: Extracting a Standardized Yeast Cell from Yeast
Bodies Enables Yeast to Become a Universal Cell
Yeast is widely used as an explanatory model for human and other eukar-
yotic cells, but also sometimes stands in for whole organisms; in aging
experiments, for example, prolong ing the life of a single yeast cell is562 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
sometimes interpreted in terms of prolonging human lives (e.g., Oliveira
et al. 2017). The “yeast group” active at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
through the 1970s and 1980s championed their organism as suitable for
studying any biological question—including, in their later careers, handed-
ness and hair growth patterns (Klar 2003). Ira Herskowitz, their contempo-
rary at the University of California San Francisco, called yeast “the
universal cell”—experimentally tractable, malleable, and able to model
virtually any eukaryotic phenomenon (Herskowitz 1985).
Hannah Landecker (2007), in Culturing Life , traces how cells of human
and other multicellular organisms have been separated from bodies to
become technologies with distinct temporalities (e.g., through freezing)
such that, through cell culture, many scientists can study “the same cell”
in disparate times and places. Yeast may seem to already be single-celled,
but laboratory yeast has likewise needed to be separated from the larger
body in which it typically lives. Clonal populations have been extracted and
isolated from yeast as it typically liv es in heterogenous communities.
S288C and other standardized laboratory strains must be temporally frozen,
maintained as evolutionarily inert standards, to be aligned as “the same
cell” across time and space. Standard ized laboratory ye ast has distinct
capacities and characteristics; it becomes a different organism in compar-
ison to yeast in the brewery or bakery (Borneman and Pretorius 2015).
Simultaneously, each remains connected to and continues to influence the
development of the other, as is evident, for example, in the lists of compa-
nies and trade organizations for which prominent yeast geneticists were
asked to provide advice (Langer 2016; Ira Herskowitz Papers 1974-2003).
Landecker’s work suggests mammalian cell culture as a necessary pre-
dicate to understanding yeast as the universal eukaryotic cell, insofar as cell
culture enabled envisioning and manipulating cells as physically separate
from whole organisms. By separating cells from bodies, yeast, human, and
myriad other cells can be lined up, made equivalent to each other, and so
used as models for one another. Similarly, by separating genomes from
bodies, digitized genomes can be fixed in time, lined up, and compared
as functional and structural equivalents.
Bud: Extracting Tools as Objects from Creatures as
Living Things Distances Technologies from Organisms
Scientific uses of yeast as tools are often not organized around the “whole”
yeast, and even whole yeast bodies do not yield the same fleshy reminders
of their aliveness as mice, zebrafish, or other model organisms typicallySzymanski 563
studied intact. On the contrary, yeast is often employed as a container—a
bag of chromosomes or genes that are themselves the objects of scientific
interest, and which may or may not have originated in yeast. The SGD is
organized around genes and around open reading frames, promoters, and
other fragments of DNA that can be handled as if they were genes. Genes
are the handles one holds while moving through the database’s resources;
cell type or strain becomes background, noticeable only if you look for it.
Whole yeast cells appear in the guise of phenotypes—single-dimension,
often binary behaviors invoked to characterize genes. The whole cell
appears in the SGD logo where, evocatively, a budding yeast cell is the
blank container within which the “SGD” resides.
Much scholarship around biotec hnology and model organisms has
addressed how organisms become t echnologies. Yeast, however, was
already a human technology long before it began its career in laboratory
science such that, for example, the boundaries that bio-objectification relies
on being transgressed by biotechnology were less sharp and arguably absent
in yeast’s case even before biotechnology intervened (Holmberg, Schwen-
nesen, and Webster 2011). Yeast is described in and outside of scientific
communities as a friend of humanity and a pillar of civilization, an old tool
being further refined, and a source of medical therapeutics such that scien-
tists not only canbutshould continue to engineer yeast without meddling
with “nature.”
Yeast is both a tool itself and a source of other tools, which retain their
yeastiness by virtue of name and lineage even when separated from yeast
bodies. Yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs), for example, are constructed
with telomeres, centromeres, and autonomous replicating sequences (ARS)
from yeast, even while the backbone or starting point for the construct is a
plasmid from bacteria (Murray and Szostak 1983). The DNA stored in the
YAC—the reason for its construction—may originate anywhere and des-
tined for many other cell types. Scientific activities to extract tools from
yeast expand what “yeast” is and distance yeast resources from yeast bod-
ies. This distancing makes it easier to work with yeast as a technology
without also working with it as an organism.
Bud: Extracting Genomes from Organisms Enables
Putting Them Back Again
Where the SGD takes yeast apart, the synthetic yeast project aims to put
yeast back together.6The synthetic yeast project, or Saccharomyces cere-
visiae 2.0, is the first effort in synthetic biology to construct a complete564 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
eukaryotic genome7entirely from algorithmically redesigned, laboratory-
synthesized DNA. In synthetic biology, yeast and other cells are most often
“chassis” or “platforms” on or within which engineering takes place. The
organism may be entirely absent from discussions concerned with engineer-
ing genetic pathways or circuits, and cellular responses to intracellular
engineering are routinely construed as interruptions or “bugs” that need
to be engineered away. The synthetic yeast project is a notable exception
to this general pattern (Calvert and Szymanski 2020). This project is about
re-placing a digital yeast genome: editing an informational text on a com-
puter, transforming that in silico text into physical molecules, and convin-
cing yeast to take up and incorporate those molecules into the physical
genome it already contains. Yeast must be convinced to perform this final
step of making the digital physical again, and their responses to redesigned
DNA are the ultimate criteria by which the success of synthetic biologists’
design work is assessed (Szymanski 2018b). Yeasts’ capacity for action and
response brings the liveliness of the tool back into the scientific picture,
making yeast’s creaturely characteristics impossible to ignore.
The synthetic yeast project revolves around chromosomes rather than
“genetic parts” with defined functions, as do most synthetic biology proj-
ects oriented around specific applications. Yeast, however, has not always
been characterized by the sixteen chromosomes now being redesigned. As
late as 1986, Hershel Roman, a leading yeast geneticist at the University of
Washington, reported that yeast might have sixteen or seventeen chromo-
somes—“the number hasn’t been settled to everyone’s satisfaction”
(Roman 1986, 3). Chinese scientists mapping chromosome V in 1992 still
reported the number as “about seventeen” (Zhu and Kuang 1992). Four
years later, following the cooperative work of the yeast genome sequencing
project, yeast’s chromosome count was stably fixed at sixteen (Goffeau
et al. 1996).
Fixing the chromosome count makes it possible to change it again, in
that possessing a complete map of the yeast genome enables rearranging its
geography. Among other changes, the synthetic yeast genome extracts all
tRNA genes—essential for translating messenger RNA into chains of amino
acids—from their typical locations scattered around the genome and con-
solidates them into a wholly new “neochromosome” (Richardson et al.
2017). Endeavoring to keep tRNA genes from moving has called for insu-
lating them with DNA fragments extracted from other yeast species, which
become part of S. cerevisiae through context and function when sequence
alone would indicate a different p arentage (Walker 2017). This planSzymanski 565
embodies a central design principle of the project, improving yeast genome
stability so that the genome changes if and only if a scientist changes it.
To maintain the same chromosome count in the finished synthetic yeast
cell, two of the smallest chromosomes will be linked to compensate for the
addition of the neochromosome. At the project’s outset, it remained an open
question whether chromosome count matters to yeast in the same way that it
matters to humans. It now appears that it does not, as viable yeasts have
been constructed with the entire genome consolidated into a single giant
chromosome (Shao et al. 2018). This example demonstrates how yeast
might be considered users of rede signed DNA, whose responses about
which designs support growth and survival must be taken into account
before any additional applications ca n occur further downstream (Szy-
manski 2018b).
The synthetic yeast project envisions yeast as a computer program to be
edited, refactored, and debugged (Szymanski 2018a). Its anticipated end
users and stakeholders are biotech entrepreneurs, pharmaceutical compa-
nies, Silicon Valley start-ups, and scientific innovators. Looking down into
the lab rather than outside it, however, we might see that yeast itself is a
stakeholder with a “say” insofar as it is being asked to change and may
refuse to do so. What is a resource to be mined (see: https://yeastmine.yea
stgenome.org/yeastmine/begin.do), a participant to be involved, or a stake-
holder who may accept or refuse a new technology? Responses to this
question depend on where one draws the line between creature and tech-
nology or, alternately, where (as I suggest here) one does not.
Bud: Whose Labor Generates Value?
Jenny Bellon has worked as an expert in yeast mating at the Australian
Wine Research Institute, constructing new yeast hybrids by mixing speci-
mens of different yeast species in the same tube and waiting.8Rare yeast
matings occur, rarely, when two cells whose genetic disparities mean that
they would not ordinarily mate sit on top of each other for long enough.
Bellon’s work chiefly concerns developing precise experimental conditions
that permit separating rare-mating progeny from cells which have not mated
(Bellon et al. 2018). We might say that the yeast, whom Bellon sometimes
describes as her children, do much of the work.
Yeast works across biotechnology. Crucially, while synthetic biologists
have numerous options for linking bits of DNA, the most reliable strategy
for difficult construction projects is assembly in yeasto (Mitchell et al.
2015). Yeast are experts at a construction technique called homologous566 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
recombination, lining up matching sequences on separate DNA fragments
and integrating them via a mechanism that scientists have yet to compre-
hensively describe or functionally mimic. Employing homologous recom-
bination involves transforming yeast with appropriately designed sections
of DNA—a simple procedure—and waiting; the scientist’s primary work is
identifying cells that have correctly assembled the DNA construct. In this
process, yeast play the role of coworkers more than tools, being active
participants in creating what could be called the surplus value extracted
from their bodies: DNA sequences and resulting metabolic products that are
far more valuable than the sugars on which yeast are fed.
Les Beldo (2017) has suggested that we consider the excess over and
above what humans invest in obtaining value from animals and plants as the
product of those creatures’ “metabolic labor.” Beldo uses this phrase to
direct attention to the “exploitation at the center of human-animal relations
of production” (p. 118) by making animal labor analogous to the exploited
labor of working human classes. I wonder, however, what bringing other
creatures into anthropogenic, anthropocentric conceptions of labor does for
structuring multispecies relationships.
“Metabolic labor” usefully points to violence that occurs when animals
are made to live for human use. Less helpfully, it constructs an equivalence
between how human lives are understood to involve work and how animal
lives are understood to involve work. In Beldo’s example of the wretched
Cornish rock broiler chicken, producing protein from grain becomes the
work of the chicken. The analogy demands that work be separated from
living when the process of living is exploited, such that thinking about the
chicken as a creature needs to be separated from thinking about the chicken
as an edible body.
Michael Pollan (2006) portrays a different view of living as labor in his
stories about Polyface Farm, where the human-in-chief, Jack Salazar, says
that cows and chickens do most of the work. Here, ascribing work is a way
of assigning value to the life of the cow and the chicken—a view enabled,
perhaps, by Salazar’s obvious disinclination to distinguish his own life and
work in a way that would enable a corporation to extract one from the other.
The Cornish rock broiler chicken was developed entirely for the sake of
being an edible body and is poorly suited to being a living creature. Salazar
would have no use for this chicken that cannot walk well enough to perform
a chicken’s job at Polyface Farm—cleaning up the grubs from cow-trodden
fields—and that can never satisfy Salazar’s end goal for chickens, of living
so as to express their creaturely distinctiveness. A Cornish rock broiler
chicken cannot work for him because it cannot work well by living well.Szymanski 567
Beldo identifies a prejudice against animal labor not being understood as
labor. That prejudice could equally be understood in reverse, as a prejudice
toward applying labor to all creatures with the presumption that they must
be not only like humans, but like a narrow subset of humans. While the first
error is a form of human exceptionalism, the second is a different form of
human exceptionalism in the guise of human universalism—that what
applies to a subset of human animals can and should be extended to under-
standing all other animals and that human experience is representative of
animal experience.
Microbial life may be put to work, but to say that microbial labor is
exploited speaks to a particular view of how microbes should be as much as
to what humans do with them. Metabolic labor makes human relating with
other species wholly about production and seems to offer the laboring
animal the limited options of either passively complying or actively resist-
ing.Work affords more diverse possibilities, beyond compliance or refusal,
allowing that yeast may productively contribute new information in
response to human demands (or requests, or invitations, or stories). Syn-
thetic biologists may work on, with, in, or for yeast. Many examples of
human working practices with sourdough starters, artisan winemaking, or
craft brewing—multispecies working practices which at least sometimes
exist outside of highly standardized industrial contexts oriented around
maximizing surplus value—involve attitudes of seeking understanding, of
care, and of living with and working with. These are not utopian practices.
They involve death, loss, and frustration (e.g., Brice 2014). They also
involve being responsive in the daily specificities of multispecies work.
Metabolic labor implies that we should not exploit the lives of other
creatures. This position is impractical if plants are understood to be crea-
tures and extracting value from bodies is understood to be exploitation. It is
equally untenable with respect to microbes, some of whom—in their life
and their death—indispensably contribute to the functional integrity of
human bodies. The alternative suggested by Haraway (2008; 2016), Puig
de la Bellacasa (2015), Krzwoszynsk a (2019), and others interested in
multispecies care , is to ask how we may live well with other creatures,
enabling more productive lines of thought about how the chicken and the
human, or the yeast and the human, might have good lives together. There is
no question that the miserable meat-production chickens Beldo describes do
not live well. One compassionate response might be not to eat chicken and
to advocate that others do the same. Another might be to raise delicious
chickens that can live good chicken lives at farms where care is taken for all
creatures—Salazar’s approach.568 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
Beldo (2017) acknowledges stretch ing the concept of labor to the
extremes of what it can do, but argues that labor is the most apt term for
animal vitality “within the existing vocabulary of capitalist production”
(p. 125). This statement leaves wide open the possibility of developing
more satisfactory alternatives outside the existing vocabulary of capitalist
production. Rather than finding an analytic to apply to existing practice,
I am more interested in opening up possibilities with respect to new prac-
tices, an interest made possible by the relatively open-to-experimentation
fields with which I engage—synthetic biology, microbiomes, winemaking
(all in contrast to factory farming)—and by an organism unlikely to incite
ethical concerns (in contrast to chickens). This is, to me, a very good reason
to work with creatures such as yeast because they afford such possibilities.
Bud: Yeast as a Good for Whom?
Whom and what are yeast good for? These are logical questions if we
imagine yeast as a resource whose extraction and development will be good
for some humans, but not for all equally. These questions also suggest that
those important to extracting value from yeast are the users of yeast-based
resources, eliding the possibility that yeast might itself be considered a
stakeholder in its own development. The question that would seem to fol-
low—what is good for yeast?—might also seem to advocate for an ethics of
microbes (see Cockell 2004), or a utopian attitude toward more-than-human
friendship. However, to suggest the possibility of caring for, about, and with
microbes is not at all to suggest that this form of care resembles that
appropriately applied to humans and other macrofauna—just as character-
izing yeast and chickens as coworkers is not to suggest that we should bring
them coffee or assign them human-appropriate offices. Living well means
very different things for different creatures. Creatures may be seen as inter-
ested parties in the bioeconomic systems in which humans interpolate them
without imagining that all creatures therefore occupy chairs of equal size
and shape around some ideal imaginary multispecies table.
Being a stakeholder begins with having a voice. Having a voice requires
being recognized as capable of communicating, inviting the possibility that
others may listen. Humans do violence to their owncapacity to learn from and
be enriched by the voices of others when they make creatures tools and tools
alone that can have no voice. By divorcing organism-derived technologies
from organisms, we humans may cultivate capacities to forget our inevitable
interdependences across more-than-human worlds and may attenuate capa-
cities to be responsive to others in the daily specificities of our work.Szymanski 569
In lieu of asking whose “good” yeast resource extraction serves, we
might instead ask: what does it mean to live and work well with creatures
who are simultaneously tools? Kelly Donati (2019) suggests multispecies
conviviality—con-vivial, literally, to live with—as a strategy for consider-
ing what it is to eat well with creatures we also eat. Donati argues that
creatures who are and who are not human should all have a voice in what it
means to live well on a multispecies farm. For the sheep and dogs on whom
she focuses, that means having space to express their needs to humans who
consider the farm itself as an organism, the parts of which variously support
the whole. Sheep, as farm animals who may be coworkers, technologies,
and dinner, need to be accounted for as stakeholders whose voice matters in
the sustainability of the farm system.
Working with yeast and other creatures as both creatures and tools need
not be contradictory if yeast can be multiple and multiplied. On the con-
trary, improving human capacities to “listen” to other creatures’ voices—to
attend, to cultivate the capacity to respond, to become response-able—
should also improve research outcomes. As has been noted by many multi-
species scholars, being response-able to research organisms’ participation
as creatures travels with becoming open to observations beyond resear-
chers’ initial expectations, yielding b oth ethical and epistemic benefits
(Candea 2013; Despret 2013; 2014). Questioning what it means to live and
work and indeed eat well with creatures who are also tools and technologies
is about locating perspectives from which humans may themselves be cow-
orkers rather than always only controllers of other species, even when
multispecies interactions are oriented around extracting value from living
things for human benefit.
Conclusion
Because their material entanglements differ, critiques that appropriately
apply to the extraction of material resources do not necessarily apply to
the extraction of digital resources, not because the latter are not material,
but because they are differently material. Digital resources are nevertheless
subject to one of the same propensities as material resources—disentangle-
ment from their origins—yet to different effect (Junka-Aikio and Cortes-
Severino 2017). In the digital case, such disentanglements are liable to limit
opportunities to realize (in both senses of the word) how biotechnical
developments invoke more-than-human worlds. Cutting genome sequences
and other digital resources away from creatures makes them wholly about
the human choices made in their extraction, closing off consideration of570 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
how these creatures may participate in their own development: to listen to,
be response-able with, and learn from them. An understanding of the tech-
nology—the digital genome, for instance—might be mistaken for an under-
standing of the creature such that the creature’s capacity to surprise,
respond, or interrupt (Buller 2015) beyond the scope of the abstracted
digital resource, is curtailed. Creaturely capacities to remind that they hold
stakes in human well-being, and vice-versa, are similarly curtailed.
Extraction is about transformation, about making a resource. As Junka-
Aikio and Cortes-Severino (2017) have observed in arguing for why cul-
tural studies should attend to “extractivism,” “the discursive construction of
something as a ‘resource’ always entails ...regulat[ing] how the relation-
ship between nature and society is imagined and enacted” (p. 180)—or, we
might say, how relationships among humans and other-than-humans are
enacted. Doing the work to maintain connections among remedializations
of creatures that become resources, I argue, may open up relationships that
digital extractivism otherwise shuts down, leaving human societies more
permeable to their more-than-human dimensions. In practical terms, envi-
sioning organism-technologies enables the possibility of asking what it
means to care for and to live well with tools that are also creatures. This
framing differs substantially from envisioning laboring creatures from
whom surplus value is extracted. While the latter suggests that creatures
are exploited and that we have a moral obligation in the name of multi-
species social justice to stop exploiting them, the former invites investigat-
ing what it means to live well with the variety of creatures upon whom our
collective well-being depends.
Snowflake yeast interrupts yeast geneticists because it sticks to the walls
and orifices of culture vessels; it refuses to lose its attachments and so gloms
up equipment built with better-behaved cells in mind. I suggest that STS
researchers should allow snowflake yeast to interrupt us for similar reasons.
We do different things with creatures than with tools. They mandate dif-
ferent ethical concerns and raise different matters of care (Puig de la Bel-
lacasa 2011) because creatures are concerned with their own interests while
tools are built to serve the purposes of others. Creatures such as S. cerevi-
siae fit both descriptions: they have been constructed to serve specific
purposes, and they have lives of their own. As yeast-based technologies
are extracted from recognizably living yeast bodies, entanglements across
the things we do with tools and the interests of other creatures become more
difficult to see. That is an ethical problem, for the violence thereby enabled
against other creatures and against humans in our many-faceted interdepen-
dences with them. It is also an epistemic problem, in that removing theSzymanski 571
organism from the picture means that it can no longer interrupt, surprise,
and challenge.
My larger point is that natural resource extractions raise different con-
cerns when the concerning resources are chiefly informational, in contrast
to conventional extractions of physical materials. How the materials of
“digital” bio-extractions travel and form connections means that their loci
of concern require re-examining apart from established extractivist cri-
tiques. Observers with critical eyes should not assume that theorizations
of natural resource extraction apply to “extracted” information resources,
any more than we should assume that no violence is done because different
kinds of violence pertain.
Acknowledgments
I thank the Engineering Life and TRANSGENE research teams at the University of
Edinburgh for their collegiality and intellectual support, along with participants in
the workshop hosted by Ana Delgado at the University of Oslo that prompted this
manuscript. I am grateful for feedback from Ana Delgado, Susanne Bauer, and the
two anonymous reviewers, all of which led to substantial improvements.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: This article received funding from
European Union Horizon 2020 (Grand ID: 678757), European Research Council
(Grand ID: ERC 616510-ENLIFE), and T he Biological and Biotechnological
Sciences Research Council (Grant ID: BB/M005690/1, ERASynBio-IESY).
ORCID iD
Erika Amethyst Szymanski https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6321-8897
Notes
1. Yeast are always female, by disciplinary convention because they can all give
rise to daughter cells.
2. See Larson and Fuller 2014, for a discussion of the multiple domestication path-
ways supported by archaeological and genetic evidence, including pathways
initiated by creatures who are not human. See Baker et al. 2015, for a discussion
of the likelihood that baker’s and brewer’s yeasts came into domestic relation-
ships with humans on numerous, separate occasions.572 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
3. For example, new yeast strains for producing beer and wine have been enabled
by detailed studies of yeast genomics t hat map relationships among strains
domesticated to particular purposes, and identify potential untapped reservoirs
of genetic diversity (Gallone et al. 2016).
4. The research described in this and the following two sections came about through
a European Research Council-funded project on the history of yeast, human, and
pig genome sequencing (TRANSGENE: Medical translation in the history of
modern genomics, led by Miguel Garcia-Sancho) during which I reviewed pri-
mary scientific literature, conducted oral history interviews, and visited several
archives pertaining to significant yeast genomicists.
5. Though the reference sequence is “of” S288C, it was created through compiling
sequence data from several closely related strains (Engel et al. 2013).
6. The research described in this and the following section stems from my work as a
postdoctoral STS researcher with the synthetic yeast project, funded through a
grant (BB/M005690/1, ERASynBio-IESY) from the Biological and Biotechno-
logical Sciences Research Council co-led by a key synthetic biologist-member of
the synthetic yeast consortium and a social scientist. I spent one or two days each
week working with a synthetic yeast lab, conducted interviews of about twenty
scientists contributing to the project, and participated in numerous conferences,
workshops, and other events.
7. Eukaryotic genomes, in comparison to prokaryotic genomes belonging to bac-
teria and archaea, are (often much) larger and divided up into multiple
chromosomes.
8. I visited with Bellon at the Australian Wine Research Institute to discuss her
yeast mating work in November 2016.
References
Baker, Emily Clare, Bing Wang, Nicolas Bellora, David Peris, Amanda Beth Hul-
fachor, Justin A. Koshalek, Marie Adams, Diego Libkind, and Chris Todd Hit-
tinger. 2015. “The Genome Sequence of Saccharomyces Eubayanus and the
Domestication of Lager-brewing Yeasts.” Molecular Biology and Evolution 32
(11): 2818-31.
Beldo, Les. 2017. “Metabolic Labor Broiler Chickens and the Exploitation of Vital-
ity.” Environmental Humanities 9 (1): 108-28.
Bellon, Jennifer R., Christopher M. Ford, Anthony R. Borneman, and Paul J. Cham-
bers. 2018. “A Novel Approach to Isolating Improved Industrial Interspecific
Wine Yeasts Using Chromosomal Mutations as Potential Markers for Increased
Fitness.” Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (July): 1442.Szymanski 573
Birch, Kean. 2017. “Rethinking Value in the Bio-economy: Finance, Assetization,
and the Management of Value.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 42 (3):
460-90.
Birch, Kean, and David Tyfield. 2013. “Theorizing the Bioeconomy: Biovalue,
Biocapital, Bioeconomics or ...What?” Science, Technology, & Human Values
38 (3): 299-327.
Boone, Charles. 2014. “Yeast Systems Biology: Our Best Shot at Modeling a Cell.”
Genetics 198 (2): 435-37.
Borneman, Anthony R., and Isak S. Pretorius. 2015. “Genomic Insights into the
Saccharomyces Sensu Stricto Complex.” Genetics 199 (2): 281-91.
Brice, Jeremy. 2014. “Killing in More-than-human Spaces: Pasteurisation, Fungi,
and the Metabolic Lives of Wine.” Environmental Humanities 4 (1): 171-94.
Buller, Henry. 2015. “Animal Geographies II Methods.” Progress in Human Geo-
graphy 39 (3): 374-84.
Calvert, Jane. 2008. “The Commodification of Emergence: Systems Biology, Syn-
thetic Biology and Intellectual Property.” BioSocieties 3 (4): 383-98.
Calvert, Jane, and Erika Szymanski. 2020. “A Feeling for the (Micro)Organism?
Yeastiness, Organism Agnosticism and Whole Genome Synthesis.” New Genet-
ics and Society 39 (4): 385-403.
Candea, Matei. 2013. “Habituating Meerkats and Redescribing Animal Behaviour
Science.” Theory, Culture & Society 30 (7–8): 105-28.
Cockell, Charles S. 2004. “The Rights of Microbes.” Interdisciplinary Science
Reviews 29 (2): 141-50.
Cook-Deegan, Robert. 1994. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics, and the Human
Genome . New York: W. W. Norton.
Despret, Vinciane. 2013. “Responding Bodies and Partial Affinities in Human–
Animal Worlds.” Theory, Culture & Society 30 (7–8): 51-76.
Despret, Vinciane. 2014. Domesticating Practices: The Case of Arabian Babblers .
New York: Routledge International Handbooks.
Donati, Kelly. 2019. “‘Herding Is His Favourite Thing in the World’: Convivial
World-making on a Multispecies Farm.” Journal of Rural Studies 66 (February):
119-29.
Endy, Drew, and Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg. 2020. “Must We Revolutionize Noth-
ing?” Live online with Ferment TV by Gingko Bioworks, 1 July 2020. Accessed
July 1, 2020. https://faberfutures.com/projects/ferment-tv/ferment-tv-05-must-
we-revolutionize-nothing/.
Engel, Stacia R.Fred S. Dietrich, Dianna G. Fisk, Gail Binkley, Rama Balakrishnan,
Maria C. Costanzo, Selina S. Dwight, et al. 2013. “The Reference Genome
Sequence of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae: Then and Now.” G3: Genes|Genomes|-
Genetics 4 (3): 389-98.574 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
Frow, Emma K. 2013. “Making Big Promises Come True? Articulating and Realiz-
ing Value in Synthetic Biology.” BioSocieties 8 (4): 432-48.
Gallone, BrigidaJan Steensels, Troels Pra hl, Leah Soriaga, Veerle Saels, Beatriz
Herrera-Malaver, Adriaan Merlevede , et al. 2016. “Domestication and Diver-
gence of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae Beer Yeasts.” Cell 166 (6): 1397-410.
e16.
Goffeau, A.B. G. Barrell, H. Bussey, R. W. Davis, B. Dujon, H. Feldmann, F.
Galibert, et al. 1996. “Life with 6000 Genes.” Science 274 (5287): 546-67.
Gudynas, Eduardo. 2011. “Buen Vivir: Today’s Tomorrow.” Development 54 (4):
441-47.
Gudynas, Eduardo. 2019. “Value, Growth, Development: South American Lessons
for a New Ecopolitics.” Capitalism Nature Socialism 30 (2): 234-43.
Haraway, Donna J. 2008. When Species Meet . Minneapolis: University of Minne-
sota Press.
Haraway, Donna J. 2016. Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene .
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hayles, N. Katherine. 1999. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cyber-
netics, Literature, and Informatics . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Herskowitz, Ira. 1985. “Cell Biology: Yeast as the Universal Cell.” Nature 316
(6030): 678-79.
Holmberg, Tora, Nete Schwennesen, and Andrew Webster. 2011. “Bio-objects and
the Bio-objectification Process.” Croatian Medical Journal 52 (6): 740-42.
Ira Herskowitz Papers. 1974-2003. San Francisco, CA: University of California, San
Francisco Library Archives & Special Collections.
Johnston, Mark. 2000. “The Yeast Genome: On the Road to the Golden Age.”
Current Opinion in Genetics & Development 10 (6): 617-23.
Junka-Aikio, Laura, and Catalina Corte s-Severino. 2017. “Cultural Studies of
Extraction.” Cultural Studies 31 (2–3): 175-84.
Katz, Sandor Elix. 2012. The Art of Fermentation . White River Junction, VT:
Chelsea Green.
Klar, Amar J. S. 2003. “Human Handedness and Scalp Hair-whorl Direction
Develop from a Common Genetic Mechanism.” Genetics 165 (1): 269-76.
Krzywoszynska, Anna. 2019. “Caring for Soil Life in the Anthropocene: The Role
of Attentiveness in More-than-human Ethics.” Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers 44 (4): 661-75.
Landecker, Hannah. 2007. Culturing Life: How Cells Became Technologies . Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Langer, Erika Michelle. 2016. “Molecular Ferment: The Rise and Proliferation of
Yeast Model Organism Research.” PhD diss . San Francisco: University of
California.Szymanski 575
Larson, Greger, and Dorian Q. Fuller. 2014. “The Evolution of Animal Domes-
tication.” Annual Review of Ecology, Ev olution, and Systematics 45 (1):
115-36.
Latimer, Joanna, and Mara Miele. 2013. “Naturecultures? Science, Affect and the
Non-human.” Theory, Culture & Society 30 (7–8): 5-31.
Latour, Bruno. 2004. “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to
Matters of Concern.” Critical Inquiry 30 (2): 225-48.
Leonelli, Sabina, and Rachel A. Ankeny. 2013. “What Makes a Model Organism?”
Endeavour 37 (4): 209-12.
Leonelli, Sabina, and Rachel A. Ankeny. 2015. “Repertoires: How to Transform a
Project into a Research Community.” BioScience 65 (7): 701-08.
Millum, Joseph. 2010. “How Should the Benefits of Bioprospecting Be Shared?”
The Hastings Center Report 40 (1): 24-33.
Mitchell, Leslie A.James Chuang, Neta Agmon, Chachrit Khunsriraksakul, Nick A.
Phillips, Yizhi Cai, David M. Truong, et al. 2015. “Versatile Genetic Assembly
System (VEGAS) to Assemble Pathways for Expression in S. Cerevisiae.”
Nucleic Acids Research 43 (13): 6620-30.
Mol, Annemarie. 2002. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice . Durham,
NC: Duke University Press.
Murray, Andrew W., and Jack W. Szostak. 1983. “Construction of Artificial Chro-
mosomes in Yeast.” Nature 305 (5931): 189-93.
Oliveira, Ana V., Rita Vilac ¸a, Cl´ audia N. Santos, V´ ıtor Costa, and Regina Menezes.
2017. “Exploring the Power of Yeast to Model Aging and Age-related Neuro-
degenerative Disorders.” Biogerontology 18 (1): 3-34.
Parolini, Giuditta. 2018. “Building Human and Industrial Capacity in European
Biotechnology: The Yeast Genome Sequencing Project (1989–1996).” dx.doi:
10.14279/depositonce-6693.
Pollan, Michael. 2006. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals .
New York: Penguin.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2011. “Matters of Care in Technoscience: Assembling
Neglected Things.” Social Studies of Science 41 (1): 85-106.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. 2015. “Making Time for Soil: Technoscientific Futurity
and the Pace of Care.” Social Studies of Science 45 (5): 691-716.
Ratcliff, William C., Johnathon D. Fankhauser, David W. Rogers, Duncan Greig,
and Michael Travisano. 2015. “Origins of Multicellular Evolvability in Snow-
flake Yeast.” Nature Communications 6:6102.
Richardson, Sarah M.Leslie A. Mitchell, Giovanni Stracquadanio, Kun Yang,
Jessica S. Dymond, James E. DiCarlo, Dongwon Lee, et al. 2017. “Design of
a Synthetic Yeast Genome.” Science 355 (6329): 1040-44.576 Science, Technology, & Human Values 49(3)
Roman, Herschel. 1986. “The Early Days of Yeast Genetics: A Personal Narrative.”
Annual Review of Genetics 20 (1): 1-14.
Shao, YangyangNing Lu, Zhenfang Wu, Chen Cai, Shanshan Wang, Ling-Li Zhang,
Fan Zhou, et al. 2018. “Creating a Functional Single-chromosome Yeast.”
Nature 560 (7718): 331-35.
Stevens, Hallam. 2013. Life Out of Sequence: A Data-driven History of Bioinfor-
matics . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Szymanski, Erika Amethyst. 2018a. “Remaking Yeast: Metaphors as Scientific
Tools in Saccharomyces Cerevisiae 2.0.” BioSocieties 14 (7): 416-37.
Szymanski, Erika Amethyst. 2018b. “Who Are the Users of Synthetic DNA? Using
Metaphors to Activate Microorganisms at the Center of Synthetic Biology.” Life
Sciences, Society and Policy 14 (1): 15.
Szymanski, Erika Amethyst, Robert D. J. Smith, and Jane Calvert. 2021.
“Responsible Research and Innovation Meets Multispecies Studies: Why RRI
Needs to Be a More-than-human Exercise.” Journal of Responsible Innovation .
doi: 10.1080/23299460.2021.1906040.
Szymanski, Erika Amethyst, Niki Vermeulen, and Mark Wong. 2019. “Yeast: One
Cell, One Reference Sequence, Many Genomes?” New Genetics and Society 38
(4): 430-50.
Taffel, Sy. 2021. “Data and Oil: Metaphor, Materiality and Metabolic Rifts.” New
Media & Society . doi: 10.1177/14614448211017887.
Walker, Roy Scott Kamla. 2017. “De Novo Biological Engineering of a tRNA
Neochromosome in Yeast.” PhD diss . Edinburgh, UK: University of Edinburgh.
Zhu, Yiwen, and Darren Kuang. 1992. “Construction of the Physical Map of Yeast
(Saccharomyces Cerevisiae) Chromosome V*.” Cell Research 2 (1): 25-34.
Author Biography
Erika Szymanski is an assistant professor of rhetoric of science at Colorado State
University. Her research concerns words as scientific tools, particularly as they
participate in what microbes become through what humans do with them, with a
current focus on genome synthesis and engineering microbiomes.Szymanski 577
