Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy
ISSN: 1548-7733 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tsus20
Where value creation meets appreciation and
care: motives of farmers for direct marketing in
Brandenburg, Germany
Suse Brettin
To cite this article: Suse Brettin (2024) Where value creation meets appreciation and care:
motives of farmers for direct marketing in Brandenburg, Germany, Sustainability: Science,
Practice and Policy, 20:1, 2420410, DOI: 10.1080/15487733.2024.2420410
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2024.2420410
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 05 Nov 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 602
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tsus20
ReseaR ch aR ticleSuStainability: Science, Practice and Policy
2024, Vol. 20, no . 1, 2420410
Where value creation meets appreciation and care: motives of farmers 
for direct marketing in Brandenburg, Germany
suse Brettin 
division of Gender and Globalization, Humboldt-university b erlin, b erlin, Germany
ABSTRACT
in recent years, the number of agricultural enterprises engaged in various forms of direct 
marketing has increased, both internationally and in Germany. to date, however, little is 
known about the farmers’ motives for selling their products directly to consumers. this 
knowledge gap seems particularly striking in light of the sociopolitical objective of fostering 
this mode of marketing and distribution. Given the hegemonic conceptualization of the 
farmer as a rational choice entrepreneur, the reasons for this could be purely economic, or a 
response to a seemingly growing demand for local produce. Nonetheless, the little research 
that exists on farmers’ motivations also points in other directions and emphasizes the 
importance of relationality and socioecological embeddedness, which are central characteristics 
of care. this article thus explores how logics of care provide a starting point for farmers’ 
motivation to direct marketing. through the analysis of nine qualitative interviews with 
farmers in Brandenburg, Germany, who sell some or all of their products directly, it illustrates 
how they consider themselves within a structure of multifaceted responsibilities. the results 
further indicate that direct marketing seems to be a logical consequence of these 
responsibilities. By providing a more nuanced picture, the direct selling of produce can be 
seen as both a strategy for value creation and a means of appreciation and a set of practices 
of care toward the complex web of human and non-human beings contributing to agricultural 
production.
Introduction
As this article is being written (early 2024), the polit -
ical protests by farmers in Germany are coming to a 
head. Triggered by the announcement that agricul -
tural diesel subsidies would be cut, large protests took 
place across the country in the first weeks of January. 
However, the discontent seems to go beyond the 
removal of subsidies (Huber 2024 ). In response to the 
protests, Vice-Chancellor Robert Habeck has pro -
posed – among other suggestions – the strengthening 
of direct marketing (BMWK 2024 ). Also at Berlin’s 
International Green Week 2024, the biggest annual 
trade fair for German agriculture, horticulture, and 
other food industries, direct marketing is prominent: 
The Future Forum for Rural Development, organized 
by the Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture, 
focuses on the question of regionalized and short 
value chains within food and energy production.
But even before this current spotlight, agricultural 
direct marketing has long had a place among the sociopolitical  approaches for creating a more sustain -
able human-nature relationship. Strengthening 
regionalized and shorter value chains is one 
sub-aspect of a diverse range of political initiatives 
and concepts like the Milan Urban Food Policy Pact 
(MUFPP 2015 ), the German Zukunftskommission 
Landwirtschaft  (ZKL 2021 ) (a committee of agricul -
tural stakeholders), or the German National 
Bioeconomy Strategy (BMBF and BMEL 2020, 42). 
Y et despite growing interest in the direct marketing 
of agricultural products, little is known about what 
actually motivates farmers to take this route when 
bringing their produce to the market – even though 
knowing the perspectives of those who have already 
adopted direct marketing could certainly be helpful 
when discussing further steps.
What are the motives behind this decision? Is it, 
as is often assumed, a purely rational and economic 
choice and thus a market-oriented motivation? The 
little resear ch that exists on farmers’ motivations  
© 2024 the a uthor(s). Published by i nforma uK limited, trading as taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT  Suse brettin  suse.brettin@gender.hu-berlin.de   division of Gender and Globalization, Humboldt-university b erlin, unter den linden 6, 10099 
berlin, Germanyhttps://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2024.2420410
this is an o pen a ccess article distributed under the terms of the c reative c ommons attribution-nonc ommercial license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ ), 
which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. the terms on which this article 
has been published allow the posting of the a ccepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 31 January 2024
accepted 19 October 
2024
KEYWORDS
agricultural production; 
care; direct marketing; 
farmers’ motivations
2 s. BRettiN
also points in other directions and emphasizes the 
importance of relationality and socioecological 
embeddedness, which are central characteristics of 
care. Consequently, this article explores how aspects 
of care provide a starting point for motivation to 
direct marketing: What are the specific dimensions 
to which these aspects are related?
To answer these questions, I first give a broad 
overview of the existing literature on direct market -
ing. Focusing on farmers’ motivations, I show that 
this area has been empirically understudied and that 
the few existing findings point to aspects that are 
ultimately central features of care. In the next step, I 
briefly discuss theories of care in order to embed 
them explicitly in an agroecological context as well 
as in the context of my research. After these initial 
theoretical considerations, I present the design of my 
empirical work, consisting of qualitative interviews 
with farmers in Brandenburg who sell part or all of 
their products directly. The presentation of my anal -
ysis, and thus the empirical results, takes place in 
two steps: First, I trace the convictions of the farm -
ers based on areas of responsibility  identified in the 
interviews. These commitments, in turn, form the 
basis for the decision to engage in direct marketing –  
a relationship that I explore in the second part of 
the analysis as well as the link between value cre -
ation and appreciation. Finally, I return to the 
research question by discussing the findings and 
explaining why direct marketing can be understood 
not only as a form of value creation, but also as a 
practice of care. In the conclusion, I provide an out -
look for further research.
Bringing produce to the market: direct 
marketing
The direct marketing of agricultural produce and 
foodstuffs through short and/or alternative value 
chains has gained increasing attention in recent years 
(Renting, Marsden, and Banks 2003 ; Born and 
Purcell 2006 ; Macias 2008 ; Goodman, Dupuis, and 
Goodman 2012 ; Corvo and Matacena 2018 ). Beyond 
the sociopolitical space, this can be seen in the 
empirical reemergence of these value chains and net -
works as well as in scholarly attention. According to 
the results of the 2020 agricultural census in 
Germany, 18% of agricultural enterprises process 
and sell produce through direct marketing 
(DESTATIS 2024a ); the final report of the ZKL 
(2021 ) even mentions up to 42%. Particularly 
through digitalization, the opportunities for farmers 
to market their products directly to consumers seem 
to be growing, and in addition to the established 
farmers’ markets or direct farm sales, farmers can now reach potential consumers through a variety of 
analogue and digital channels. These various meth -
ods of marketing are finding their way into aca -
demic debate and are being studied and discussed 
from different perspectives, with a focus on chang -
ing structures and their influence on the food sys -
tem (Macias 2008 ; Corvo and Matacena 2018 ) or on 
food-related practices (Čajić, Brückner, and Brettin 
2022 ; Samsioe and Fuentes 2022 ). Nevertheless, the 
notion of locality and localism, and its ability to 
counter current trends in globalized food systems, is 
critically discussed as it is far from a neutral concept 
without tensions or intricate inequalities (Born and 
Purcell 2006 ; Cohen 2016 ; DuPuis, Goodman, and 
Harrison 2006 ).
What becomes apparent when reviewing the exist -
ing literature, however, is the under-consideration of 
the perspectives and practices of one of the main 
protagonists – the agricultural producers. Looking at 
the production side of direct marketing, the topics 
include, for example, a critical discussion of the role 
for sustainability (Brown and Guiffrida 2014 ) or 
rural development (Renting, Marsden, and Banks 
2003 ) as well as different marketing structures 
(Paciarotti and Torregiani 2021 ). Less considered are 
the farmers’ practices, motivations, or challenges and 
it can be argued that the agricultural production 
side is often underrepresented, especially in a quali -
tative perspective.
One can only guess at the reasons for this general 
lack of consideration. Naomi Beingessner and Ember 
Fletcher (2020) point out that this may be due to 
the focus on value chains, which so far are defined 
purely in terms of the market economy; farmers may 
simply be responding to increasing demand for 
regional, directly marketed products. A historical 
analysis by Shane Hamilton supports this claim and 
he traces the development of agricultural manage -
ment as a discipline and demonstrates how in the 
early twentieth century and “for a surprisingly long 
period, proponents of farm management emphasized 
not a disciplinary body of knowledge but instead 
very pragmatic, socially embedded ways of being a 
farmer” (Hamilton 2024, 8). But this embedded and 
embodied understanding gradually shifted and “[i]n 
theorizing farm management as a constellation of 
decisions, economists from the 1960s onward imag -
ined farmers as Homo economicus  [emphasis in orig -
inal], capable of making rational decisions if given 
all the relevant information” (Hamilton 2024 , 11). 
This simplistic conceptualization of farmers has 
found its way into policy design (Brown and 
Guiffrida 2021) and discussions on agricultural value 
creation suggest that direct marketing, or even the 
integration of aspects of sustainability, are based on 
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 3
strategic considerations for value-added agriculture 
(Buller and Morris 2004 ; Lu and Dudensing 2015 ). 
However, as early as the 1960s and 1970s the trope 
of the purely economic farmer came under scrutiny 
(Wolpert 1964 ; Gasson 1973 ) and various academics 
highlight, for example, the role of values (Busck 
2002 ) or culture and identity (Burton et  al. 2021 ) in 
farmers’ decision making.
In line with these voices, the studies that do shed 
light on farmers’ perspectives on direct marketing 
also suggest additional motivating factors beyond 
purely economic considerations. Beingessner and 
Fletcher ( 2020 ), who conducted interviews and 
group discussions with Canadian farmers, go in a 
similar direction. They state that “[f]armers are not 
merely reacting to consumer trends when they pro -
duce local or more sustainable food; indeed, many 
engage in sustainable practices because of their own 
values, indicating a deeper and more lasting com -
mitment to the principles of local and alternative 
food systems than to the vagaries of market forces” 
(Beingessner and Fletcher 2020 , 139). Their research 
indicates that the farmers’ motives for selling their 
products directly relate to sustainability, relationality, 
and solidarity. In a case study in northern Italy, 
Eugenio Demartini, Anna Gaviglio, and Alberto 
Pirani (2017) conclude that while economic aspects 
help to motivate the marketing of products through 
short value chains, the results also suggest that a 
direct relationship with consumers should also be 
considered a crucial factor. Amy Trauger and her 
colleagues analyzed the perspectives of female farm -
ers on alternative value chains in Pennsylvania and 
found that for them, successful farming was charac -
terized by “care, responsibility to the public, and 
connection to the farm” (Trauger et  al. 2010 , 53). In 
this context, the direct marketing of products is 
born out of the opportunity to respond to and take 
care of the social or cultural needs of the commu -
nity. The local community also plays a decisive role 
for farmers’ motivation to participate in a 
community-supported agriculture (CSA) scheme in a 
study by a team led by Rosie Cox. They found that 
providing organic food to local people, reducing 
food miles and sharing knowledge through direct 
communication were key inspirational factors (Cox 
et  al. 2008 ).
These existing studies on the perspectives and 
motivations of farmers who market their produce 
directly repeatedly reveal that relationality, socioeco -
logical embeddedness, and responsibility are driving 
impulses. As a researcher with a background in fem -
inist theory, these aspects sound quite familiar, as 
these are defining characteristics for care, care work, 
and socioecological reproduction. These findings thus point to a tension that has been highlighted by 
feminist economic theorists for decades: the separa -
tion of production and reproduction within the 
hegemonic understanding of economy and in this 
case agriculture. Contrary to this separation, aspects 
central to care and reproduction seem to play a role 
in the field of agricultural production and in deci -
sions regarding agricultural value creation. In the 
next step, therefore, I provide a brief overview on 
care theories, especially in connection with agricul -
ture, and develop my research questions.
Care and agriculture
In recent years, some research has emerged that uses 
a care perspective as an analytical entry point for 
agricultural contexts. One of the best-known exam -
ples might be the work of María Puig de la Bellacasa 
(2015 ) on human-soil relationships. By tracing dif -
ferent soil ontologies and timescapes, she demon -
strates how these conceptualizations inform practices 
and knowledges of soil care. Sophie Chao ( 2018 , 
434) focuses in her research on seeds and states that 
“[s]eed economies in the palm oil sector are also 
‘economies of care. ’” She turns her attention to dif -
ferent affective attachments and the resulting tension 
between loving and violent practices of care in this 
context. The reference to tensions and simultaneities 
of control and care are also a key result of Barbara 
Wittmann’s ( 2022 ) study of Bavarian farmers engaged 
in intensive animal husbandry. What unites these 
perspectives is critical reflection on the paradigm of 
productivism prevalent in the hegemonic under -
standing of agriculture and its effects on the differ -
ent agricultural practices of care. Beyond these 
examples, other authors also have located care prac -
tices in different farming systems such as, for exam -
ple, regenerative agriculture (Seymour and Connelly 
2023 ), vine growing (Krzywoszynska 2016 ), and food 
self-provisioning (Pungas 2020 ).
What this brief overview reveals is that care in 
general is a challenging concept to grasp since it 
refers to heterogeneous practices, activities, and con -
texts. Nonetheless, feminist scholars highlight the 
socioeconomic importance of care work as a prereq -
uisite for (social, political, and economic) life in gen -
eral (Waring 1990 ). In a very broad definition, Joan 
Tronto ( 1994 , 103) describes care as a set of activi -
ties that “maintain, continue and repair our ‘world’ 
so that we can live in it as well as possible. ” She 
further speaks of a “complex, life-sustaining web” 
(Tronto 1994 , 103) in which both humans and the 
environment are interwoven, not least through these 
practices and activities. Following Puig de la Bellacasa 
(2015 ), care can be understood as both a perspective 
4 s. BRettiN
and a set of practices directed toward the well-being 
of human and non-human beings. Two key charac -
teristics of care are highlighted by both authors: care 
enfolds in relations and involves a normative orien -
tation toward well-being. However, as care practices 
are both shaped by and imbued with power struc -
tures, the layout of particular care relationships and 
the orientation toward who’s well-being is highly 
contested (Sevenhuijsen 2003 ; Puig de la Bellacasa 
2015 ; Hofmeister et  al. 2019 ).
There are numerous scholars who discuss the eth -
ical and political values and norms of care and the 
extent to which these can and should have an impact 
on general societal discourses and structures such as 
politics and the economy (Sevenhuijsen 2003 ; 
Bauhardt and Çağlar 2010 ; Tronto 2015 ). But what 
makes the discussion of care so interesting in the 
context of agriculture? Why should care be linked to 
environmental, sociopolitical, or even economic con -
texts? Scholars from the fields of feminist economics 
and feminist political ecology have been answering 
this question for years by repeatedly showing how 
the hegemonic notion of autonomous, purely ratio -
nal decision-making subjects – to which the key 
characteristics of care stand in fundamental contrast 
– leads to a destructive societal relationship with 
nature and the environment (Bauhardt 2013 ; 
MacGregor and Mäki 2023 ) from which we now 
have to deal with the crisis-laden outcome. Focusing 
on a care perspective therefore implies a radical 
rethinking and entails profound changes in politics 
and economics, as well as how socioecological 
resources are dealt with, for example in the context 
of agriculture. Accepting multi-species entangle -
ments, and thus starting from a perspective of con -
tinuing, maintaining, and repairing for the well-being 
of both human and non-human life, could trigger a 
rethinking of agriculture in a more sustainable way. 
Nevertheless, in line with the hegemonic conceptual -
ization of economy, agriculture is commonly negoti -
ated under the parameters of efficiency increase and 
profit maximization. Relationality, a normative orien -
tation toward well-being and affective aspects, finds 
little place in it, even though these factors matter. If 
we take the previous findings on farmers’ motiva -
tions for direct marketing seriously, the following 
question arises: How do aspects of care provide a 
starting point for the motivation for direct market -
ing? What are the specific dimensions to which 
these aspects are related?
Methodology and empirical context
The methodological approach of this article is 
strongly influenced by feminist standpoint theory (Harding 1986 ) since the focus of my analysis will 
be the view and perspectives of the participating 
farmers – how they construct their motivations and 
reasons for direct marketing. In doing so, I try to 
follow Donna Haraway’s ( 1988 , 850) call for “the 
ability partially to translate knowledges among dif -
ferent – and power-differentiated – communities” in 
order to broaden conversations about agricultural 
production beyond the dominant notion in agricul -
tural science of the purely economic farmer. The 
qualitative research and analysis of this article should 
be understood as an exploration – a tentative, though 
systematic, search or a partial perspective (Haraway 
1988 ) – and accordingly makes no claim to be a 
comprehensive study of farmers’ motivations. Rather, 
the aim of this article is to provide initial impulses 
and to point to directions in the search for a better 
understanding of the role of care within agricultural 
production and especially value creation.
To obtain these perspectives and knowledges, I con -
ducted qualitative, semi-structured, in-depth interviews 
with farmers in Brandenburg between Spring 2021 
and Winter 2022. The federal state of Brandenburg, 
Germany’s fifth largest state and one of the least pop -
ulated, uses almost 44% of its land for agriculture, 
with an average farm size of 242 hectares (598 acres) 
which is well above the German average of 65 hectares 
(161 acres) (DESTATIS 2024b ). In 2020, out of the 
5,420 agricultural enterprises, 550 were involved in the 
processing and direct marketing of agricultural prod -
ucts (DESTATIS 2021 ). In 2023, only 5,370 enterprises 
are listed, but at the time of writing data on direct 
marketing were not yet available. The interviews were 
preceded by a brief desk study to compile a list of 
farms that sell their products through various forms of 
direct marketing, such as CSAs, Marktschwärmer ,1 
regional box schemes,2 or farmers’ markets or farm 
shops. In composing my sample, I aimed for the 
greatest possible diversity in the forms of direct mar -
keting. During the course of the interviews, however, 
it became apparent that most farmers usually operate 
a network of multiple forms of direct marketing. 
Another aspect of the agricultural reality of these 
farmers, which was ultimately reflected in the inter -
views as well, became apparent in the initial responses 
to the interview request: the farmers’ high workloads. 
As one put it in his refusal to participate in the proj -
ect: “Farmer’s time is like gold dust. ” Table 1  gives an 
overview of the respondents and their agricultural 
production and direct marketing practices.
The recorded interviews – almost all of them 
were held on farm with the exception of one inter -
view via videoconference – were fully transcribed 
for further analysis. A qualitative coding frame was 
generated by a mixture of deductive and inductive 
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 5
coding; accordingly, the categories and codes were 
mostly derived from the empirical material itself 
and partly from care-theory considerations (Schreier 
2014 ). The coding frame was evaluated with the 
support of a colleague3 and modified accordingly 
prior to the main phase of coding. This frame, the 
basis of my systematic analysis, consists of nine 
categories (sociodemographic information, farming 
business, direct marketing, relationality and rela -
tionships [deductive category], responsibility, emo -
tions [deductive category], working conditions, 
business efficiency and challenges) with two to 
four codes (e.g., within direct marketing: develop -
ment, structure, advantages, and disadvantages; 
within business efficiency: general business effi -
ciency, profitability, and care). The results of the 
coding frame “serve[d] as a starting point for fur -
ther data exploration, examining results of qualita -
tive content analysis for patterns and co-occurrences 
of selected categories” (Schreier 2014 , 180). Thus, a 
further step of abstraction in the process of analy -
sis was reached by developing thematic networks 
(Attride-Stirling 2001 ) out of selected categories 
and codes that related to the research question of 
this article. These thematic networks served as the 
basis for the analysis, which I present in the fol -
lowing section.
Results
I always say that we never set up the farm store to 
make the biggest turnover of our lives. The farm store is the window of our business, simply the 
stage where we can communicate our concept and 
our convictions. (Klara)4
What Klara expresses very clearly is something I was 
able to find in almost all of the interviews, albeit in 
different shades: The motivation for direct marketing 
can be better understood against the background of 
the farmers’ convictions, as it is inextricably linked 
to them. Therefore, in the following analysis, I first 
trace the respective convictions and then establish 
the connection between these topics and the farm -
ers’ motivation for direct marketing. The discussion 
of my findings will follow in the next section.
Forms and dimensions of responsibility – tracing 
the convictions of farmers
Talking with the farmers in this sample about their 
motivations for farming and direct marketing – 
about what keeps them in the farming business and 
on track with direct marketing despite different 
obstacles – all of the interviewees related their 
answers to different sets of beliefs and convictions, 
which, as I demonstrate in this section, almost 
always lead to issues of responsibility. Following my 
analysis, I argue that these farmers consider them -
selves part of a diverse network of responsibilities, 
which relates to and touches different areas in their 
socioecological embeddedness. Giving an overview 
of these responsibilities, Figure 1  puts the different 
aspects that were raised by the nine farmers into a 
thematic network that will also serve as an Table 1.  overview of respondents.
nameatypes of agricultural production Forms of direct marketing
alexandra
(Founder, owner, and farmer)livestock farming for meat (3,000 geese), 
arable farming (54 ha), grassland 
(16 ha)Farm shop, i nternet, local restaurants
andrea
(Founder, owner, and farmer)livestock farming for dairy products (180 
cows, 40 milked),b grassland (250 ha)Food cooperatives, Marktschwärmer
annika
(Founder, owner, and farmer)Vegetable farming (3 ha) cSa, Marktschwärmer
carsten
(Main shareholder and farmer)Mainly livestock farming (cattle and 
hogs), arable farming (over 150 ha)Farm shop, Marktschwärmer , local restaurant, two 
local shops, direct sale to local branch of 
supermarket chain
constanze
(Funder, owner and farmer)Vegetable and arable farming (12 ha) Marktschwärmer
Jana
(Founder and board member of the 
co-operative; partly farming)Fruit and vegetable farming (30 ha) cSa
Klara
(employee in her parent’s company; partly 
farming)livestock farming for meat (cattle, hogs, 
and sheep), arable farming (600 ha 
fodder and biogas), grassland (200 ha)Farm shop, farmer’s markets, local restaurants, direct 
sale to local branch of supermarket chain
Moritz
(owner by means of family takeover and 
farmer)Vegetable and arable farming (10 ha) Farmer’s markets, cSa, regional box scheme
Stephan
(Founder, owner, and farmer)Fruit growing (30 ha) cSa
athe names of the interviewees have been changed to preserve anonymity. the author obtained the informed, voluntary consent of the participants 
in writing before the interview. bunfortunately, about a year and a half after our interview, a ndrea had to close the dairy and switch to all-mother 
calf rearing; she now sells pasture-raised beef.
6 s. BRettiN
orientation for the presentation of my data. The 
sequence in each area can be read from “mentioned 
by many/all” to “mentioned by a few/one. ” In the 
following, I will address those aspects that relate 
specifically to the farmers’ motivation for direct 
marketing and that were given particular weight in 
the interviews.
Responsibility as an actor in the food system
One of the most frequently stressed topics in all of 
the interviews was of course the production of food. 
All farmers considered the food supply as one of 
their primary responsibilities. However, the parame -
ters on which they based their production varied. 
For Carsten, for example, feeling responsible for pro -
ducing enough food was the reason he decided to 
remain within the framework of conventional farm -
ing and not change to organic methods. Beyond 
this, almost all of my respondents expressed at vari -
ous points in their interviews that they are con -
cerned not only with the quantity of food produced, 
but also or even foremost with its quality – be it in 
terms of taste or healthiness, as Andrea explained:
And I think it’s also important to eat natural foods 
and not just highly processed things, simply because 
they nourish us more…So it’s super important for 
health care. (Andrea)
In addition to this strongly felt responsibility, a 
majority of the farmers also saw it as their responsi -
bility to bring about change in some way or another in the food system. Jana, for example, describes a 
vision of advancing the agricultural transformation 
within the food system as an important driver for 
funding an agricultural business – a growing vegan 
organic agricultural cooperative supported by 600 
members. The climate crisis and the destruction of 
nature was a central point of reference for Jana, and 
other interviewees also considered agricultural and 
farm-related decisions particularly in the context of 
ecological responsibility, which I discuss in the fol -
lowing section.
Responsibility toward more than human realities
In addition to the responsibility to produce 
(high-quality) food, obligations toward more than 
human realities seemed to play a decisive role in 
the specific organization of the farms. Unsurprisingly, 
responsibility toward their animals was a vital 
aspect for the respondents involved in animal hus -
bandry, especially for Carsten, Andrea, and 
Alexandra. Ensuring a quality living environment 
for the animals, taking care of them, and looking 
after their well-being and health were frequently 
mentioned issues in their interviews and are 
important aspects of their farming practices and 
decisions. As Carsten showed me around his farm, 
for instance, he explained that he had decided to 
demolish and rebuild certain structures to ensure 
the well-being of his cattle – even though the old 
structure would have been legally sufficient in most 
respects.
Figure 1.  areas of responsibilities.
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 7
Similarly, the topic of killing and eating animals 
was taken up by the meat-producing farmers, 
Alexandra, Carsten, and Klara. All three touched 
upon this socially charged topic and framed it in the 
context of responsibility and ultimately caring rela -
tionships. Especially Carsten often emphasized that 
it is part of his conviction and his way of showing 
respect toward his animals, of a trustful and caring 
relationship with them that he is able to determine 
and oversee the slaughtering process. He describes 
the killing of a cow which he remembers as having 
had a particularly “strong” character:
And then there was peace and quiet and then she 
[the cow] made it. So she didn’t have to collapse on 
a truck somewhere and then wait with a thousand 
other scaredy cats somewhere in the waiting area of 
the big slaughterhouse or something, but she was 
just allowed to die here. (Carsten)
In the context of growing crops, fruits, and vege -
tables, responsibilities played a crucial role as well. 
For Moritz, for example, growing organically is of 
the utmost importance, since he sees it as the only 
way to secure the future existence of nature and thus 
humankind. At the same time, he questions the 
extent to which large farming businesses are truly 
able to fulfill their responsibilities toward more than 
human realities accordingly – even if they produce 
organically – since the farmers will not be able to 
truly take care of all the land. As a result, he told 
me that he will continue to farm his existing land 
and not seek to expand.
The reflections on responsibilities toward more 
than human realities very often also pointed to a 
broader societal context, extending beyond the 
boundaries of their own farmland and I will thus 
turn to this in the next section.
Responsibility toward human society
Societal embeddedness and the resulting responsi -
bilities were expressed in the interviews in various 
contexts. Some farmers reported that they saw 
themselves as having a responsibility to shape a 
socioecological environment worth living in for 
humans and non-humans alike by, for example, 
maintaining hedges, sowing a perennial bee pas -
ture, or providing agricultural machinery for 
events in the village.
One dimension of responsibility espoused by all 
of the farmers is educating the public about the real -
ities of agricultural production. This topic was raised 
in different ways and, of course, with different con -
sequences for each farm, but all interviewees shared 
the view that society in general knows too little about the methods and conditions of food and espe -
cially agricultural production. The respondents 
emphasized the need to give people a different, more 
realistic image of agriculture,
[b]ecause it’s not like a hundred years ago, where 
you knew a farmer personally because you had one 
in the family. (Moritz)
One often referred to area of responsibility is still 
missing, and I will turn to this in the next section.
Economic-entrepreneurial responsibility
As can be expected, sales prices and thus the eco -
nomic viability of the agricultural businesses in this 
study were central concerns. Frustration with a 
low-price mentality was a theme in almost all the 
interviews, exemplified here by Klara:
And, of course, the prices of pigs, they push you to 
the limit, where you can actually see that things 
could be done differently, but everyone just wants to 
buy cheap. And I don’t just mean the consumer, but 
also the big sausage factories. (Klara)
Interestingly, the concern about economic viability 
was almost always related to meeting the other 
responsibilities, as well as aspects such as the tech -
nology required, wages, and the workload of the 
team. In particular, their accountability as an 
employer, both toward the team and the social fabric 
of the region, was mentioned several times.
What became clear at various points in the inter -
views is the specific pressure that weighs on agricul -
tural entrepreneurs: The almost mundane fact that 
agricultural activities more often than not include 
the need to “maintain, continue and repair” (Tronto 
1994 , 103) living matter, animals, or ecological sys -
tems, and that these activities are subject to imme -
diacy and non-deferability. Alexandra expressed this 
best in the following quote:
Nobody who has a farm takes time off…the animals 
are there and thus the work. (Alexandra)
The notion of being at work 24/7, of a high 
workload combined with hard physical labor and 
economic pressure and uncertainty, was expressed by 
nearly every respondent. When asked what keeps 
them going in the face of challenges and difficulties, 
the answers often related to the different areas of 
responsibility outlined above, and thus played a cru -
cial role in the farmers’ convictions. The motivation 
for direct marketing is directly linked to these com -
mitments, as this form of marketing is ultimately a 
means for the farmers to fulfill their responsibilities 
as I will show in the next section.
8 s. BRettiN
The farmers’ motivation for direct marketing – 
window, stage, and tool for convictions
In my interviews, marketing agricultural produce 
directly points to the responsibilities and thus con -
victions of the respective farmers – even though, at 
first glance, it seems as if direct marketing was con -
sidered by the farmers to be the best way of achiev -
ing higher prices or financial security. Particularly in 
the context of CSAs, financial security was an 
important factor, as harvest shares are sold to the 
members in advance of the growing season. However, 
a closer look reveals that the desire to improve value 
creation is also driven by factors other than profit 
maximization. Andrea, for example, told me about 
the need to repeatedly explain her high milk prices, 
by putting them in the context of the higher pro -
duction costs – which ultimately result from the 
choices she has made in relation to her responsibil -
ity toward the well-being of her cows. The shared 
assumption by all farmers was that asking for higher 
prices requires increased communication in order to 
explain, justify, and sometimes even convince 
through tasting. This communication opportunity is 
seen first and foremost in direct marketing and was 
also considered as a suitable means of realizing 
another responsibility, namely informing the public 
about agricultural production and working methods. 
The higher prices, however, relate to the farmers’ 
responsibilities: They are necessary to implement the 
specific forms of agricultural production and work -
ing methods which, as shown above, reflect the 
respective responsibilities. Carsten, for instance, 
emphasized that for him the question of direct mar -
keting is ultimately a question of responsibility and 
conviction. By ensuring the welfare of his cattle right 
up to the point of slaughter, and then being able to 
oversee the process of producing meat and sausage 
products of a certain quality, he is able to remain 
true to them.
When asked if the work involved in direct mar -
keting – something he had been telling me about at 
length just a few minutes earlier – is sometimes a 
burden, he replied as follows:
We work with animals, with living beings, and we 
all love the job we do here. And when we experi -
ence the greatest possible appreciation for the prod -
uct, no, it’s actually a pleasure. (Carsten)
Another central and often mentioned aspect of 
direct marketing was the opportunity to receive 
direct (critical) feedback. This played a role in two 
ways: First, feedback was seen as a necessary aspect 
of the responsibility for producing high-quality food. 
Especially Moritz explained to me that he wants to produce food that not only nourishes people, but 
also gives them pleasure. That is why he seeks feed -
back on the needs and wishes of his customers. 
Second, direct encounters and feedback are of high 
value to the farmers personally and are often a key 
motivating factor in their daily agricultural work and 
struggles. For instance, when I asked Annika what 
she enjoyed most about her job, she pointed to giv -
ing products to customers who appreciated them. 
This also gives her the strength to endure the hard -
ships of farm work.
Consequently, I argue that a key motivation for 
direct marketing lies in the appreciation  it enables: 
The ability to ask for higher prices and receive direct 
consumer feedback can be understood as a form of 
appreciation of the animals, the ecosystem, and the 
agricultural work that was put into the product. I 
borrow this term directly from Carsten – 
Wertschätzung , he said in the interview, in the sense 
of positively recognizing and valuing the worth of 
somebody or something. This notion of “approval, 
positive estimation; favorable recognition (of worth 
or excellence), ” as the English translation “apprecia -
tion” is described in the online Oxford English 
Dictionary , was an underlying subtext in all the 
interviews. This appreciation points in two direc -
tions. The higher prices and the feedback can be 
seen by farmers as an external approval and recog -
nition that they receive from the outside – an appre -
ciation of agricultural work enabled through direct 
marketing. In addition, and most importantly, the 
higher prices also enable an internal appreciation 
related to the process of agricultural production 
itself: The farmers in this study try to practice agri -
culture according to their responsibilities and con -
victions, almost always based on an appreciation – a 
favorable recognition of worth – of animals and 
other more than human beings contributing to agri -
cultural food production.
The motivation for direct marketing can thus be 
seen as grounded within a structure of multifaceted 
areas of responsibility. The direct relationship 
between production and consumption – the result -
ing space for communication – makes it possible, on 
one hand, to demand higher prices, as they can be 
explained and elaborated. The higher prices, in turn, 
provide the basis for specific forms of agricultural 
production, in line with the respective responsibili -
ties and convictions. Whether it is, for example, the 
conscious decision not to expand in order to prac -
tice biocyclic agroecological farming (Moritz), or to 
practice a combination of mother-bonded and fos -
tered calf-rearing exclusively on grassland (Andrea), 
or even having slaughtering and further processing 
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 9
carried out on the farm to be able to control these 
processes accordingly (Carsten).
On the other hand, this communication space 
also makes it possible to fulfill responsibilities 
directly – for example, by asking consumers about 
their needs and tastes or by providing information 
and education through the direct exchange. As I 
have illustrated, for the farmers interviewed here, 
marketing all or some of their food products directly 
seems to be a consequence or a continuation of their 
responsibilities and convictions as practicing and 
producing farmers.
Discussion
It has become clear that farmers do not merely react 
to existing demand in their decision to market 
directly (Beingessner and Fletcher 2020 ). Consumers 
are certainly important, but not in the sense of a 
pure market economy of supply and demand. Rather, 
responsibility toward consumers, as well as toward 
other multifaceted living realities, plays a crucial role 
in farmers’ various decisions in relation to the agri -
cultural production process, including the decision 
to market produce directly. This, in turn, clearly 
answers the question of how aspects of care provide 
a starting point for the motivation for direct market -
ing. Tronto ( 2015 ) for example defines responsibility 
as a core element of care. She outlines four phases of 
care: The first phase contains caring about  in a sense 
of identifying needs of the other; the second phase 
is characterized by caring for  and thus by accepting 
and taking on responsibility; the third phase is the 
actual caregiving ; and the fourth phase is defined by 
care-receiving , which includes feedback and perhaps 
the recognition of new needs or the need for 
improvement. Through analysis of the interviews, I 
was further able to identify four dimensions or areas 
of responsibility  to which the motivation of direct 
marketing relates to: responsibility as an actor in the 
food system, and responsibility toward human soci -
ety and toward more than human realities as well as 
economic-entrepreneurial responsibility.
The trope of farmers as caretakers of societies’ 
food supply is well known, especially under the par -
adigm of productivism (Burton 2004 ). However, my 
interviewees made it clear that they understand their 
responsibility for food production not only in quan -
titative terms but also explicitly in qualitative terms. 
They considered themselves as caretakers of a food 
supply that is supposed to be healthy and tasty, in 
some cases even directly adapted to the needs of the 
consumers. Direct marketing, I suggest, was in many 
cases a means for care about , caregiving , and being able to actively witness the care-receiving  – an aspect 
usually separated from the producing farmers in 
conventional and globalized value chains. Especially 
the openness and, in some cases, eagerness to receive 
feedback, and thus the willingness to adapt or 
improve, is very much in line with Tronto’s concept 
of care, I would argue and thus demonstrates how 
much a care perspective in the agri-food system 
could break up established structures of individual -
ization (Busa and Garder 2015 ). Such a perspective 
could help in identifying, designing, and evaluating 
alternatives of agri-food environments by under -
standing farmers and consumers not as unrelated, 
isolated actors but as interconnected through com -
plex relationalities and responsibilities (Dowler 
et  al. 2009 ).
At this point, the inclusion of Tronto’s ( 2015 ) fifth 
phase comes into play, the caring with , the orienta -
tion toward solidarity by taking collective responsibil -
ity. In the context of alternative agri-food environments 
this entails an organization of consumer-producer 
relationships not through market-mechanisms (alone) 
but rather a sociopolitical support of agri-food struc -
tures that are truly oriented toward the well-being of 
those involved, including human and non-human 
beings. Consequently, I suggest including care theo -
ries in the critical debate on direct marketing and 
localization. Melanie DuPuis, David Goodman, and 
Jill Harrison (2006) caution us, for example, against 
an “unreflexive localism” which does not change 
injustices and inequalities caused by globalization. 
They rather call for “a just and reflexive food local -
ism [which] will work not to erect economic bound -
aries between a particular ‘here’ and the global ‘there’ 
but to engender and deepen their connection with 
the people who live nearby” (DuPuis, Goodman, and 
Harrison 2006 , 262). Their suggestion is a “New 
Regionalist” approach in which local food politics 
promote a more equitable distribution of regional 
agri-food resources and services. As I understand the 
authors, this would mean, for example, supporting 
the introduction of directly marketed food into the 
public food supply (e.g., school cafeterias, possibly 
even combined with educational programs). This, in 
turn, is in line with the motivations mentioned by 
almost all the farmers that I interviewed, who con -
sider educating and informing about agriculture as 
one of their responsibilities.
Further, DuPuis, Goodman, and Harrison ( 2006 ) 
point to the need for localized agri-food relation -
ships to meet diverse and differently “situated” 
(Haraway 1988 ) demands and needs, rather than 
simply conforming to a standardized version of val -
ues. Similarly, Tronto ( 1994 ) reminds us that care 
should not be idolized or romanticized as inherently 
10 s. BRettiN
good. Rather, existing care structures can also con -
tribute to the reestablishment or manifestation of 
power structures, or have an exclusionary effect, if 
they only affect those who are close or are consid -
ered equal. Bringing these strands together, two 
issues become apparent. First, food politics, aiming 
at shaping localized, just, and reflexive agri-food 
environments, need to constantly refocus on the 
well-being and thus on the heterogenous and diverse 
needs and values of a complex web of multispecies 
livelihoods. This normative orientation, second, can -
not be fulfilled through a purely market-oriented 
localism since this would foster existing structures of 
exclusion and individualization.
In line with these aspects, Patricia Allen et  al. 
(2003 ) also criticize neoliberal orientations of local 
agri-food initiatives. In their study with leaders of 
California organizations, they conclude that for most 
“changing the food system means increasing the 
diversity of alternative markets such that the con -
sumers have more choice, rather than making deep 
structural changes” (Allen et  al. 2003 , 72). Also, 
Henry Buller and Carol Morris (2004, 1067) state in 
their study on market-oriented initiatives for envi -
ronmentally sustainable food production that “the 
incentive for food producers to manage the environ -
ment positively comes directly through the harvest -
ing of market benefits” and underline the fact that 
this “reappropriation and revalorization of positive 
externalities…provides an additional source of reve -
nue for those involved in the supply chain” (Buller 
and Morris 2004 , 1078). However, based on the 
analysis of my interviews, I would argue that a closer 
look is necessary and suggest a slightly different per -
spective: Following Saurabh Arora and Barbara Van 
Dyck (2021), who understand the refusal of conven -
tional value chains as creating a space for otherness 
within which ethics and practices of care are possi -
ble, I suggest that direct marketing in my interviews 
was both  a mode of value creation and a means for 
appreciation and practices of care. As the analysis 
shows, value creation in the context of direct mar -
keting can contribute to enabling specific forms of 
care for and appreciation of the complex web of 
human and non-human beings contributing to agri -
cultural food production.
Understanding direct marketing as a means for 
practices of care – as a way to realize agricultural 
work in a careful way, the results of this exploratory 
study connect to the analysis by Joseph Murphy and 
Sarah Parry (2021, 1114) who suggest understanding 
care as the context for work. However, the authors 
caution “against collapsing work into care, care into 
work or offering new neologisms” and “any one-size 
fits all model of work and care. ” Following this, I want to emphasize that not all agricultural work can 
be described as caring or careful. Even though my 
research suggests that care and agricultural work are 
closely knit together, further studies are necessary to 
better understand the various configurations and 
“dynamic tensions” (Murphy and Parry 2021 ) 
between work and care in the diverse and heteroge -
nous contexts of agricultural production.
Conclusion
The starting point of this article was the 
under-examination of farmers’ perspectives when 
looking at direct marketing. In particular, little atten -
tion has been paid to the question of the motivation 
for marketing agricultural products this way. One 
explanation for this may lie in the simplistic under -
standing of farmers as purely economic actors. This 
would certainly correspond to the hegemonic under -
standing of economy and agriculture, where deci -
sions are seemingly based solely on maximizing 
profit and productivity. According to this rationale, 
direct marketing would only be motivated by the 
logic of the market economy, by the prospect of 
increasing value creation. However, the analysis of 
qualitative interviews with nine farmers in 
Brandenburg who market directly suggests a differ -
ent, more nuanced picture and illustrates how aspects 
of care play an important role in their decision mak -
ing. More specifically, responsibility to consumers 
and to other multifaceted realities of human and 
more than human beings are crucial to the various 
choices farmers make in relation to agricultural pro -
duction and value creation. I was able to identify 
four specific dimensions or areas of responsibility 
that formed the basis for farmers’ motivation for 
direct marketing: responsibility as an actor in the 
food system and responsibility toward human soci -
ety and more than human realities as well as 
economic-entrepreneurial responsibility. A central, 
directly related theme that emerged throughout the 
interviews was appreciation. The issue of apprecia -
tion referred to farmers’ desire for external appreci -
ation of agricultural work by consumers. However, 
as a basis for decision making, a form of internal 
appreciation toward all human and non-human 
beings involved in agricultural production seems to 
be much more important. This appreciation was 
seen to be realized in certain forms of agricultural 
production and processing which was, in turn, made 
possible by the increased value added in the context 
of direct marketing. Following these findings, I argue 
that direct marketing should be understood as a way 
of value creation as well as a means for appreciation 
and practices of care.
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 11
As this is an exploratory study, further research is 
needed to better understand the different configura -
tions of agricultural production, value creation, and 
care. How, for example, do material factors such as 
business size, location, ownership, and the specific 
foodstuffs that are produced influence this relation -
ship? What role do more immaterial aspects such as 
access to information, skills, and knowledge play? 
How do factors such as time, communication, and 
emotion – key to analyzing caring relationships – 
factor into the equation?
Moreover, it is also important to look beyond food 
production and consider these issues in the context of 
biomass production and thus the bioeconomy. 
Focusing not only on technological innovation, but 
also on the different socioeconomic configurations of 
the agricultural value chain and their interlinkages 
with the well-being of each part of the complex web 
of human and non-human beings that contribute to 
agriculture, would certainly be helpful in the search 
for a more sustainable human-nature relationship. 
Further research in this direction could contribute to 
the development of a new understanding of agricul -
ture in which the integral aspects of care within pro -
duction are recognized.
Notes
 1. Marktschwärmer , also known as Food Assembly, is a 
digital platform that connects producers and  
consumers in regional, direct networks.
 2. A regional box scheme is a subscription for  
consumers to receive regular deliveries of fruits and 
vegetables directly from farmers
 3. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Meike 
Brückner for her invaluable help.
 4. I have translated the quotes from German into 
English.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
ORCID
Suse Brettin  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4442-2745
References
Allen, P ., M. FitzSimmons, A. Goodman, A, and K. 
Warner. 2003 . “Shifting Plates in the Agrifood 
Landscape: The Tectonics of Alternative Agrifood 
Initiatives in California. ” Journal of Rural Studies  19 (1): 
61–75. doi: 10.1016/S0743-0167(02)00047-5 .
Arora, S., and B. Van Dyck. 2021. “Refusal as Radical 
Care? Moving beyond Modern Industrial Agriculture. ” 
Development  64 (3–4): 252–258. doi: 10.1057/s41301-021-  
00310-3 .Attride-Stirling, J. 2001 . “Thematic Networks: An Analytic 
Tool for Qualitative Research. ” Qualitative Research  1 
(3): 385–405. doi: 10.1177/146879410100100307 .
Bauhardt, C. 2013 . “Rethinking Gender and Nature from 
a Material(Ist) Perspective: Feminist Economics, Queer 
Ecologies and Resource Politics. ” European Journal of 
Women’s Studies  20 (4): 361–375. doi: 10.1177/1350506  
812471027 .
Bauhardt, C., and G. Çağlar. 2010 . “Gender and Economics: 
Feministische Kritik Der Politischen Ökonomie (Gender 
and Economics: Feminist Critique of Political 
Economy). ” In Gender and Economics , edited by C. 
Bauhardt and G. Çağlar, 7–17. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag 
für Sozialwissenschaften.
Beingessner, N., and A. Fletcher. 2020 . “‘Going Local’: 
Farmers’ Perspectives on Local Food Systems in Rural 
Canada. ” Agriculture and Human Values  37 (1): 129–
145. doi: 10.1007/s10460-019-09975-6 .
Born, B., and M. Purcell. 2006 . “ Avoiding the Local Trap: 
Scale and Food Systems in Planning Research. ” Journal 
of Planning Education and Research  26 (2): 195–207.  
doi:10.1177/0739456X06291389 .
Brown, J., and A. Guiffrida. 2014 . “Carbon Emissions 
Comparison of Last Mile Delivery versus Customer 
Pickup. ” International Journal of Logistics Research and 
Applications  17 (6): 503–521. doi: 10.1080/13675567.2014
.907397 .
Brown, C., E. Kovács, I. Herzon, S. Villamayor-Tomas, A. 
Albizua, A. Galanaki, I. Grammatikopoulou, D. 
McCracken, J. Alkan Olsson, and Y . Zinngrebe. 2021. 
“Simplistic Understandings of Farmer Motivations 
Could Undermine the Environmental Potential of the 
Common Agricultural Policy. ” Land Use Policy  101: 
105136. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.105136 .
Buller, H., and C. Morris. 2004 . “Growing Goods: The 
Market, the State, and Sustainable Food Production. ” 
Environment and Planning A  36 (6): 1065–1084. 
doi:10.1068/a35282 .
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) and 
Bundesministerium für Ernährung und Landwirtschaft  
(BMEL). 2020. National Bioeconomy Strategy . Berlin: 
BMBF. https://www.bmel.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/
Publications/national-bioeconomy-strategy.pdf?__
blob=publicationFile&v=2
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz 
(BMWK). 2024 . “Zu den aktuellen Protesten (On the 
Current Protests). ” [Video] https://www.bmwk.de/
Redaktion/DE/Videos/2024-some/240107-bmwk-bm-  
demokratie/video.html
Burton, R. J. F. 2004 . “Seeing Through the ‘Good Farmer’s’ 
Eyes: Towards Developing an Understanding of the Social 
Symbolic Value of ‘Productivist’ Behaviour. ” Sociologia 
Ruralis  44 (2): 195–215. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9523.2004.00270.x .
Burton, R., J. Forney, P . Stock, and I. Sutherland. 2021 . 
The Good Farmer: Culture and Identity in Food and 
Agriculture . London: Routledge.
Busa, J., and R. Garder. 2015 . “Champions of the 
Movement or Fair‐Weather Heroes? Individualization 
and the (A)Politics of Local Food. ” Antipode  47 (2): 
323–341. doi: 10.1111/anti.12108 .
Busck, A. 2002 . “Farmers’ Landscape Decisions: 
Relationships between Farmers’ Values and Landscape 
Practices. ” Sociologia Ruralis  42 (3): 233–249. 
doi:10.1111/1467-9523.00213 .
12 s. BRettiN
Čajić, S., M. Brückner, and S. Brettin. 2022 . “ A Recipe for 
Localization? Digital and Analogue Elements in Food 
Provisioning in Berlin: A Critical Examination of 
Potentials and Challenges from a Gender Perspective. ” 
Sustainable Production and Consumption  29: 820–830. 
doi:10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.025 .
Chao, S. 2018 . “Seed Care in the Palm Oil  
S e c t o r.”  Environmental Humanities  10 (2): 421–446. 
doi:10.1215/22011919-7156816 .
Cohen, M. 2016 . The Future of Consumer Society: Prospects 
for Sustainability in the New Economy . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Corvo, P ., and R. Matacena. 2018 . “The New ‘Online’ 
Alternative Food Networks as a Socio-Technical 
Innovation in the Local Food Economy: Two Cases 
from Milan. ” In Services, Experiences and Innovation , 
edited by A. Scupola and L. Fuglsang, 301–315. 
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Cox, R., L. Holloway, L. Venn, L. Dowler, J. Hein, M. 
Kneafsey, and H. Tuomainen. 2008 . “Common Ground? 
Motivations for Participation in a Community-Supported 
Agriculture Scheme. ” Local Environment  13 (3): 203–
218. doi: 10.1080/13549830701669153 .
Demartini, E., A. Gaviglio, and A. Pirani. 2017. “Farmers 
Motivation and Perceived Effects of Participating in 
Short Food Supply Chains: Evidence from a North 
Italian Survey. ” Agricultural Economics (Zemědělská 
ekonomika)  63 (5): 204–216. doi: 10.17221/323/  
2015-AGRICECON .
Dowler, E., M. Kneafsey, R. Cox, and L. Holloway. 2009 . 
“‘Doing Food Differently’: Reconnecting Biological and 
Social Relationships through Care for Food. ” The 
Sociological Review  57 (Supp. 2): 200–221. doi: 10.1111/
j.1467-954X.2010.01893.x .
DuPuis, M., D. Goodman, and J. Harrison. 2006 . “Just 
Values or Just Value? Remaking the Local in Agro-Food 
Studies. ” In Between the Local and the Global: 
Confronting Complexity in the Contemporary Agri-Food 
Sector , edited by T. Marsden and J. Murdoch, 241–268. 
Oxford: Elsevier. doi: 10.1016/S1057-1922(06)12010-7 .
Gasson, R. 1973 . “Goals and Values of Farmers. ” Journal 
of Agricultural Economics  24 (3): 521–542. doi: 10.1111/  
j.1477-9552.1973.tb00952.x .
Goodman, D., E. Dupuis, and M. Goodman, eds. 2012 . 
Alternative Food Networks: Knowledge, Practice and 
Politics . London: Routledge.
Hamilton, S. 2024 . “Managing the Farm: Bullshit in 
Theory and Practice. ” Agricultural History  98 (1): 1–22. 
doi:10.1215/00021482-10910287 .
Haraway, D. 1988 . “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question 
in Feminism and the Privilege of Partial Perspective. ” 
Feminist Studies  14 (3): 575–599. doi: 10.2307/3178066 .
Harding, S. 1986 . The Science Question in Feminism . 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Hofmeister, S., T. Mölders, M. Deininger, and K. Kapitza. 
2019 . “Für welche ‘Natur/en’ sorgen wir? Kritisch femi -
nistische Perspektiven auf aktuelle Care-Debatten im 
sozial-ökologischen Kontext (What ‘Nature/s’ Do We 
Care For? Critical Feminist Perspectives on Current 
Care Debates in a Social-Ecological Context). ” GENDER 
– Zeitschrift für Geschlecht, Kultur und Gesellschaft  11: 
125–139. doi: 10.3224/gender.v11i1.09 .
Huber, E. 2024 . “Bauernproteste: Die Ursachen des 
Unmuts (Peasant Protests: The Causes of Discontent. ” BR24 , January 10. https://www.br.de/nachrichten/
deutschland-welt/bauernproteste-die-ursachen-des-
unmuts,U0zpRkC
Krzywoszynska, A. 2016 . “What Farmers Know: Experiential 
Knowledge and Care in Vine Growing. ” Sociologia Ruralis  
56 (2): 289–310. doi: 10.1111/soru.12084 .
Lu, R., and R. Dudensing. 2015 . “What Do We Mean by 
Value-Added Agriculture?” Choices  30 (4): 1–8. https://
www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/choices.30.4.05 .
MacGregor, S., and A. Mäki. 2023 . “‘We Do Not Want to 
Be Mainstreamed into a Polluted Stream’: An 
Ecofeminist Critique of SDG 5. ” In The Environment in 
Global Sustainability Governance , edited by L. Partzsch, 
220–242. Bristol: Bristol University Press.
Macias, T. 2008 . “Working toward a Just, Equitable, and 
Local Food System: The Social Impact of 
Community-Based Agriculture. ” Social Science Quarterly  
89 (5): 1086–1101. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6237.2008.00566.x .
Milan Urban Food Policy Pact (MUFPP). 2015 . “Milan 
Urban Food Policy Pact. ” https://www.milanurbanfood  
policypact.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Milan-  
Urban-Food-Policy-Pact-EN.pdf
Murphy, J., and S. Parry. 2021 . “Gender, Households and 
Sustainability: Disentangling and Re-Entangling  
with the Help of ‘Work’ and ‘Care. ’” Environment and 
Planning E: Nature and Space  4 (3): 1099–1120. 
doi:10.1177/2514848620948432 .
Paciarotti, C., and F. Torregiani. 2021 . “The Logistics of 
the Short Food Supply Chain: A Literature Review. ” 
Sustainable Production and Consumption  26: 428–442. 
doi:10.1016/j.spc.2020.10.002 .
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. 2015 . “Making Time for Soil: 
Technoscientific Futurity and the Pace of Care. ” Social 
Studies of Science  45 (5): 691–716. doi: 10.1177/030631  
2715599851 .
Pungas, L. 2020 . “Caring Dachas. Food Self-Provisioning 
in Eastern Europe through the Lens of Care. ” In Food 
for Degrowth: Perspectives and Practices , edited by A. 
Nelson and F. Edwards, 59–73. London: Routledge.
Renting, H., T. Marsden, and J. Banks. 2003 . “Understanding 
Alternative Food Networks: Exploring the Role of Short 
Food Supply Chains in Rural Development. ” Environment 
and Planning A: Economy and Space  35 (3): 393–411. 
doi:10.1068/a3510 .
Samsioe, E., and C. Fuentes. 2022 . “Digitalizing  
Shopping Routines: Re-Organizing Household Practices to 
Enable Sustainable Food Provisioning. ” Sustainable Production 
and Consumption  29: 807–819. doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.07.019 .
Schreier, M. 2014 . “Qualitative Content Analysis. ” In 
Qualitative Data Analysis , edited by U. Flick, 170–183. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sevenhuijsen, S. 2003 . “The Place of Care: The Relevance 
of the Feminist Ethic of Care for Social Policy. ” Feminist 
Theory  4 (2): 179–197. doi: 10.1177/14647001030042006 .
Seymour, M., and S. Connelly. 2023 . “Regenerative 
Agriculture and a More-than-Human Ethic of Care: A 
Relational Approach to Understanding Transformation. ” 
Agriculture and Human Values  40 (1): 231–244. 
doi:10.1007/s10460-022-10350-1 .
Statistisches Bundesamt (DESTATIS). 2021 . Land- und 
Forstwirtschaft, Fischerei. Einkommenskombinationen 
Landwirtschaftszählung : Fachserie 3, Reihe 2.1.7 (Agriculture, 
Forestry, Fishing: Income Combinations Agricultural Census: 
Specialist Series 3, Series 2.1.7).  Wiesbaden: Statistisches 
sustaiNaBility: scieNce, PR actice aNd POlicy 13
Bundesamt. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Branchen-  
Unternehmen/Landwirtschaft-Forstwirtschaft-Fischerei/
Landwirtschaftliche-Betriebe/Publikationen/Downloads-  
Landwirtschaftliche-Betriebe/einkommenskombinationen-  
2030217209004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile
Statistisches Bundesamt (DESTATIS). 2024a . 50% of 
Agricultural Holdings Had Additional Sources of Income 
in 2020 . Wiesbaden: Statistisches Bundesamt. https://
www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2021/09/PE21_N056_41.html
Statistisches Bundesamt (DESTATIS). 2024b . Betriebsgrößenstruktur 
landwirtschaftlicher Betriebe nach Bundesländern (Farm Size 
Structure of Agricultural Businesses by Federal State) . Wiesbaden: 
Statistisches Bundesamt. https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/
Branchen-Unternehmen/Landwirtschaft-Forstwirtschaft-
Fischerei/Landwirtschaftliche-Betriebe/Tabellen/
betriebsgroessenstruktur-landwirtschaftliche-betriebe.html
Trauger, A., C. Sachs, M. Barbercheck, K. Brasier, and N. 
Kiernan. 2010 . “‘Our Market Is Our Community’: 
Women Farmers and Civic Agriculture in Pennsylvania, 
USA. ” Agriculture and Human Values  27 (1): 43–55. 
doi:10.1007/s10460-008-9190-5 .
Tronto, J. 1994 . Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for 
an Ethic of Care . London: Routledge.Tronto, J. 2015 . Who Cares? How to Reshape a Democratic 
Politics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Waring, M. 1990 . If Women Counted: A New Feminist 
Economics . San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins.
Wittmann, B. 2022 . “Beruf Massentierhalter:In – Landwirtschaft 
Zwischen Fürsorge, Ausbeutung Und Naturbeherrschung 
(Profession of Factory Farmer – Agriculture between Care, 
Exploitation and Domination of Nature). ” ForAP: 
Forschungsergebnisse Von Absolventen Und Promovierenden 
Der Fakultät Für Sprach-, Literatur- Und Kulturwissenschaften  
5 (5): 8–23. doi: 10.5283/epub.53698 .
Wolpert, J. 1964 . “The Decision Process in Spatial Context. ” 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers  54 
(4): 537–558. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1964.tb01783.x .
Zukunftskommission Landwirtschaft (ZKL). 2021 . 
Zukunft Landwirtschaft: Eine gesamtgesellschaftliche 
Aufgabe: Empfehlungen der Zukunftskommission 
Landwirtschaft (Future Agriculture: A Task for Society 
as a Whole: Recommendations from the Agriculture 
Future Commission) . Berlin: ZKL. https://www.
bundesregierung.de/resource/blob/975226/1939908/2c6
3a7d6ce38e8c92aa5f73aff1cd87a/2021-07-06-zukunftsk
ommission-landwirtschaft-data.pdf?download=1
