Received:31March2022 Accepted:21September2022
DOI:10.1002/jpln.202200120
REVIEW
Why do we need interdisciplinary cooperation with
anthropologists and archaeologists in soil science?
Sandra Teuber1,2,3Martin Bartelheim2,4Roland Hardenberg2,5,6Monica Knopf2,7
Thomas Knopf2,4,7Peter Kühn1,2Tobias Schade2Karsten Schmidt2,8
Thomas Scholten1,2
1DepartmentofGeosciences,ChairofSoil
ScienceandGeomorphology,Universityof
Tübingen,Tübingen,Germany
2SFB1070ResourceCultures,Universityof
Tübingen,Tübingen,Germany
3GeoparkSchwäbischeAlb,Schelklingen,
Germany
4DepartmentofPrehistoryandEarlyHistory,
UniversityofTübingen,Tübingen,Germany
5DepartmentofSocialandCultural
Anthropology,GoetheUniversityofFrankfurt,
FrankfurtamMain,Germany
6FrobeniusInstituteforResearchinCultural
Anthropology,FrankfurtamMain,Germany
7KeltenmuseumHochdorf/Enz,
Eberdingen-Hochdorf,Germany
8eScience-Center,UniversityofTübingen,
Tübingen,Germany
Correspondence
SandraTeuber,GeoparkSchwäbischeAlb,
Marktstraße17,Schelklingen89601,
Germany.
Email:sandra.teuber@uni-tuebingen.de
ThomasScholten,EberhardKarlsUniversity
Tübingen,SoilScienceandGeomorphology,
Rümelinstraße19-23,TübingenD-72070,
Germany.
Email:thomas.scholten@uni-tuebingen.de
ThisarticlehasbeeneditedbyLydiaPohl.Abstract
Lookingatsoilsfromtheperspectiveofanenvironmentalscientistoragronomistmight
neglect various dimensions of valuation that can be attributed to soils. Especially social
andculturalconnotedvaluesincludingecosystemservicescannotalwaysbemeasuredin
termsofscientificvaluesorclassifiedassoiltypesorsoilqualitiesinamodern,economic
way.
EventhoughsoilsareafactandhavebeenpresentontheEarth’ssurfaceandusedbypeo-
ple,atleastforfoodproduction,atdifferenttimesandindifferentcultures,thewaysof
dealingwithsoilsandthevaluationsofsoilsareextremelydiverse.Researchersinanthro-
pology,archaeology,andagriculture,forexample,areinvestigatingdifferentperspectives
likesoilsascommongoodorasprivateproperty.Thisconcernsnotonlydifferentknowl-
edge orders about soils, but also beliefs, techniques, foodways, practices, and power
relationsconcerningsoilsandcerealcultivation.
Based on the example of agriculture with a focus on cereal cultivation, we argue that
there is still a great need for interdisciplinarity between the sciences and humanities.
However, there is also a need to distinguish and explain between fundamental interdis-
ciplinaryresearchandapplicationoffindingsinasocio-economiccontext.Itisnecessary
tounderstanddifferentknowledgeordersandvaluationsintimeorspaceandtoreevalu-
atetoday’sperspectivesonsoilsandagricultureforfacingmodernproblemssuchassoil
degradation,erosion,salinization,andanoveralllossofsoilfertility.
KEYWORDS
cereal cultivation, ecosystem services, interdisciplinarity, pedology, resources, ResourceCultures,
soilfunctions
1 INTRODUCTION
Soilcultivationasamultidimensionalprocessaffectstheenvironment
and human societies alike. While soil scientists often focus on soil
properties or soil fertility when they study soil cultivation, some of
Thisisanopenaccessarticleunderthetermsofthe CreativeCommonsAttribution License,whichpermitsuse,distributionandreproductioninanymedium,provided
theoriginalworkisproperlycited.
©2022TheAuthors. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science publishedbyWiley-VCHGmbHthem tend to overlook that social and cultural dimensions affect how
people use soils and knowledge about them develops. The impact of
humans on soils has already been pointed out by Jenny ( 1980), who
arguedthathumansneedtobeconsideredseparatelyfromtheother
bioticfactorsofsoilformationasnotonlygeneticpropertiesbutalso
752 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jpln J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci. 2022;185:752–765.

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 753
the “cultural environment” affect their soil use. While the question
remains, what “cultural environment” encompasses, expertise about
social and cultural processes or dimensions is needed to understand
how humans value soils in different regions of the world and in dif-
ferenttimes,howthisaffectsandaffectedtheirawarenessofsoilasa
basisoftheirlife,andhowinreturnitmightinfluenceandinfluenced
their soil management practices. The research of these cultural and
social processes is needed, if the soil scientific community in collabo-
ration with society and politics wants to maintain soil quality and soil
health. While soil quality refers to soil functions, the concept of soil
health sees soils as living, biological entities, which affect the health
and growth of plants and, thus, the health of the entire ecosystems,
which rely on the plants—including humans (Lal, 2016). Thus, under-
standing soil health is needed to guarantee humanities development.
However, it is also essential that humanity values soils and for soil
scientists to understand which processes and practices lead to soci-
etal valuation. Thus, it is necessary to research valuation processes
andland-managementpracticesrelatedtosoils.Thisisaprerequisite
to raise awareness within societies around the globe for the value of
soilsforeachandeverypersonontheplanet.Ifsoilscientistsandpol-
icymakersunderstandtherelationpeopleindifferentregionshaveto
their soils, educational and developmental programs can be devised
that take these values in consideration and fit the needs of the local
people. Further, soil scientists can learn from the humanities but also
frompeoplearoundtheworldhowdifferentlysoilsareperceivedand
howthisaffectspracticesandtheuseofsoilineverydaylife.
Soilscientistsoftendonothavethekindofexpertisetounderstand
valuation processes of local people (including the populations in the
GlobalNorth),theirpracticesandbeliefsystems,astheytendtofocus
onnaturalprocessesandnotonculturallydefinedvaluesofsoils.Thus,
interdisciplinary cooperation is needed to ensure that the soil quality
ismaintainedorincreasedsothatthedifferentsoilfunctionsarepre-
servedandthesoilscancontinuetoprovideecosystemservices(ES)to
humanity(e.g.,Bouma, 2014;Drobniketal., 2018).
The need of interdisciplinary studies has long been addressed by
variousscientist.Richteretal.( 2011),forexample,callforananthrope-
dologytofosteranunderstandingofhuman–soilrelationsbycombin-
ingdifferentdisciplinesfromthenaturalsciencesandthehumanities.
Based on this understanding, one can ensure the sustainability of the
soil’s ES, minimize detrimental impacts of soil management to the
environment, and conserve natural soil bodies (Richter et al., 2011).
Breviketal.( 2015)alsoemphasizethatthecollaborationofscientists
of different disciplines ranging from geologists, physicists, and biolo-
gists to anthropologists, medical professionals, and artists is needed
toaddresscurrentcrisessuchasbiodiversityloss,waterscarcity,and
land degradation as well as energy security, the latter a most impor-
tanttopicofourcurrenttimes.Similarly,BoumaandMcBratney( 2013)
call for a re-framing of soils and a focus on the contributions soils
can play in solving current environmental problems. This requires
interdisciplinarybutalsotransdisciplinarywork,whichinvolvesstake-
holders and practitioners (Bouma & McBratney, 2013). Bouma and
Montanarella ( 2016), thus, advocate to use the Agenda 2030 with its
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to address how soil sci-enceasadisciplinecancontributetowardreachingtheseSDGs.With
the focus on sustainable and resilient soil use, the above-mentioned
scientists acknowledge that human–soil relations need to be inves-
tigated in order to achieve the overarching sustainability goal. This
is urgently needed as soil degradation is an eminent problem and
global processes outside academia and soil science currently show,
howdependentsocietiesaroundtheglobeareonthecerealandsun-
flower yield of a single nation, Ukraine. Thus, it is necessary to show
people worldwide that human societies rely on soil quality and soil
health and need to care for the soils they have. However, in order to
raise awareness within societies, soil scientists must understand how
thesesocietiesvaluesoilsandagriculture,whatpracticestheyuseand
whichbeliefsystemstheyfollow.Further,KrzywoszynskaandMarch-
esi (2020) argue that within social science and the humanities, soils
needtobecomevisibleandneedtobeseenasindispensable.Forthis,
interdisciplinary research is urgently needed to understand knowl-
edge orders, valuation processes, practices of care and—generally
speaking—people.Further,as PuigdelaBellacasa(2010) wrote:“Tak-
ingresponsibilityforwhatandwhomwecarefordoesn’tmeanbeing
in charge. Adequate care requires knowledge and curiosity regarding
the needs of an ‘other’—human or not—and these become possible
through relating, through refusing objectification.” Thus, in order to
protectorcareforsoils,weneedcuriosityforsoilsandabroadunder-
standing of them. We as soil scientists need to understand that we
are not in charge of human–soil relations but need to be curious
about the many relations that exist between people and soils. Sev-
eral sub disciplines within soil science and other disciplines already
addresshuman–soilrelations.Theseincludearchaeopedology(Pietsch
& Kühn, 2017; Scudder, 2001), ethnopedology (Barrera-Bassols &
Zinck,2003a; Williams & Ortiz-Solorio, 1981; WinklerPrins & San-
dor,2003), and studies using the ecosystem service (ES) framework
(Jónsson&Davíðsdóttir, 2016)putforwardintheMillenniumEcosys-
temAssessment( 2005).Thesedifferentsubdisciplinesuseavarietyof
methods and rely on the cooperation of soil scientists with scientists
from the humanities. This is often based on mutual understanding of
thecooperatingscientistsandaccompaniedbycertainchallenges.This
perspective paper wants to draw attention to these subdisciplines as
they might provide insights into the cultural and social aspects con-
nectedtosoiluseintimeandspace.Thepresentpaper,thus,identifies
benefits but also challenges of the existing approaches. Further, the
present paper proposes a way to increase interdisciplinary collabo-
ration through an analytical tool that can facilitate communication
betweenscientistsofdifferentfields.Toaddresstheseobjectivesthis
paper:
(1) illustrates the benefits of existing collaborations in the field of
archaeopedology and geoarchaeology, ethnopedology and the
researchareaofecosystemservices(ES)thatprovideinformation
about interdisciplinary research taking place in the soil scientific
community.Whiletheexistingcollaborationsareconsidered,this
paperdoesnotoffercompletereviewsoftherespectivesubdisci-
plineasthiswouldexceedthescopeofthepaper.Itmerelyoffers
thought-provokinginsightsintothesevaluablecollaborationsand
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

754 TEUBER ET AL.
citessomeauthorswho,inouropinion,areagoodstartingpointto
lookintothesesubdisciplines;
(2) identifieschallengesofinterdisciplinarycollaborations;
(3) introduces a resource framework, which shifts the perspective
toward social and cultural practices and valuations. This frame-
work hopefully facilitates communication between scientists of
differentdisciplines—itdidforus.
2 INTERDISCIPLINARY COLLABORATIONS
BETWEEN SOIL SCIENTISTS AND OTHER
DISCIPLINES FROM THE HUMANITIES
2.1 Archaeopedology
Asoftoday,diversecollaborationsbetweensoilscientistsandarchae-
ologists, anthropologists, and economists exist, but the socio-cultural
aspects connected to soils are not necessarily their research focus.
Soil scientists and archaeologists, for example, are collaborating in
archaeopedology(Ahlrichsetal., 2016;Ballasusetal., 2022;Borketal.,
1998; Dreibrodt et al., 2022; Gerlach et al., 2012; James et al., 2021;
Kühnetal., 2010;Mieraetal., 2019;Pietsch&Kühn, 2017)tounder-
standhowpastsocietiesaffectedthesoilsandlandscapesaroundtheir
settlements.
Although early human influence on the landscape can already
be proven for the Mesolithic period (e.g., Dotterweich et al., 2013),
humans began to cultivate soils on a larger scale with the transition
to the Neolithic when the first farmers settled down (Davison et al.,
2006;Teuberetal., 2017;Tresset&Vigne, 2011).Thisalsostartedtheir
dependencyonsoilsforsubsistence.Onemightarguethatthesoilwas
alreadyprovidingfoodforhunter-gatherercommunities,butwiththe
advent ofagriculture,includingarablefarmingandanimalhusbandry,
humansactivelyworkedwiththesoiltogrowfood.Withthis,humans
alsoincreasinglybecameanelementoflandscapeformation(Kadereit
etal.,2010;Kühnetal., 2017;Wolf&Faust, 2013).
Tracesofsoilcultivation,whichledtoatransformationoftheland-
scape, are also analyzed in geoarchaeological research, showing the
extenttowhichhumanshavealteredthelandscapeandthesoilsthey
usedintheirdailylife(Henkner,Ahlrichs,Downeyetal. 2018;Henkner,
Ahlrichs,Fischeretal., 2018;Kappleretal., 2018;Porębaetal., 2019).
Ascultivationofsoilsusuallycausesunintendedsoilerosion(McNeill
& Winiwarter, 2004), colluvial deposits—as the correlate sediments
of soil erosion—can be particularly suitable for the reconstruction of
(pre)historic agricultural activities as they also archive signals of past
land use practices (Glaser & Birk, 2012; Prost et al., 2017; Scherer,
Deckersetal., 2021;Scherer,Höpferetal., 2021).
Combining the research on colluvial deposits with archaeological
research at the same location provides in-depth knowledge about
settlement patterns and agricultural practices (Höpfer et al., 2018).
Collaborations of soil scientists with archaeologists in the field of
archaeopedology, thus, show that researchers from both disciplines
can learn from each other and provide supplemental information
concerningspecificregionsorsites.Archaeologists further provide a cultural perspective on soils. Sal-
isbury (2012), for example, sees soils not only as something, which
covers archaeological finds, but which might have affected “the con-
struction of community through the practices of soilscape formation,
sensualexperienceandviasocialmemory”(Salisbury, 2012).However,
archaeologistsrarelyexcavatefeatures,wheretheyfinddirectaccess
to cultural meanings of soils, for instance religious connotations (see
Knopf[2010]withreferencetoadepositionofspecialceramicsinthe
contextofsoiltillage).
In general, archaeological finds, features, and soil formations like
colluviahavetobeinterpretedbytheuseofanalogiescomingfromhis-
toricalobservationsorethnographicevidence(McNeill&Winiwarter,
2006; Warkentin, 2006; Wilshusen & Stone, 1990). Thus, the suc-
cessfulapplicationofarchaeopedologicalmethodsusuallydependson
thediscussionsthatarchaeologistsandsoilscientistshaveinadvance
about the research question to be answered. The simple application
of the same methods in different archaeological contexts does not
necessarily lead to the expected results, that is, the application of
archaeopedologicalmethodshastobeadjustedforitssuitabilitywith
therespectivequestionsandgeofactorsateachsite.
2.2 Ethnopedology
The connections between soils and people are also investigated in
the field of ethnopedology, particularly by anthropologists, soil scien-
tistsandgeographers(WinklerPrins, 1999).Barrera-BassolsandZinck
(2000) compiled a dataset encompassing 895 references and found
thatmoststudiesarelocatedinAfrica,Asia,andLatinAmerica.
Geographer and anthropologist Barrera-Bassols and soil scientist
Zinck investigated people’s approach to soils and to soil manage-
mentfromasocio-culturalaswellasfromanecologicalandeconomic
perspective. Based on the theoretical framework of Ethnoecology
(Toledo,1992) they applied the Cosmos–Corpus–Praxis complex to
their fields of studies (Barrera-Bassols & Zinck, 2003a,b). In doing so,
their research on local soil knowledge included—next to research on
soil classification systems (Corpus) and land-use strategies (Praxis)—
the spiritual dimension of soil and soil fertility (Cosmos). The latter
combines local symbols, the religious meaning of soil and nature, and
agrarianrituals.
SoilscientistKrasilnikovandepidemiologistaswellassoilscientist
Taborrecognizedthat“[e]conomic,infrastructural,cultural,andsocial
assumptions are inherent in [soil] classification systems and are fac-
tors for determining value” (Krasilnikov & Tabor, 2003). Even in the
currentGermansoilclassificationsystem,suchassumptionsexist,for
example, colluvial deposits were seldom mapped during soil surveys
in the 20th century, even though recent research indicates that they
are widespread (Henkner et al., 2017; Scherer, Höpfer et al., 2021).
Thus,culturalandsocialvaluationsareintegralpartsofethnopedolog-
icalinvestigations,whichareusuallylocatedinthe(sub)tropicsandare
oftenconductedinterdisciplinary.
However, little research about local soil knowledge and valuation
exists for the Global North or the so-called West (Krzywoszynska &
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 755
Marchesi, 2020).Exceptionsarefoundinafewstudiesonsmall-scale
agricultureinEurope,forexample, Christanell(2007) ,Engel-DiMauro
(2003),Krzywoszynska(2020) orWahlhütter(2011) ,butalsoinNorth-
ern America, as the example of the Zuni, a southwestern American
Indian tribe, shows (Sandor et al., 2002). First insights into the socio-
cultural dimensions connected to soil cultivation in the Global North
are also provided by a limited number of studies in the context of
urbanagricultureandurbangardening.Eventhoughthesestudiesdo
not necessarily focus on subsistence practices, as urban gardens are
created for various reasons, for instance food production (Aptekar &
Myers,2020;Barthel&Isendahl, 2013;Pouriasetal., 2016),aesthetic
purposes (Lindemann-Matthies & Marty, 2013), recreation (Bhatti &
Church,2000;Langemeyeretal., 2016),orcivicengagement(Krasny&
Tidball,2009),someaddresssoilsandincludesocio-culturalaspectsof
soilcultivation(Dewaelheynsetal., 2013,2014 ,2018;Engel-DiMauro,
2019; Kim et al., 2014; Scheromm, 2015; Teuber et al., 2019). They
donotusetheCosmos–Corpus–Praxiscomplex,though.Thismightbe
relatedtothelimitedanthropologicalknowledgeinsoilscienceorthe
factthattheCosmoscomponentmightnotseemapplicabletocommu-
nitiesintheGlobalNorth,wherespiritualityseemstoloseimportance.
ThisneglectsthefactthatmanyworldviewsintheGlobalNorthhave
theirorigininChristianor“pagan”ritualsthatexistedinthesocalled
“OldWorld.”Forexample,Thanksgiving(German =Erntedank )wasand
stilliscelebratedinmanyregionsinGermanyandthebiologic-organic
German brand Demeter still applies rules to agriculture that belong
to a more spiritual plane of existence, compared with the scientific
approachespracticedinsoilscientificlaboratories.
2.3 Ecosystem services
A further aspect of the socio-cultural dimensions of soil cultivation
concerns ES. As countries around the world are part of the free mar-
ket and a globalized trading network, economic considerations based
on the global market economy are omnipresent and an integral part
of ES research. The soil’s ES, however, are often not a direct part of
economic considerations of ES. Generally, the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment ( 2005), written by an interdisciplinary team of scien-
tistsfromdisciplinessuchaseconomy,ecology,biology,environmental
economy,environmentalscience,mathematicsandphysics,chemistry,
and agricultural science, focuses on sustainability. In its preface, it
is specified that “Ecosystem services are the benefits people obtain
from ecosystems. These include provisioning services such as food,
water,timber,andfiber;regulatingservicesthataffectclimate,floods,
disease,wastes,andwaterquality;culturalservicesthatproviderecre-
ational,aesthetic,andspiritualbenefits;andsupportingservicessuch
as soil formation, photosynthesis, and nutrient cycling. The human
species,whilebufferedagainstenvironmentalchangesbycultureand
technology, is fundamentally dependent on the flow of ecosystem
services” (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment [MEA], 2005). Soils are
mentioned intheMEAundertheheadingofsupporting ES.However,
Robinsonetal.( 2013)showthatthesoil’sESgobeyondthesupporting
categoryofMEAandattributethedifferentsoilfunctionstothefourEScategoriesofMEA—provisioning,regulating,cultural,andsupport-
ing ES (Robinson et al., 2013). This will likely facilitate the use of the
ESframeworkwithinthesoilsciencecommunitybecausethiscommu-
nityusuallyusestheconceptofsoilfunctions(Vogeletal., 2019).The
latter,however,isoflittlerelevanceoutsidethesoilscientificcommu-
nity.TheESapproach,thus,providesalinktoconnectsoilstoawidely
appliedframework,whichcanbehelpfultoputsoilsonpoliticalagen-
das.However,theworkofRobinsonetal.( 2013)onlymentionscultural
andsocialvaluationofsoilsthatgobeyondtheeconomicrealmwith-
out specifying or elaborating what is included in these cultural ES of
soils. Thus, cultural aspects connected to soils seem of minor impor-
tance. This is also indicated in the literature review of Jónsson and
Davíðsdóttir ( 2016) about the soil’s ES. They focus on the economic
functions that were used to assign a monetary value to the soil’s ES.
However,theyalsoaddresspossibleculturalESofsoils,suchasthepro-
tectionofculturalheritage,orcognitiveandrecreationalservicesand
found that very few studies exist, which address cultural ES of soils.
The exceptions are studies related to the recreational services soils
contribute to (Jónsson & Davíðsdóttir, 2016). On the Swabian Alb in
Germany, Plieninger et al. ( 2013) investigated cultural landscapes in
thecontextofES.Whilesoilswerenottheresearchobjective,thestudy
participantsassignedhighimportancevaluestosoilfertility,whichthey
also determined as a critical ES. Similarly, the study of Smith and Sul-
livan (2014) did not focus on soils but analyzed farmer’s perceptions
of twelve ES in Australia. While the farmers perceived their vulner-
ability to a loss of any of the twelve ES as moderate, they indicated
that they were highly vulnerable if soil health was lost and identified
poorlandmanagementincludingagro-chemicalsandsoildegradation
asthreatstotheES(Smith&Sullivan, 2014).Thesestudiessuggestthat
the research of soils ES is still in an early stage. However, especially
theworkofRobinsonetal.( 2013)ispromisingasitconnectsthetwo
frameworksofsoilfunctionsandESwitheachother.Asmanyothersci-
entistsalreadyusetheESapproach,thisworkcanbeusedtofacilitate
interdisciplinarycollaboration.However,theESframeworkitselfisnot
knowntothegeneralpublic.Also,culturalpracticesandunderstanding
seem to differ from the ES framework. Thus, social and cultural prac-
tices need to be addressed differently to understand how they affect
soilcultivation.
3 CHALLENGES RELATED TO
INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH AND
APPROACHES TO OVERCOME THEM
Soil scientists and their respective donor organizations call for inter-
disciplinary collaboration between the sciences and the humanities
concerninghuman–soilrelationships.TheinitiativeonAnthropedology
(Richter et al., 2011), being one example, is calling on the sustainable
use of soils while minimizing detrimental impacts of soil manage-
ment to the environment and a better understanding of human–soil
relations. However, as shown in the examples of archaeopedology,
ethnopedology, and the application of the ES framework to soil sci-
entificquestions,despitethemanybenefits,thesecollaborationsalso
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

756 TEUBER ET AL.
face challenges. This includes the matter of communication, as dif-
ferent disciplines have different views on the material soil and use
different theoretical frameworks within their research. Some of the
introduced subdisciplines do not rely on a specific interdisciplinary
methodological approach, others use a model such as the Cosmos–
Corpus–Practice complex from ethnoecology, which is also used in
ethnopedology. There, it is applied to the research of rural regions in
Africa,Asia,andLatinAmerica,butrarelytotheGlobalNorthandthe
human–soilrelationsthere.ThefocusoftheCosmos–Corpus–Practice
model is on cognitive knowledge and practical land-use strategies,
which are integrated into a specific religious-magical world vision.
ThismightexplainthemissingCosmos–Corpus–Practicemodelinthe
ethnopedologicalstudiesfromtheGlobalNorth,asscientistsworking
onlanduseinthecountriesoftheGlobalNorthusuallyarefromthat
part of the world and might not be able to identify the Cosmos com-
ponentofthemodel.However,professionalsfromthehumanities,like
cultural anthropologists, might want to focus on these cultural phe-
nomena and on the specific world visions of social groups that have
differenttraditions.Hardenberg( 2018),forexample,isconcernedwith
the study of cereals in Odisha (eastern India), which is known among
archaeobotanists as a region where evidence of very early forms of
rice cultivation has been found (Fuller, 2006, 2011 ). In present-day
Odisha,largeareasofricecultivationexistincoastalareas,aswellas
onplateausandinsomecasesinmountainousregions.Riceisconsid-
ered the most important staple food in Odisha compared with other
grains, and the cultivation and consumption of rice are embedded in
Hindu cosmology and rituals (Skoda, 2013). With the Green Revolu-
tion,ricecultivationhasintensifiedgreatlythroughoutIndia.Theterm
GreenRevolutionreferstoaperiodfromthe1960stothe1980swhere
investment in crop research was high, and infrastructure, policies as
well as markets were developed to enhance crop productivity, lead-
ing to higher yields per hectare (Pingali, 2012). However, the Green
Revolution affected agricultural and social practices and led to a per-
ceptionofsoilsasinertsubstrate,whileplantsarenolongerconsidered
to be an organic unit (Molina-Zapata, 2021). In India, the Green Rev-
olution increased rice cultivation, mainly through the introduction of
new fertilizers, pesticides, machinery, and high-yielding hybrid vari-
eties,leadingtotheincreasingdependenceoffarmersonmultinational
companies(Kloppenburg, 2014).Otherdisadvantagesquicklybecame
apparent: soil degradation, increasing water shortages, unbalanced
diets, and social inequalities (Gupta, 1998). As a result, new environ-
mentalmovementsemergedinIndia,campaigningforthepreservation
of biodiversity and against habitat destruction (Linkenbach, 2007,
2008). One consequence of the protests has been stately as well as
civil society actions to conserve different rice varieties, in situ and ex
situ,andtopromoteseedbanks(Patnaiketal., 2017).Anotherconse-
quenceofthecriticismofmoderncerealpolicieshasbeenthesearch
foralternativestointensivericecultivation,whosesustainabilityisin
question in the context of increasing water scarcity and soil degra-
dation. This has led to various millet varieties coming back into the
focusofgovernmentsupportinrecentyears.SincetheGreenRevolu-
tion,productionofmilletshaddeclinedsignificantlynotonlyinOdisha
butthroughout India,whilecultivationofrice,wheat,maize,andbar-ley intensified (Finnis, 2008). Millet was long considered a low-status
food, the food of the poor and the “socially backward” (Hardenberg,
2018).Nowadays,millets(includingsorghum)havebeenpromotedas
“forgotten foods for the future.” Under this slogan, the Smart Food
Initiative at the International Crop Research Institute for Semi-Arid
Tropics (ICRISAT) has begun to develop new programs to make vari-
ousmilletsattractivetopeopleinAfricaandIndia(ICRISAT, 2018).Key
businessandpolicystakeholdershaverecognizedthatmilletscanplay
animportantroleinachievingtheSDGsduetotheirdroughtresilience
and health benefits ( UNDP: SDGS ). In India, these findings are being
implemented by a variety of government institutions and nongovern-
mentalorganizations.In2017,thePrimeMinisterofIndiadecidedto
includemillets(includingsorghum)inthePublicDistributionSystem,a
systemtoprovidefoodtothepoor,anddeclaredtheyear2018tobe
the“NationalYearofMillets”(PIBIndia, 2018).Thehopeisthatmore
millets will be produced and consumed by the urban population and
the biodiversity of millets will be preserved. As a result, communities
whose millet consumption was previously considered backward are
nowbecomingthefocusofpromotionalactivitiesas“custodiansofmil-
let,”suchasthroughtheOdishaMilletsMission( milletsodisha ).Millets
arenolongersaidtobepoorpeople’sfoodbutarepromotedas“nutri
cereals” and even “super food” and are becoming part of the Indian
mainstream(Bergaminietal., 2013).Thisexampleshowshowcultural
anthropologists can contribute to understanding the processes that
emergethroughtheinterplayoffoodresearch,agroeconomyandlocal
politicalactors.
Interdisciplinarycollaborationinthefieldofethnopedologyisvery
much based on individual scientists and their willingness to cooper-
ate,whichrequiresamutualunderstandingandwillingnesstostepout
of the respective comfort zone. Further, even when the more func-
tionalESapproachofMEAwithitsdistinctcategoriesisappliedtosoil
scientificresearch,oftenmarketvalueisassignedtosoils,whilethecul-
turalESrelatedtosoilsarenotconsideredormerelymentioned.Thus,
aspects central to cultural anthropology are not addressed in these
studies.
This illustrates that scientists from different disciplines might not
understand, why the respective research topic is important and what
isgainedbythecollaboration.Aseachscientistiseducatedaccording
toacertainsetofrulesandideaspresentintherespectivediscipline,
theyneedanapproachthatenablestheircollaboration.Further,each
scientific discipline can be seen as “an epistemic unit consisting of a
set of closely related cognitive resources such as, for example, con-
cepts, models and theories, and as a social unit consisting of highly
similar experts who were employing and at the same time develop-
ing their shared cognitive resources.” (Andersen, 2016). This means
that within a given discipline scientists generally agree on research
questions and how to approach them (Andersen, 2016). This leads to
fruitful communication and successful collaboration withinany scien-
tificcommunitybutcanresultinmisunderstandingsanddisagreement
ifscientistsbelongtodifferentdisciplinesanddonotaddresstheirdif-
ferent scientific rules and languages (Kuhn, 2012). Further, Andersen
(2016) highlights that scientists from different disciplines, who want
to collaborate interdisciplinary,need to “combine cognitive resources
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 757
that are distributed among them and which they do not all possess
individually.” Thus, further expertise is required to achieve any col-
laboration, which goes beyond the disciplinary based expertise of the
involvedscientists(Andersen, 2016).Thiscanbecomeadecidedlybig
challenge,forexample,ifasoilscientistisforcedtounderstandassem-
blage theory (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987) and a sociologist is urged to
understandthesoil’smicrobiome.
Approaches to include expertise from different disciplines into
a holistic study are the social-ecological systems and the complex
adaptive systems frameworks. Berkes and Folke ( 1998) showed that
both the social and the ecological system need to be investigated in
the context of resource management. However, they observed that
depending on the discipline, resource management either focusses
on social systems or on ecological systems, but rarely on both at
the same time. Ostrom ( 2009) thus proposed a framework consisting
of resource systems, resource units, governance systems and users,
with each consisting of several variables as well, and interactions
between them, leading to a multilevel nested framework. However,
thissocial-ecologicalsystemapproachdividesthesysteminthecate-
gories “natural” and “social.” Another interdisciplinary framework for
thestudyofsocialandnaturalsystemsarethecomplexadaptivesys-
tems,whicharepartofthecomplexitysciencesdisplayedbyCastellani
(2018).Anycomplexadaptivesystemconsistsofdifferentcomponents
such as for example humans, animals, plants, soils, and others that
interactacrossmultiplescalesinspaceandtime.Thesesystemsdisplay
characteristicssuchasemergentproperties,dominationofnonequilib-
riumstates,feedbackrelationships,andregimeshifts(Holland, 1992;
Lansing,2003).However,asHertzetal.( 2020)pointout,bothsocial-
ecological systems as well as complex adaptive systems often follow
a substance ontology, where entities are the research interest. They
argue that a shift to a process ontology might offer new perspectives
to understand social-ecological as well as complex adaptive systems
(Hertzetal., 2020).
4 A RESOURCE PERSPECTIVE TOWARD
INTERDISCIPLINARY COLLABORATION IN SOIL
SCIENCE
Here, we introduce an analytical tool that still consists of entities,
butwheretheinteractionsbetweentheseentitiesareconsideredand
socialandculturaldimensionsareemphasized.Ifsoilscientistswantto
collaborate with scientists from other disciplines, especially from the
humanities, this tool, which uses resources as an analytical category,
mightenablefruitfuldiscussionsandasuccessfulinterdisciplinarycol-
laboration. It enables scientists of different disciplines to contribute
their perspective to the respective challenge or research question
while simultaneously acknowledging the other perspectives. Through
this,collaborationcanstartandeventuallymightraisenewtrulyinter-
andmaybeeventransdisciplinaryresearchquestions.
Inpublicdiscourse,theterm“resource”isoftenusedsynonymously
with “raw materials,” or more generally, with things that can be mon-
etized. However, from a social perspective, something becomes aresource when people ascribe a culturally shaped interest to it, that
is, attach a value to it and use it as part of a socially and culturally
shapedpractice.Amainargumentoftheinterdisciplinarycollaborative
researchcenterSFB1070isthattoday’sunderstandingofresourcesis
often an expression of the socio-cultural conditions of modern indus-
trial societies, while other societies have developed other ways of
looking at and dealing with resources according to their culturally
shaped orders. In other words, societies have their own resources,
whichtheyusefortheirownpurposes,andtheseculturalattributions
andformsofuseareatthecenteroftheSFB1070’sresearch(Bartel-
heimetal., 2015;Hardenberg, 2016;Hardenbergetal., 2017;compare
analogouslyRichardson&Weszkalnys 2014).
TheGermanResearchFoundationexplicitlyfundssocalledSFB’sas
collaborativeresearchcenterstostrengtheninterdisciplinaryresearch
withinacertainuniversityandengageinamutuallybeneficialexchange
of ideas. The SFB 1070 ResourceCultures is such an interdisciplinary
research center where archaeologists, social and cultural anthropol-
ogists, historians but also geoscientists, linguists, and several other
disciplines focus on how resources develop, how they affect migra-
tion and movement, and how values and practices are affected by
resources. In order to facilitate the communication between the dif-
ferent disciplines, the analytical tool of the ResourceComplex was
introducedearlyontounderstandrelationsbetweendifferententities.
Whenever one wants to understand one specific resource, one needs
to identify every aspect that affects the resource. In order to under-
stand soils as a resource we need to identify everything that affects
thisresource,rangingfromthegeology,theplantsandthetimetocul-
tural aspects such as political programs, knowledge of soil scientists,
othersoilprofessionalssuchasfarmersandgardenersaswellasofthe
generalsociety.
The different cultural attributions societies assign to resources
becomeparticularlyclearwhenattentionispaidtotheconcreteform
of a resource and not only to its function. Thus, it can be argued that
thereareuniversalresourcesthatplayacentralrolenotonlyincertain
societies,butinprincipleinallhumanpopulationscompletelyindepen-
dent of culture, such as soil for agriculture, air for breathing, food for
eating, or water for drinking. This line of reasoning places the func-
tionofaresourceatthecenterofinquiry.However,whentheconcrete
formthataresourcetakesforacommunityisconsideredataparticu-
lartimeandplace,thespecificculturalattributions andmannersthat
havehistoricallyemergedbecomeapparent.Evenfortheessentialele-
ments of life there can be significant cultural differences: water and
foodarevaluedverydifferentlybydifferentsocieties,dependingoncli-
maticconditions,ecologicalavailability,andculturalrules(Bartelheim
etal.,2021).
The“value”ofaresourcesuchassoilcanbedefinedinvariousways
(see Gregory, 2015). In economic terms, it can mean the use-value of
soil, that is, its usefulness for concrete practices. It may also refer to
the exchange-value, for example of ore-bearing soils when they are
tradedinaparticularratio.Thevalueofcertaintypesofsoilmayalso
beexpressedintermsofanindividual’sdesire,suchaswhatapersonis
willingtogiveupinordertoownoruseararetypeofsoil.Or,thevalue
of soil is assumed to be derived from the amount of labor invested in
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

758 TEUBER ET AL.
itsextractionorprocessing.Theresourcevaluationargumentputfor-
wardinthispaperismoreinlinewiththeconceptof“values”(plural!)as
usedinlinguisticsandanthropology.Inthesesubjects,valuesarebest
translatedas“meanings”orsignificantcultural“differences”(seeGrae-
ber,2001). In this sense, resources, such as soil for example, refer to
certainvaluesofasociety,suchasfertility,wealth,orpower,whichare
often hierarchicallyordered.In situations of gift exchange, the values
ofaresourcemayalsodependonthestatusofthepersonorcommu-
nitywithwhomitisinan“inalienable”relationship.Resourcesarethen,
often controversial, bearers of meanings (“values”) ascribed to them
in the context of specific socio-cultural systems. An extension of this
concept has been proposed by David Graeber, who following Nancy
Munn argues that “value emerges in action” (Graeber, 2001). Applied
toresourcessuchassoils,hisargumentisthattheyservetomakeclear
topeoplethevalueoftheirownactions.Thus,ifpeopleinvestagreat
deal of time and energy in preserving and cultivating their soils, then
thesesoilsaremerelythemediumthroughwhichpeoplevisualizethe
realizationoftheirownpotentials.
Thus, people all over the world have had—and continue to have—
different ideas of what soil is, distinguish between different types of
soil,anddeveloptheirownwaysofdealingwithsoildependingontheir
culturalorientation.Theseculturalvariationsinformandusagemake
it understandable how resources help to shape, maintain,and change
differentsocialidentitiesandrelationships.Thus,whilematerialthings
exist, they only become a resource when used by humans due to val-
uationprocesses.Iron,forexample,existedonEarthpriortotheIron
Age,butwasnotused.Afteritwasmadeaccessibleandafteritsvalua-
tion,itbecameanimportantmaterialthatwasusedoveralongtime,so
that archaeologists named one epoch from the human past—the Iron
Age—afterthismaterial(Schweizer, 2018).Similarly,soilsexisted,and
have had significance, for example in the context of Mesolithic uses
in burials in special sediments and at certain places or in the extrac-
tion of ochre. During the Neolithic transition, soils gained even more
importanceaftertheirpropertieshadbeenjudgedasusefulforhuman
life.Farmersdevelopedtoolslikediggingsticks,spadesandlaterards
andplowstoworkwiththesoil(Laletal., 2007),domesticatedcereals
(Bakels,2014;Dreslerováetal., 2013;Rösch,1998),andanimals(Lar-
sonetal., 2007),andsimultaneouslygainedknowledgeaboutsoiland
plant cultivation as well as about livestock upbringing. This resulted
in specific practices like plowing or breeding specific animals deemed
useful for the respective society. These farmers, thus, used a combi-
nationofplants,soils,tools,knowledge,andpracticestoprovidefood
to themselves and their social groups. The knowledge for using soils
consists of individual experiences as well as the collective memory; it
canbe,forexample,personalorinstitutionalized,tacitorexplicit,sci-
entific or traditional. It is preserved and handed down either codified
in written texts, embeddedin oraltraditions, or through materialcul-
ture. Related to different knowledge orders even different identities
andconceptionsrelatedtotheuseofsoilsmighthavearisenthrough
time and in space. While soils have been the research focus of the
naturalsciences—especiallyinsoilscience—thehumanitiesandsocial
sciencestendedtotakesoilsforgrantedfocusingonotheraspectssuch
asterritorialities(Krzywoszynska&Marchesi, 2020).Thus,soilscien-tistsmighthavetoraiseawarenessforsoilsinthesedisciplinespriorto
startinginterdisciplinarycollaborations.Whilethetoolsforandprac-
tices of farming changed through the centuries (Teuber et al., 2017),
soilsarestillimportantforfoodproductiontoday.However,inurban-
ized areas around the globe most people do not regularly work with
soils and might refer to the soils they see in the urban landscape as
“dirt.” Urban citizens usually do not work in agriculture or horticul-
turebutinsteadintheservicesector,inindustryortheITsector.Soils,
thus,arenotnecessarilypresentinpublicperception.However,certain
groups of humanity—farmers, (urban) gardeners, soil scientists—still
workwithsoilsusingknowledge,practices,toolsforsoilcultivation,or
soil analysis, and more. Working with soils also means that someone
hastheopportunity,authority,andpowertopossess,touse,andtoval-
orize them. Thus, these elements need to be identified and analyzed
separately,tounderstandhowsoilisperceivedbyhumansfromdiffer-
ent walks of life. Within the interdisciplinary Collaborative Research
Center1070R ESOURCECULTURES,theheuristicoftheResourceCom-
plex allows to identify and analyze such elements needed for the
valuationanduseofanyresource,inourcasesoils,notonlyinaneco-
nomic way of thinking. With this analytical tool, one can identify all
elements and connections that affect the use of a specific resource
and also visualize the feedbacks between these elements. Such an
approach can for example disentangle human–land interactions and
cultural concepts during the Holocene (James et al., 2021). Like the
theoriesandconceptsofGudeman( 2001),Latour( 1999,2011 ),Ingold
(2016)andHodder( 2012)explain,networks,meshworks,orentangle-
mentsexistbetweenresourcesandotherelementsthatenabletheuse
oftheresourceitself.Oncetheseelementsareidentified,theycanbe
analyzedbyscientistsfromdifferentdisciplines,whileenablingthedis-
cussionoftheresultsviatheheuristicoftheResourceComplex,which
focusses on functional and intentional interactions between the dif-
ferent elements that entangle a resource. The analytical tool of the
ResourceComplexcanbeusedinsoilsciencetounderstandthesocial
andculturaldimensionsrelatedtosoilandhowthismightturnsoilinto
avaluedresourceforsocietyapartfrommonetization.IneasternIndia,
forexample,indigenouscommunitiesworshiptheearthasalife-giving
goddess,whodemandsthebloodofavictiminordertomakethesoil
firmandreadyforcultivation.Forthisreason,localcommunitiesannu-
allyperformbuffalosacrificesbeforethebeginningoftheagricultural
cycleandoffersomeoftheanimal’sbloodtothestonesrepresenting
theearthgoddess.ThissacrificeispartofaResourceComplexinwhich
cultivationisintimatelyconnectedtoknowledgeaboutdifferenttypes
ofsoil,plants,andanimals,toaparticularformofclanorganization,and
topeople’sreligiousideasandpractices(Hardenberg, 2017).
5 THE EXAMPLE OF CEREAL CULTIVATION
Ifoneconsiderssoilasasociallyconstructedresource,soilsandtheir
cultivation became the means for identity creation and the forma-
tion of social relations and units, because the social group of farmers
cameintobeingduringtheNeolithictransition.Thus,peoplebeganto
identify as a farmer, developed certain practices and worldviews, and
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 759
distinguished themselves from the hunter-and-gatherer populations.
While there are no written records for the time from the Neolithic
to Antiquity, archaeologists like Salisbury ( 2012) argue “that people
areimpactedbyanddrawinspirationfrominteractionswiththemate-
riality of soil.” While western scientists look upon soil in a mainly
technological,generalizedandstandardizedway,theydonotconsider
theculturalframeworkofsoilknowledge(Barrera-Bassolsetal., 2006).
Contrary to this western view, local soil knowledge circles around
a complex spiritual and cultural concept of soil fertility, where reli-
gionandritualtogetherwithpracticalaspectsregulatetheuseofsoil
(Toledo,2000;WinklerPrins&Barrera-Bassols, 2004).Eventoday,soil
cultivationcreatesnotonlyfavorableconditionsforplantingandhigh
yieldbutalsosocialidentities,asfarmersdistinguishthemselvesfrom
other professions. They also have social relations with other farm-
ers, shaped by agricultural activities, such as harvesting. Thus, using
theheuristicoftheResourceComplexasaheterogeneousnetworkof
phenomenaofdifferentmaterialitycanprovideinsightsintothesocio-
culturaldimensionsofsoilcultivationataspecificlocation.Thisholds
trueaswellfornetworks,forexamplenationalandinternationalunions
of soil scientists like the German Soil Science Society or the Interna-
tional Union of Soil Science, where soils are valued, and their values
aremadeaccessibletoacommunity.Fromthisperspective,soilspro-
videdifferentfunctions(Blum&Eswaran, 2004;Vogeletal., 2019)and
severalES(Dailyetal., 1997)tosociety.
For the following application of a ResourceComplex, the focus will
beoncerealcultivationsincethishasbeenacentralactivityofhumans
intheirhandlingofsoilssincethesedentismofhumangroups.Inafirst
stepoftheanalysis,itisnecessarytoidentifyallelementsneededfor
cereal production. This includes above all soils, in the context of land
use strategies and climate variables, and the availability of domesti-
catedplants,butalsotoolsandtechnologyforsoilcultivation,planting
andharvesting.Further,knowledgeandvaluesaswellaspoliticalpro-
gramsandeconomyaffecthowsoilsareusedandwhichkindofcereals
areproducedbywhomandinwhichway(Figure 1).
The analytical tool ResourceComplex shifts the perspective from
thepurelyfunctionalanalysisofsoilpropertiesandsoilplantinterac-
tionincludingorganisms,waterandotherclimaticcontrolvariablesto
theinteractionshappeningbetweenthedifferententities.Twoimpor-
tant entities regarding the role of interdisciplinary collaboration are
knowledgeandvalues.
Early concepts of soil were based on ideas of German agronomer
Albrecht D. Thaer (1752–1828), German chemist Justus von Liebig
(1803–1873), English naturalist and biologist Charles Darwin (1809–
1882), American scientist Eugene W. Hilgard (1833–1916), Russian
scientistVasilyDokuchaev(1846–1903),andSwiss-bornAmericansoil
scientistHansJenny(1899–1992).JustusvonLiebig,forexample,pub-
licized the law of the minimum developed by Carl Sprengel (1840)
basedonagriculturalfindingsfromlaboratory,greenhouses,andfield
experiments(Sinclair, 1994).Liebig’slawdescribesplantgrowthbeing
constraint not by total resources available, but by the most limiting
resource. This idea of one single limiting factor has also been applied
to biological populations and ecosystem models for factors such as
sunlight or specific nutrients. The scientific basis of soil science wasestablished by the classical works of Vasily V. Dokuchaev (cited in
Glinka [1927]and Rusakova et al. [ 2022]),who considered soil not as
just a substrate from which plants derive nutrients but as a complex
natural body with its own genesis and history of formation. Such sci-
entific knowledge of soil scientists about soils as a natural body and
the interactions with the other components of the environment (cli-
mate, organisms, relief, parent material, and time) has been gathered
inagrarianschoolsanduniversitiesfordecades,forexample,byJenny
(1941),Glinka( 1927),orHilgard( 1921)tonamesomeoftheearlybig
minds in soil science. This knowledge also leads to new technological
advancements,todayforexampletheapplicationofmachinelearning
inprecisionagriculture(e.g.,Qinetal., 2011;Schmidtetal., 2008).
In turn, technological development affects our knowledge of cul-
tivation and of soil–plant–environment interactions. Such knowledge
about certain interactions might affect our values. For example, if we
know about soil erosion and consider it as a constrain for cereal cul-
tivation,conservationtillageorno-tillageapproachesmightbevalued
differently than before since these cultivation techniques can reduce
soilerosion(Seitzetal., 2019).Thisknowledgemighteventuallyleadto
newpoliticalprograms,whichinturnaffectthedifferentcomponents
oftheResourceComplex(Figure 1).Prominentexamplesaretheuseof
farmingterracesbytheIncasortheGrainforGreenprograminChina
in 1999 that was designed to mitigate and prevent flooding and soil
erosion (Schönbrodt-Stitt et al., 2013) and paid farmers for changing
farmlandintoforest.
Also, today’s knowledge can be used for the interpretation of col-
luvial deposits and archaeological finds and applied to observations
of land use in earlier societies and other cultures (James et al., 2021;
Pietsch&Kühn, 2017;Scherer,Höpferetal., 2021;Teuberetal., 2017).
Inalargercontext,suchResourceComplexescanthenbeunderstood
asResourceCultures(seeHardenbergetal.[ 2017]foratheoreticaldis-
courseaboutthisconceptandJamesetal.[ 2021]foracomparisonof
ResourceCultureswithotherconceptsappliedtohuman–landinterac-
tionsduringtheHolocene).However,thismightbemisleadingfroma
soilscienceperspectivealone,whennotconsideringrecentadvancesin
sociologyoranthropologyconcerningknowledgeorders,suchasthose
also present in the perspective of the SFB 1070 R ESOURCECULTURES
and which become apparent in human practices and in material cul-
ture.Knowledgeordersarealsoembedded,forexample,in“foodways”
or“foodsystems,”whichmaynotonlyincludeknowledgeaboutavail-
ability and use of specific cereals or soils, but also knowledge about
practicesandinfrastructures,equipment,andtechnologiesforcultiva-
tion, processing, storage, distribution, and consumption of food (e.g.,
cereals).Byanalyzing,forexample,archaeobotanicalremains,ceramic
vessels, agricultural tools as well as land use strategies still visible
andbuiltstructuresfromthepast,archaeologiststrytoidentifythese
“foodways”and“foodsystems”(e.g., Reed,2021 )aswellasrelatediden-
tity formations—or even values attributed to certain foods. Further,
sociocosmic connotations can play an important role. For example, in
today’s India, rice is associated with various goddesses (e.g., Anna-
purna, Ponniyamman), but is particularly seen as a representation of
the goddess of wealth and happiness, Lakshmi. In numerous Indian
temples,goddessLakshmiisworshippedinananthropomorphicform,
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

760 TEUBER ET AL.
FIGURE 1 TheResourceComplex:Aschematicrepresentationofpossiblerelationships,connections,andinteractionsusingtheexampleof
cerealcultivation.
but in rural areas she is often represented only by a bundle of rice
straw or a rice basket (Hardenberg, 2018). In eastern India, the rice
plant,aswellasricesowing,issymbolicallyassociatedwithpregnancy
andmotherhood(Tokita-Tanabe, 2014),andinindividualcommunities
like the Gadaba, bringing in the rice harvest is celebrated like “fetch-
ing the bride” at a wedding (Berger, 2015). Women recite extensive
oral traditions in which Lakshmi’s wedding is recounted, but also her
disappearanceandthefamineitushered(Gregory&Vaishnav, 2003).
Both,knowledgeandvaluesareimportantpartsoftheResourceCom-
plex,sothatsocialandculturalanthropologists,economistsandothers
cancontributetheirinsightsintosocialprocesses,whichinfluencesoil
management because of the diverse feedbacks that exist within the
ResourceComplex.
Further, ethnopedological studies show that the perception of
erosionintraditional,mainlysubsistence-orientated,nonmechanized,
small-scalefarmingagriculturalsocietiesstronglydiffersfromwestern
scientific views and western perceptions of soil, soil fertility, and
erosion (Barrera-Bassols & Zinck, 2003b; Ericksen & Ardon, 2003;
Niemeijer&Mazzucato, 2003;Warrenetal., 2003).Thecosmovisionof
thesesocietiespicturessoilasalivingbeingthat,justasanyotherliving
organism,changesthroughouttimesbuthasanimmortalcharacteras
wellandbelongstothespiritualsphereofsupernaturalbeings.Erosionoftopsoilisseenaspartofalandscape’snaturalprocessofchange,and
the natural phenomena that trigger erosion (like rainfall and storms)
arevisionedassupernaturalpowersaswell(Bocco, 1991;Lindsk og&
Tengberg, 1994;vanDissel&deGraaff, 1998).Eventhoughtraditional
farmers often have a very detailed understanding of the underlying
mechanisms of erosion (soil degradation, role of water, organic mate-
rial, plant cover, surface-relief, etc.), they believe that the process
itself can only be partly controlled by human as weather, soil-type,
and topography are beyond their influence. For this reason, farmers
stronglytendtotolerateandviewerosionasinevitable.Infact,astheir
economiesstronglyrelyonalargevarietyofdifferentlandscapesand
different agricultural strategies and resources, erosion is valued as a
process that increases landscape diversity and also provides fertile
soilsedimentsthatcanbetrappedandusedforagriculture(Critchley
et al.,1994; Kiome & Stocking, 1995; Warren et al., 2003). Farmers
worldwide trap fertile soil sediments, for instance, with terraces and
mechanicalbarrierslikestone-walls,fencesandvegetationbarriersor
the digging of ditches (Barrera-Bassols & Zinck, 2003b; Bocco,1991;
Critchleyetal., 1994;Sillitoe,1993).Besides,manyfarmingstrategies
commonly used to maintain soil fertility prevent erosion as well, for
instance mulching (Barrera-Bassols & Zinck, 2003b; Showers, 2006a;
Warrenetal., 2003),falloworfieldandcroprotations(Scott&Walter,
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 761
1993;Showers, 2006b).Evenoccasionaleventsofmassiveerosioncan
be balanced by the diversity of the ecosystem and usage strategies.
However,anthropologicalstudiesalsoshowthatwhenmajorchanges
(e.g., climate changes, migration of people, increase in population,
political changes, technological changes) occur, the firmly rooted
agricultural traditions and values of farmers do only slowly react to
newneedsandsituations(Beachetal., 2006;Bork,2006).
Not only soil threats and land management but also preferences
forspecificcerealsinaResourceComplexcanbeunderstoodonlyina
culturalcontext.InIndia,forexample,differentcerealvarietiesarepre-
ferred in different regions of the country (Kingwell-Banham & Fuller,
2012). This is partly a response to ecological conditions, but also an
expressionofcertainculturalideasandpractices,particularlyreligious
ones, that have shaped these regions over long periods of time. For
example,intheratheraridnorthandnorthwestofthecountry,wheatis
thepreferredstaplefood,whileintheverywater-richeastandnorth-
eastofthecountry,riceisparticularlywidelygrownandconsumed.In
themountainousandplateauregionsofcentralandsouthernIndia,on
theotherhand,varioustypesofmilletarecultivatedandmakeupthe
dailydiet.Ineachoftheseregions,thereisacertainhierarchyandcom-
petitionbetweengrains,forexampleineasternIndia,wherericeisthe
highestformofcereal,offeredassacredfoodeven tothegods,while
wheatproductsareseenas“foreign”andmilletas“poorman’sfoodf.”
Particularlyin India,whose society is highlydifferentiated and where
grain as food or drink serves to publicly express these multiple iden-
tities,grainhierarchiesarealwayslinkedtoclaimsofsocialstatus.As
briefly mentioned above, such hierarchies can also change, for exam-
ple,whenmilletsaresuddenlyvalorizedatthelocallevelbyanurban
elitebecauseofinternationalpoliciesorientedtowardtheSDGs.
6 SYNTHESIS AND CONCLUSION
By analyzing soils in the context of food production and using the
ResourceComplex approach, scientists from different disciplines con-
tributetheirinsightstotheprocessofcerealcultivationfromdifferent
pointsofview.Thisleadstointerdisciplinarycollaborationasdisplayed
intheexample.
Therefore, the resource perspective offers a new way to show the
importance of soils to a wider society. If sociologists and anthropol-
ogists are included in the assessment of soil related problems, soil
scientists might be able to communicate different values of soils to a
wideraudience,includingpolitics,industry,andthepublic.
Our examples show that the interpretation of soils as part of a
ResourceComplexleadstoabetterunderstandingofhumandevelop-
ments,forexampleregardingthelocationofsettlements,whichmight
be based on valorization processes, and which has associated inter-
actions of natural and cultural factors and processes. This, ultimately,
leadstoaholisticunderstandingofsoilsasadynamic-adaptivesystem.
Currently, in addition to the classical soil functions (Blum & Eswaran,
2004), aspects of soil health, soil biodiversity, and soil resilience
are increasingly being added (Lehmann et al., 2020). This certainly
broadens the spectrum of the significance of soils for humans, buttheirappreciationbyawiderangeoftheworld’spopulationisstilllow
(e.g., Lal et al. 2007) and the valuation of soils is still primarily linked
to technical aspects. Holistic approaches like the ResourceComplex
approachcanhelptoovercomenotonlyoldculturalconceptsoffavor
and disfavor for analyzing human–land interactions (James et al.,
2021), but also to understand why certain actions are not effective
or are not applied. For example, from a soil scientific point of view
sensible countermeasures, for instance to conserve soil health or
prevent loss of biodiversity, are often not applied, even though they
wouldpreventlossofsoilhealth.
Wecanconcludethatthereisstillagreatneedforinterdisciplinar-
itybetweenthesciencesandhumanities,hereexplainedanddiscussed
for the case of soil science in an agricultural context. However, there
is also a need to distinguish between fundamental interdisciplinary
researchandapplicationoffindingsinasocio-economiccontext.Bene-
fits of an interdisciplinary understanding of soils in a socio-economic
context go beyond a better understanding of environmental pro-
cesses and dynamics within soils which are typically done through
fundamental interdisciplinary research, but toward countering envi-
ronmental changes. One prominent example is the international
student movement of Fridays for Future. They understand environ-
mental changes as a loss of opportunities and demand a sustainable
planet Earth that can be used for the needs of the young generation.
For soil science, this could mean that a stronger focus on research
on values and related appreciations and their economic as well as
social importance by means of dynamic-complex approaches such as
ResourceComplexesisnecessaryandcanhelptomeetcurrentsocietal
challenges.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Fundstosupportthisresearchwereprovidedbythe German Research
Foundation (DFG),collaborativeresearchcenter SFB 1070 ResourceCul-
ture(project number 215859406) .
OpenaccessfundingenabledandorganizedbyProjektDEAL.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were gener-
atedforthearticle.
REFERENCES
Ahlrichs, J., Henkner, J., Teuber, S., Schmidt, K., Scholten, T., Kühn, P., &
Knopf, T. (2016). Archaeological and archaeopedological approaches
to analyze the development of marginal areas in prehistory: A case
study from the western Baar, SW Germany. In P. Kolodziejczyk, B.
Kwiatkowska-Kopka (Eds.), Landscape in the Past & Forgotten Land-
scapes . Cracow Landscape Monographs 2 – Landscape as Impulsion for
Culture: Research, Perception & Protection (pp.39–49).InstituteofArchae-
ologyJagiellonianUniversityinKraków,InstituteofLandscapeArchitec-
tureCracowUniversityofTechnology.
Andersen, H. (2016). Collaboration, interdisciplinarity, and the epistemol-
ogyofcontemporaryscience. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part A,56,1–10.
Aptekar,S.,&Myers,J.S.(2020).Thetaleoftwocommunitygardens:Green
aesthetics versus food justice in the big apple. Agriculture and Human
Values,37(3),779–792.
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

762 TEUBER ET AL.
Bakels,C.(2014).ThefirstfarmersoftheNorthwestEuropeanplain:Some
remarksontheircrops,cropcultivationandimpactontheenvironment.
Journal of Archaeological Science ,51,94–97.
Ballasus, H., Schneider, B., von Suchodoletz, H., Miera, J., Werban, U.,
Fütterer, P., Werther, L., Ettel, P., Veit, U., & Zielhofer, C. (2022). Over-
bank silt-clay deposition and intensive Neolithic land-use in a Central
Europeancatchment–coupledordecoupled? Science of the Total Environ-
ment,806,150858. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150858
Barrera-Bassols, N., & Zinck, J. A. (2000). Ethnopedology in a worldwide
perspective. An annotated bibliography .ITCPublication.
Barrera-Bassols, N., & Zinck, J. A. (2003a). Ethnopedology: A worldwide
view on the soil knowledge of local people. Geoderma ,111(3–4), 171–
195.
Barrera-Bassols,N.,&Zinck,A.(2003b).‘Landmovesandbehaves’:Indige-
nousdiscourseonsustainablelandmanagementinPichataro,Patzcuaro
Basin, Mexico. Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography ,85(3-4),
229–245.
Barrera-Bassols,N.,Zinck,J.A.,&VanRanst,E.(2006).Symbolism,knowl-
edgeandmanagementofsoilandlandresourcesinindigenouscommu-
nities:Ethnopedologyatglobal,regionalandlocalscales. Catena,65(2),
118–137.
Barthel, S., & Isendahl, C. (2013). Urban gardens, agriculture, and water
management:Sourcesofresilienceforlong-termfoodsecurityincities.
Ecological Economics ,86,224–234.
Bartelheim,M.,Hardenberg,R.,Knopf,T.,Scholz,A.K.,&Staecker,J.(2015).
‘ResourceCultures’: A concept for investigating the use of resources in
differentsocieties.InA.Danielisová,&M.Fernández-Götz(Eds.), Persis-
tent Economic Ways of Living: Production, Distribution, and Consumption in
Late Prehistory and Early History (pp.39–50).Archaeolingua.
Bartelheim, M., García Sanjuán, L., & Hardenberg, R. (2021). Human-
made environments: The development of landscapes as resource
assemblages—An introduction. In M. Bartelheim, L. García Sanjuán, &
R. Hardenberg (Eds.), Human-made environments: The development of
landscapes as resource assemblages (pp. 7–22). RessourcenKulturen 15.
TübingenUniversityPress.
Beach, T., Luzzadder-Beach, S., & Dunning, N. (2006). A soils history of
MesoamericaandtheCaribbeanIslands.InJ.R.McNeill,&V.Winiwarter
(Eds.), Soils and societies: Perspectives from environmental history (2nded.)
(pp.51–90).TheWhiteHorsePress.
Bergamini,N.,Padulosi,S., Ravi,S. B., & Yenagi,N.(2013).Minormilletsin
India:Aneglectedcropgoesmainstream.InJ.Fanzo,D.Hunter,T.Borelli,
&F.Mattei(Eds.), Diversifying food and diets: Using agricultural biodiversity
to improve nutrition and health (pp.313–325).Routledge.
Berger,P.(2015). Feeding, sharing, and devouring: Ritual and society in Highland
Odisha.DeGruyter.
Berkes, F., & Folke, C. (1998). Linking social and ecological systems for
resilienceandsustainability.InF.Berkes,&C.Folke(Eds.), Linking social
and ecological systems: Management practices and social mechanisms for
building resilience (pp.1–25).CambridgeUniversityPress.
Bhatti, M., & Church, A. (2000). ‘I never promised you a rose gar-
den’: Gender, leisure and home-making. Leisure Studies ,19(3), 183–
197.
Blum,W.E.,&Swaran,H.(2004).Soilsforsustainingglobalfoodproduction.
Journal of Food Science ,69(2),37–42.
Bocco, G. (1991). Traditional knowledge for soil conservation in central
Mexico. Journal of Soil and Water Conservation ,46(5),346–348.
Bork, H.-R. (2006). Landschaften der Erde unter dem Einfluss des Menschen .
PrimusVerlag.
Bork, H.-R., Bork, H., Dalchow, C., Faust, B., Piorr, H.-P., & Schatz, T.
(1998). Landschaftsentwicklung in Mitteleuropa: Wirkung des Menschen auf
Landschaften .Klett-Perthes.
Bouma,J.,&McBratney,A.(2013).Framingsoilsasanactorwhendealing
withwickedenvironmentalproblems. Geoderma ,200,130–139.
Bouma, J. (2014). Soil science contributions towards sustainable devel-
opment goals and their implementation: Linking soil functions withecosystem services. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science ,177(2),
111–120.
Bouma, J., & Montanarella, L. (2016). Facing policy challenges with inter-
and transdisciplinary soil research focused on the UN Sustainable
DevelopmentGoals. Soil,2(2),135–145.
Brevik, E. C., Cerdà, A., Mataix-Solera, J., Pereg, L., Quinton, J. N., Six, J., &
VanOost,K.(2015).TheinterdisciplinarynatureofSOIL. Soil,1(1),117–
129.
Castellani, B. (2018). Map of the complexity sciences. https://www.art-
sciencefactory.com/complexity-map.html
Christanell,A.(2007). Lokale Perspektiven zu Wetter, Klima und Klimawandel:
Eine sozialanthropologische und ethnoklimatologische Untersuchung in der
Weststeiermark, Österreich [PhD thesis] ,UniversityofVienna.
Critchley,W.R.S.,Reij,C.,&Willcocks,T.J.(1994).Indigenoussoilandwater
conservation: A review of the state of knowledge and prospects for
buildingontraditions. Land Degradation & Development ,5(4),293–314.
Daily,G.C.,Matson,P.A.,&Vitousek,P.M.(1997).Ecosystemservicessup-
pliedbysoil.InG.C.Daily(Ed.), Nature’s services: Societal dependence on
natural ecosystems (pp.113–132).IslandPress.
Davison, K., Dolukhanov, P., Sarson, G. R., & Shukurov, A. (2006). The role
of waterways in the spread of the Neolithic. Journal of Archaeological
Science,33(5),641–652.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and
Schizophrenia .UniversityofMinnesotaPress.
Dewaelheyns, V., Elsen, A., Vandendriessche, H., & Gulinck, H. (2013).
Garden management and soil fertility in Flemish domestic gardens.
Landscape and Urban Planning ,116,25–35.
Dewaelheyns,V.,Rogge,E.,&Gulinck,H.(2014).Puttingdomesticgardens
ontheagendausingempiricalspatialdata:ThecaseofFlanders. Applied
Geography ,50,132–143.
Dewaelheyns,V.,Jakobsson,A.,&Saltzman,K.(2018).Strategicgardensand
gardening:Invitingawidenedperspectiveonthevaluesofprivategreen
space. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening ,30,207–209.
Dotterweich,M.,Kühn,P.,Tolksdorf,J.F.,Müller,S.,&Nelle,O.(2013).Late
Pleistocene to Early Holocene natural and human influenced sediment
dynamics and soil formation in a 0-order catchment in SW-Germany
(PalatinateForest). Quaternary International ,306,42–59.
Dreibrodt,S.,Hofmann,R.,DalCorso,M.,Bork,H.-R.,Duttmann,R.,Martini,
S.,Saggau,P.,Schwark,L.,Shatilo,L.,Videiko,M.,Nadeau,M.-J.,Grootes,
P.M.,Kirleis,W.,&Müller,J.(2022).Earthworms,Darwinandprehistoric
agriculture-Chernozem genesis reconsidered. Geoderma ,409, 115607.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2021.115607
Dreslerová, D., Ko ˇcár, P., Chuman, T., Šefrna, L., & Poništiak, Š. (2013).
Variety in cereal cultivation in the Late Bronze and Early Iron Ages in
relation to environmental conditions. Journal of Archaeological Science ,
40(4),1988–2000.
Drobnik, T., Greiner, L., Keller, A., & Grêt-Regamey, A. (2018). Soil qual-
ity indicators—From soil functions to ecosystem services. Ecological
Indicators ,94(1),151–169.
Engel-Di Mauro, S. (2003). Disaggregating local knowledge: The effects
of gendered farming practices on soil fertility and soil reaction in SW
Hungary. Geoderma ,111(3–4),503–520.
Engel-Di Mauro, S. (2019). Urban vegetable garden soils and lay pub-
lic education on soil heavy metal exposure mitigation. In V. Vasenev,
E. Dovletyarova, Z. Cheng, R. Valentini, & C. Calfapietra (Eds.), Green
tecnologies and infrastructure to enhance urban ecosystem services (pp.
221–226).SpringerGeography.
Ericksen, P. J., & Ardón, M. (2003). Similarities and differences between
farmer and scientist views on soil quality issues in central Honduras.
Geoderma ,111(3–4),233–248.
Finnis, E. (2008). Economic wealth, food wealth, and millet consumption:
Shiftingnotionsoffood,identity,anddevelopmentinSouthIndia. Food,
Culture & Society ,11(4),463–485.
Fuller, D. Q. (2006). Agricultural origins and frontiers in South Asia: A
workingsynthesis. Journal of World Prehistory ,20(1),1–86.
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 763
Fuller,D.Q.(2011).PathwaystoAsiancivilizations:tracingtheoriginsand
spreadofriceandricecultures. Rice,4(3),78–92.
Gerlach, R., Fischer, P., Eckmeier, E., & Hilgers, A. (2012). Buried dark
soil horizons and archaeological features in the Neolithic settlement
region of the Lower Rhine area, NW Germany: Formation, geo-
chemistry and chronostratigraphy. Quaternary International ,265, 191–
204.
Glaser,B.,&Birk,J.J.(2012).Stateofthescientificknowledgeonproperties
and genesis of Anthropogenic Dark Earths in Central Amazonia (terra
pretadeÍndio). Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta ,82,39–51.
Glinka, K. D. (1927). Dokuchaiev’s ideas in the development of pedology and
cognate sciences .TheAcademy.
Graeber,D.(2001). Toward an anthropological theory of value. The false coin of
our own dreams .Palgrave.
Gregory,C.A.(2015). Gifts and commodities (SecondEdition).HauBooks.
Gregory,C.A.,&Vaishnav,H.(2003). Lachmi Jagar: Gurumai Sukdai’s Story of
the Bastar Rice Goddess .KaksadPublications.
Gudeman,S.F.(2001). The anthropology of economy: Community, market, and
culture.BlackwellPublishers.
Gupta, A. (1998). Postcolonial developments: Agriculture in the making of
modern India .DukeUniversityPress.
Hardenberg,R.(2016).Beyondeconomyandreligion:resourcesandsocio-
cosmicfieldsinOdisha,India. Religion and Society ,7(1),83–96.
Hardenberg,R.(2017).Childrenoftheearthgoddess:Society,Marriageand
SacrificeintheHighlandsofOdisha. Religion and Society ,73.DeGruyter.
Hardenberg, R. (2018). ‘Imperial Rice’ and ‘subaltern millets’: Cereals as
resourcesinOdisha(India)andbeyond. Paideuma ,64,265–283.
Hardenberg,R.,Bartelheim,M.,&Staecker,J.(2017).The‘ResourceTurn’:A
socioculturalperspectiveonresources.InA.K.Scholz,M.Bartelheim,R.
Hardenberg, & J. Staecker (Eds.), ResourceCultures: Sociocultural dynam-
ics and the use of resources: Theories, methods, perspectives (pp. 13–23).
RessourcenKulturen5.UniversitätTübingen.
Henkner, J., Ahlrichs, J., Downey, S., Fuchs, M., James, B. R., Knopf, T.,
Scholten,T.,Teuber,S.,&Kühn,P.(2017).Archaeopedologyandchronos-
tratigraphyofcolluvialdepositsasaproxyforregionallandusehistory
(Baar,southwestGermany). Catena,155,93–113.
Henkner,J., Ahlrichs,J., Downey,S., Fuchs,M., James, B., Junge,A.,Knopf,
T., Scholten, T., & Kühn, P. (2018). Archaeopedological analysis of col-
luvialdepositsinfavourableandunfavourableareas:Reconstructionof
landusedynamicsinSWGermany. Royal Society Open Science ,5,171624.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171624
Henkner,J.,Ahlrichs,J.,Fischer,E.,Fuchs,M.,Knopf,T.,Rösch,M.,...&Kühn,
P. (2018). Land use dynamics derived from colluvial deposits and bogs
in the Black Forest, Germany. Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil Science ,
181(2),240–260.
Hertz, T., Garcia, M. M., & Schlüter, M. (2020). From nouns to verbs: How
processontologiesenhanceourunderstandingofsocial-ecologicalsys-
tems understood as complex adaptive systems. People and Nature ,2(2),
328–338.
Hilgard,E.W.(1921). Soils: Their formation, properties, composition, and rela-
tions to climate and plant growth in the humid and arid regions .Macmillan.
Hodder, I. (2012). Entangled: An archaeology of the relationships between
humans and things .Wiley-Blackwell.
Holland,J.H.(1992).Complexadaptivesystems. Daedalus,121,17–30.
Höpfer, B., Scherer, S., Schmid, D., Hermann, J., Scholten, T., Kühn, P., &
Knopf, T. (2018). Archäologische und bodenkundliche Untersuchungen
zur bronzezeitlichen Besiedlung des westlichen Allgäus bei Leutkirch.
In Landesamt für Denkmalpflege Regierungspräsidium Stuttgart (Ed.),
Archäologische Ausgrabungen in Baden-Württemberg 2018 (pp. 31–35).
WbgTheiss.
ICRISAT (2018). https://www.icrisat.org/millets-and-sorghum-forgotten-
foods-for-the-future/
Ingold,T.(2016).Onhumancorrespondence. Journal of the Royal Anthropo-
logical Institute ,23(1),9–27.James,B.R.,Teuber,S.,Miera,J.J.,Downey,S.,Henkner,J.,Knopf,T.,Correa,
F. A., Höpfer, B., Scherer, S., Michaelis, A., Wessel, B. M., Gibbons, K. S.,
Kühn,P.,&Scholten,T.(2021).Soils,landscapes,andculturalconceptsof
favouranddisfavourwithincomplexadaptivesystemsandResourceCul-
tures:Human–landinteractionsduringtheHolocene. Ecology and Society ,
26(1).https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-12155-260106
Jenny, H. (1941). Factors of soil formation: A system of quantitative pedology .
McGrawHill.
Jenny,H.(1980). The soil resource: Origin and behavior .Springer.
Jónsson, J. Ö. G., & Davíðsdóttir, B. (2016). Classification and valuation of
soilecosystemservices. Agricultural Systems ,145,24–38.
Kadereit, A., Kühn, P., & Wagner, G. A. (2010). Holocene relief and
soil changes in loess-covered areas of south-western Germany: The
pedosedimentary archives of Bretten-Bauerbach (Kraichgau). Quater-
nary International ,222(1–2),96–119.
Kappler,C.,Kaiser,K.,Tanski,P.,Klos,F.,Fülling,A.,Mrotzek,A.,Sommer,M.,
& Bens, O. (2018). Stratigraphy and age of colluvial deposits indicating
LateHolocenesoilerosioninnortheasternGermany. Catena,170,224–
245.
Kim, B. F., Poulsen, M. N., Margulies, J. D., Dix, K. L., Palmer, A. M., &
Nachman,K.E.(2014).Urbancommunitygardeners’knowledgeandper-
ceptionsofsoilcontaminantrisks. Plos One,9(2),e87913. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0087913
Kingwell-Banham, E., & Fuller, D. Q. (2012). Shifting cultivators in South
Asia: Expansion, marginalisation and specialisation over the long term.
Quaternary International ,249,84–95.
Kiome,R.M.,&Stocking,M.(1995).Rationalityoffarmerperceptionofsoil
erosion:Theeffectivenessofsoilconservationinsemi-aridKenya. Global
Environmental Change ,5(4),281–295.
Kloppenburg, J. (2014). Re-purposing the master’s tools: the open source
seed initiative and the struggle for seed sovereignty. Journal of Peasant
Studies,41(6),1225–1246.
Knopf, T. (2010). Schleichende Katastrophen: Bodenübernutzung in
vorindustriellen Gesellschaften. In B. Herrmann, E. Mackowiak, P.
Masius,&J.Sprenger(Eds.),KatastrophenmachenGeschichte:Umwelt-
geschichtlicheProzesseimSpannungsfeldvonRessourcennutzungund
Extremereignis (pp.31–45).UniversitätsverlagGöttingen.
Krasilnikov,P.V.,&Tabor,J.A.(2003).Perspectivesonutilitarianethnope-
dology. Geoderma ,111(3–4),197–215.
Krasny, M. E., & Tidball, K. G. (2009). Community gardens as contexts for
science,stewardship,andcivicactionlearning. CATE,2,1–18.
Krzywoszynska,A.,&Marchesi,G.(2020).Towardarelationalmaterialityof
soils:Introduction. Environmental Humanities ,12(1),190–204.
Krzywoszynska, A. (2020). Nonhuman labor and the making of resources:
Makingsoilsaresourcethroughmicrobiallabor. Environmental Humani-
ties,12(1),227–249.
Kuhn, T. S. (2012). The structure of scientific revolutions: 50th anniversary
edition.TheUniversityofChicagoPress.
Kühn, P., Pietsch, D., & Gerlach, I. (2010). Archaeopedological analyses
aroundaNeolithichearthandthebeginningofSabaeanirrigationinthe
oasis of Ma’rib (Ramlat as-Sab’atayn, Yemen). Journal of Archaeological
Science,37(6),1305–1310.
Kühn,P.,Lehndorff,E.,&Fuchs,M.(2017).LateglacialtoHolocenepedoge-
nesisandformationofcolluvialdepositsinaloesslandscapeofCentral
Europe(Wetterau,Germany). Catena,154,118–135.
Lal,R.(2016).Soilhealthandcarbonmanagement. Food and Energy Security ,
5(4),212–222.
Lal, R., Reicosky, D. C., & Hanson, J. D. (2007). Evolution of the plow
over 10,000 years and the rationale for no-till farming. Soil and Tillage
Research,93(1),1–12.
Langemeyer,J.,Latkowska,M.J.,&Gómez-Baggethun,E.N.(2016).Ecosys-
temservicesfromurbangardens.InS.Bell,R.Fox-Kämper,N.Keshavarz,
B.Menson,S.Caputo,S.Noori,&A.Voigt(Eds.), Urban allotment gardens
in Europe (pp.115–141).Routledge.
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

764 TEUBER ET AL.
Lansing,J.S.(2003).Complexadaptivesystems. Annual Review of Anthropol-
ogy,32,183–204.
Larson, G., Albarella, U., Dobney, K., Rowley-Conwy, P., Schibler, J.,
Tresset, A., Vigne, J.-D., Edwards, C. J., Schlumbaum, A., Dinu, A.,
Bˇalˇaçsescu, A., Dolman, G., Tagliacozzo, A., Manaseryan, N., Miracle, P.,
van Wijngaarden-Bakker, L., Masseti, M., Bradley, D. G., & Cooper, A.
(2007).AncientDNA,pigdomestication,andthespreadoftheNeolithic
intoEurope. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America ,104(39),15276–15281.
Latour,B.(1999).OnrecallingANT. The Sociological Review ,47,15–25.
Latour, B. (2011). Networks, societies, spheres: Reflections of an actor-
network theorist. International Journal of Communication ,5, 796–
810.
Lehmann, J., Bossio, D. A., Kögel-Knabner, I., & Rillig, M. C. (2020). The
concept and future prospects of soil health. Nature Reviews Earth &
Environment ,1(10),544–553.
Lindemann-Matthies, P., & Marty, T. (2013). Does ecological gardening
increase species richness and aesthetic quality of a garden? Biological
Conservation ,159,37–44.
Lindskog,P.,&Tengberg,A.(1994).Landdegradation,naturalresourcesand
local knowledge in the Sahel zone of Burkina Faso. GeoJournal ,33(4),
365–375.
Linkenbach, A. (2007). Forest futures: Global representations and ground
realitiesintheHimalayas.SeagullBooks.
Linkenbach, A. (2008). Das Erbe Gandhis? Umweltbewegungen in Indien
heute. Historische Anthropologie ,16(3),395–419.
McNeill, J. R., & Winiwarter, V. (2004). Breaking the sod: Humankind,
history,andsoil. Science,304(5677),1627–1629.
McNeill, J. R., & Winiwarter, V. (2006). Soils and societies: perspectives from
environmental history .WhiteHorsePress.
Miera,J.J.,Henkner,J.,Schmidt,K.,Fuchs,M.,Scholten,T.,Kühn,P.,&Knopf,
T. (2019). Neolithic settlement dynamics derived from archaeological
dataandcolluvialdepositsbetweentheBaarregionandtheadjacentlow
mountain ranges, southwest Germany. E&G Quaternary Science Journal ,
68(1),75–93.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-
Being: Synthesis .IslandPress.
Molina-Zapata, J. E. (2021). La revolución verde como revolución tecno-
científica:artificializacióndelasprácticasagrícolasysusimplicaciones.
Revista Colombiana De Filosofía De La Ciencia ,21(42),175–204.
Niemeijer,D.,&Mazzucato,V.(2003).Movingbeyondindigenoussoiltax-
onomies:Localtheoriesofsoilsforsustainabledevelopment. Geoderma ,
111(3–4),403–424.
Ostrom, E. (2009). A general framework for analyzing sustainability of
social-ecologicalsystems. Science,325,419–422.
Patnaik,A.,Jongerden,J.,&Ruivenkamp,G.(2017).Repossessionthrough
sharing of and access to seeds: Different cases and practices. Interna-
tional Review of Sociology ,27(1),179–201.
PIB India (2018): https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=
177889
Pietsch,D.,&Kühn,P.(2017).Buriedsoilsinthecontextofgeoarchaeolog-
icalresearch—TwoexamplesfromGermanyandEthiopia. Archaeological
and Anthropological Sciences ,9(8),1571–1583.
Pingali, P. L. (2012). Green revolution: impacts, limits, and the path ahead.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America,109(31),12302–12308.
Plieninger, T., Bieling, C., Ohnesorge, B., Schaich, H., Schleyer, C., & Wolff,
F.(2013).Exploringfuturesofecosystemservicesinculturallandscapes
through participatory scenario development in the Swabian Alb, Ger-
many. Ecology and Society ,18(3), 39.http://doi.org/10.5751/ES-05802-
180339
Poręba, G., Śnieszko, Z., Moska, P., & Mroczek, P. (2019). Deposits of
NeolithicwatersoilerosionintheloessregionoftheMa łopolskaUpland
(S Poland)–A case study of the settlement micro-region in Bronocice.
Quaternary International ,502,45–59.Pourias,J.,Aubry,C.,&Duchemin,E.(2016).Isfoodamotivationforurban
gardeners? Multifunctionality and the relative importance of the food
function in urban collective gardens of Paris and Montreal. Agriculture
and Human Values ,33(2),257–273.
Prost,K.,Birk,J.J.,Lehndorff,E.,Gerlach,R.,&Amelung,W.(2017).Steroid
biomarkersrevisited—Improvedsourceidentificationoffaecalremains
in archaeological soil material. Plos One,12(1), e0164882. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164882
Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2010). Matters of care in technoscience: Assem-
blingneglectedthings. Social Studies of Science ,41(1),85–106.
Qin,C.Z.,Zhu,A.X.,Pei,T.,Li,B.L.,Scholten,T.,Behrens,T.,&Zhou,C.H.
(2011).Anapproachtocomputingtopographicwetnessindexbasedon
maximumdownslopegradient. Precision Agriculture ,12(1),32–43.
Reed, K. (2021). Food systems in archaeology. Examining production and
consumptioninthepast. Archaeological Dialogues ,28(1),51–75.
Richardson, T., & Weszkalnys, G. (2014). Introduction: resource materiali-
ties. Anthropological Quarterly ,87(1),5–30.
Richter, D. d., Bacon, A. R., Mobley, M. L., Richardson, C. J., Andrews,
S. S., West, L., Wills, S., Billings, S., Cambardella, C. A., Cavallaro, N.,
DeMeester,J.E.,Franzluebbers,A.J.,Grandy,A.S.,Grunwald,S.,Gruver,
J., Hartshorn, A. S., Janzen, H., Kramer, M. G., Ladha, J. K., & Lajtha,
K. (2011). Human–soil relations are changing rapidly: Proposals from
SSSA’scross-divisionalsoilchangeworkinggroup. Soil Science Society of
America Journal ,75(6),2079–2084.
Robinson, D. A., Hockley, N., Cooper, D. M., Emmett, B. A., Keith, A. M.,
Lebron,I.,Reynolds,B.,Tipping,E.,T ye,A.M.,W atts,C.W .,Whalley,W .
R.,Black,H.,Warren,G. P.,&Robinson,J.S.(2013).Naturalcapitaland
ecosystemservices,developinganappropriatesoilsframeworkasabasis
forvaluation. Soil Biology and Biochemistry ,57,1023–1033.
Rösch, M. (1998). The history of crops and crop weeds in south-western
Germany from the Neolithic period to modern times, as shown by
archaeobotanical evidence. Vegetation History and Archaeobotany ,7(2),
109–125.
Rusakova,E.,Sukhacheva,E.,&Hartemink,A.E.(2022).VasiliyDokuchaev—
A biographical sketch on the occasion of his 175thbirthday. Geoderma ,
412,115718. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2022.115718
Salisbury, R. B. (2012). Engaging with soil, past and present. Journal of
Material Culture ,17(1),23–41.
Sandor,J.A.,Norton,J.B.,Pawluk,R.R.,Homburg,J.A.,Muenchrath,D.A.,
White,C.S.,Williams,S.E.,Havener,C.L.,&Stahl,P.D.(2002).Soilknowl-
edgeembodiedinaNativeAmericanrunoffagroecosystem. Transactions
of the 17th World Congress of Soil Science ,Bangkok,Thailand.
Scherer,S.,Deckers,K.,Dietel,J.,Fuchs,M.,Henkner,J.,Höpfer,B.,Junge,
A.,Kandeler,E.,Lehndorff,E.,Leinweber,P.,Lomax,J.,Miera,J.,Poll,C.,
Toffolo,M.B.,Knopf,T.,Scholten,T.,&Kühn,P.(2021).What’sinacollu-
vialdeposit?Perspectivesfromarchaeopedology. Catena,198,105040.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2020.105040
Scherer, S., Höpfer, B., Deckers, K., Fischer, E., Fuchs, M., Kandeler, E.,
Lechterbeck,J.,Lehndorff,E.,Lomax,J.,Marhan,S.,Marinova,E.,Meister,
J., Poll, C., Rahimova, H., Rösch, M., Wroth, K., Zastrow, J., Knopf, T.,
Scholten, T., & Kühn, P. (2021). Middle Bronze Age land use practices
in the north-western Alpine foreland—A multi-proxy study of colluvial
deposits,archaeologicalfeaturesandpeatbogs. Soil,7(1),269–304.
Scheromm,P.(2015).Motivationsandpracticesofgardenersinurbancol-
lectivegardens:ThecaseofMontpellier. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening ,
14(3),735–742.
Schmidt, K., Behrens, T., & Scholten, T. (2008). Instanceselection and clas-
sification tree analysis for large spatial datasets in digital soil mapping.
Geoderma ,146(1–2),138–146.
Schönbrodt-Stitt, S., Behrens, T., Schmidt, K., Shi, X., & Scholten, T. (2013).
DegradationofcultivatedbenchterracesintheThreeGorgesArea:Field
mappinganddatamining. Ecological Indicators ,34,478–493.
Schweizer, B. (2018). Dinge in Gräbern—Artefakte als Ressourcen. In S.
Wefers, I. Balzer, M. Augstein, J. Fries-Knoblach, C. Later, K. Ludwig,
C. Tappert, P. Trebsche, & J. Wiethold (Eds.), KunstHandWerk .B e i t r ä g e
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

WHYDOWENEEDINTERDISCIPLINARYCOOPERATION 765
der 26. Tagung der AG Eisenzeit gemeinsam mit der Keltenwelt am Glauberg
und der hessenARCHÄOLOGIE im Landesamt für Denkmalpflege Hessen in
Bad Salzhausen–3.–6. Oktober 2013 (pp.193–205).BeiträgezurUr-und
FrühgeschichteMitteleuropas84.Beier&Beran.
Scott, C. A., & Walter, M. F. (1993). Local knowledge and conventional
soilscienceapproachestoerosionalprocessesintheShivalikHimalaya.
Mountain Research and Development ,13,61–72.
Scudder,S.(2001).EvidenceofsealevelriseattheearlyOstionanCoralie
site (GT-3), c. AD 700, Grand Turk, Turks and Caicos Islands. Journal of
Archaeological Science ,28(11),1221–1233.
Seitz,S.,Goebes,P.,Puerta,V.L.,Pereira,E.I.P.,Wittwer,R.,Six,J.,vander
Heijden,M.G.A.,&Scholten,T.(2019).Conservationtillageandorganic
farmingreducesoilerosion. Agronomy for Sustainable Development ,39(1),
1–10.
Showers,K.B.(2006a).AhistoryofAfricansoil:Perceptions,useandabuse.
InJ.R.McNeill,&V.Winiwarter(Eds.), Soils and societies: Perspectives from
environmental history (pp.118–176).TheWhiteHorsePress.
Showers,K.B.(2006b).Soilerosionandconservation:Aninternationalhis-
tory and a cautionarytale. In B. P. Warkentin (Ed.), Footprints in the soil:
People and ideas in soil history (pp.369–406).Elsevier.
Sillitoe, P. (1993). Losing ground? Soil loss and erosion in the highlands of
PapuaNewGuinea. Land Degradation & Development ,4(3),143–166.
Sinclair,T.R.(1994).Limitstocropyield?InK.J.Boote,J.M.Bennett,T.R.
Sinclair,&G.M.Paulsen(Eds.), Physiology and determination of crop vield .
AmericanSocietyofAgronomy.
Skoda, U. (2013). Reiskultur im bäuerlichen Odisha: Kategorien, Anbau
und Rituale. In L. Lutz-Auras, P. Gottschlich (Eds.), Aus dem politischen
Küchenkabinett (pp.163–192).Nomos.
Smith,H.F.,&Sullivan,C.A.(2014).Ecosystemserviceswithinagricultural
landscapes—Farmers’perceptions. Ecological Economics ,98,72–80.
Teuber,S.,Ahlrichs,J.J.,Henkner,J.,Knopf,T.,Kühn,P.,&Scholten,T.(2017).
Soil cultures–the adaptive cycle of agrarian soil use in Central Europe.
Ecology and Society ,22(4).https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-09729-220413
Teuber,S.,Schmidt,K.,Kühn,P.,&Scholten,T.(2019).Engagingwithurban
green spaces–a comparison of urban and rural allotment gardens in
Southwestern Germany. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening ,43, 126381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2019.126381
Tokita-Tanabe, Y. (2014). Women as Earth: Fertility Rituals, Cosmology
andSocialInteractioninRuralOdisha,India. Global Collaboration Online:
Discussion Papers ,2014(1),1–13.
Toledo,V.M.(1992).Whatisethnoecology?Origins,scopeandimplications
ofarisingdiscipline. Etnoecológica ,1(1),5–21.
Toledo, V. M. (2000). Indigenous knowledge on soils: An ethnoecological
conceptualization.InN.Barrera-Bassols,J.Zinck(Eds.),Ethnopedology
inaworldwideperspective :Anannotatedbibliography.ITCPublication,
77 (pp. 1–9). International Institute for Geo-Information Science and
EarthObservation.Tresset,A.,&Vigne,J.D.(2011).Lasthunter-gatherersandfirstfarmersof
Europe. Comptes Rendus Biologies ,334(3),182–189.
UNDP: SDGS (without year): https://www.undp.org/sustainable-
development-goals
van Dissel, S. C., & de Graaff, J. (1998). Differences between farmers and
scientists in the perception of soil erosion: A South African case study.
Indigenous Knowledge and Development Monitor ,6,8–9.
Vogel, H.-J., Eberhardt, E., Franko, U., Lang, B., Ließ, M., Weller, U.,
Wiesmeier,M.,&Wollschläger,U.(2019).Quantitativeevaluationofsoil
functions:Potentialandstate. Frontiers in Environmental Science ,7,164.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2019.00164
Wahlhütter, S. (2011). Lokales Wissen über Boden zwischen Theorie und
Praxis. Eine kulturanthropologisch-ethnopedologische Studie im südlichen
Burgenland und in der Weststeiermark [PhD thesis] ,UniversityofGraz.
Warkentin,B. P.(2006). Footprints in the soil: People and ideas in soil history .
Elsevier.
Warren, A., Osbahr, H., Batterbury, S., & Chappell, A. (2003). Indigenous
views of soil erosion at Fandou Béri, southwestern Niger. Geoderma ,
111(3–4),439–456.
Williams, B. J., & Ortiz-Solorio, C. A. (1981). Middle American folk soil
taxonomy. Annals of the Association of American Geographers ,71(3),
335–358.
Wilshusen,R.H.,&Stone,G.D.(1990).Anethnoarchaeologicalperspective
onsoils. World Archaeology ,22(1),104–114.
WinklerPrins,A.M.(1999).Insightsandapplicationslocalsoilknowledge:a
toolforsustainablelandmanagement. Society & Natural Resources ,12(2),
151–161.
WinklerPrins,A.M.,&Barrera-Bassols,N.(2004).LatinAmericanethnope-
dology: a vision of its past, present, and future. Agriculture and Human
Values,21(2),139–156.
WinklerPrins, A. M., & Sandor, J. A. (2003). Local soil knowledge: insights,
applications,andchallenges. Geoderma ,3(111),165–170.
Wolf, D., & Faust, D. (2013). Holocene sediment fluxes in a fragile loess
landscape(Saxony,Germany). Catena,103,87–102.
How to cite this article: Teuber,S.,Bartelheim,M.,
Hardenberg,R.,Knopf,M.,Knopf,T.,Kühn,P.,Schade,T.,
Schmidt,K.,&Scholten,T.(2022).Whydoweneed
interdisciplinarycooperationwithanthropologistsand
archaeologistsinsoilscience? Journal of Plant Nutrition and Soil
Science,185,752–765.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jpln.202200120
 15222624, 2022, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jpln.202200120 by Capes, Wiley Online Library on [06/09/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

